Ms. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Permit me to begin
by expressing our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to commend the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his report
(S/2008/159).

My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Kyrgyzstan on behalf of the States members of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).

The reason that I have taken the floor is that
Afghanistan is located in the Central Asian region, and
the security situation and the development of that
country are of great importance for Kazakhstan.

As was duly pointed out in the Secretary-
General's report, entitled "The situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security", despite some progress in the peace process
and in the reconstruction in Afghanistan, the resolution
of problems in the country continues to face serious
difficulties. The overall situation in Afghanistan
continues to be characterized by persistent problems in
the area of security, while the Taliban and other
extremist elements continue to pose challenges to
stability in Afghanistan.

The international community and Afghanistan
still face enormous tasks if they are to strengthen the
new executive authority, build the country's statehood
and rehabilitate its social and economic situation. Thus,
in order to meet the security challenge and to stabilize
Afghanistan, a complex approach is needed - an
approach that encompasses the areas of security,
governance, the rule of law, human rights and social
and economic development.

(spoke in Russian)

Another reason for the international community
to be concerned is the growing production and
smuggling of drugs. In 2007, raw-opium production in
Afghanistan increased by more than 35 percent over
that in 2006, and the size of the opium-poppy harvest
has reached dangerous levels. Here, we should note
that the primary flow of heroin passes through the
States of Central Asia and the Russian Federation. A
considerable portion of it ends up in transit countries,
unfortunately, while the rest of it is shipped to Europe.

The constant increase in opium production in
Afghanistan and the instability along its borders are
compelling the neighbouring countries to pool their
efforts to counter the drug threat. As a result, in
November 2007, the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre was established
in Almaty, Kazakhstan, as part of a pilot project. The
Centre will become fully operational once it has
established ties with Interpol, with the law enforcement
agencies of the countries in Central Asia and the
Russian Federation and with other regional structures.

Kazakhstan welcomes the assistance of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in establishing the Centre. It is our hope that the
UNODC will continue to make efforts in that regard
and that it will increase its technical assistance to the
Central Asian region in general. We also reaffirm our
readiness to support efforts to establish a counter-
narcotics belt along Afghanistan's borders, within the
framework of the CSTO. We hope that these counter-
narcotics and counter-terrorist efforts will be
accompanied by genuine social and economic
programmes, in particular for average citizens.

At the same time, however, the development
process cannot place in the absence of security. In that
connection, the primary aim of the international
community should be to strengthen the institutions and
security forces of the Afghan State to fight the growing
production of opium and the activities of extremists.
We express our deep gratitude to those United Nations
Member States that are making genuine contributions
to the reform of the security sector in Afghanistan,
including reform in the military, political and judicial
areas, in the area of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and in the fight against illegal drugs.

Furthermore, we believe that international
assistance should be provided directly to recipients
through the establishment of effective and transparent
08-26923

allocation and monitoring mechanisms under the
auspices of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) or other intergovernmental and
regional organizations.

For its part, Kazakhstan has continued to provide
bilateral assistance to Afghanistan in rebuilding the
economy and stabilizing the situation in the country. In
late 2007, the Government of Kazakhstan adopted a
programme of assistance to Afghanistan, with a budget
of $3 million thus far. Under that programme,
Afghanistan has been provided with wheat, and
resources have been allocated to build roads, hospitals
and schools in a number of provinces. In addition, we
are considering the possibility of providing assistance
in retraining officers of the Afghan police and border
service in Kazakh training institutions.

As a partner country located in the region, the
Government of Kazakhstan expresses its readiness to
provide a venue, if necessary, for the international
forum to discuss the actions to be taken by the
international community to further improve the
situation in Afghanistan. Kazakhstan remains
committed to efforts by international partners for the
Afghan people in establishing a better future for that
country.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our hope that the work of the newly appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, be productive and
successful.

