Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Guehenno and
Ms. Malcorra for their briefings on the report of the
Senior Advisory Group (see S/2011/85) and to
Mr. Gasana, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his comments.

We believe that the report reflects the main
problems in peacebuilding. Indeed, it provides
excellent food for thought and could serve as a
platform for cooperation among Member States in
determining the optimal means of assisting countries
overcoming the consequences of conflict. We will
carefully study the report, and we are ready for an
exchange of views with the various partners.

We support the two main thrusts of the report.
The first is that civilian specialists must be deployed
rapidly, and second is that deployment must be focused
on maximizing the use of and strengthening national
institutions and national capacities. Like our
colleagues, we are ready to discuss the Secretary-
General's recommendations on the subject.

In general and in principle, we would like to note
that any form of assistance from the international
community must be provided with the consent of
national Governments, while respecting national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Assistance should
be tailored to each country. It is important to
understand that one of the main elements of post-
conflict peacebuilding is the strengthening of national
institutional capacity. We are pleased that this principle
is reflected very clearly in the report.

This universal organization, the United Nations,
should play the coordinating role in international
peacebuilding efforts, owing to its unique experience
and legitimacy. The United Nations should coordinate
all efforts by countries to implement the decisions
taken. In practical terms, with respect to the concrete
proposals in the report, we would like to make several
comments.

First, we have questions about the use of reserves
in the area of civilian components in United Nations
field missions deployed under Security Council
mandates. How balanced would that be in terms of
geographical representation? How much would it
reflect the actual capacity of Member States?

Secondly, in our view, it is important to avoid
contradictions between efforts to build capacity in the
post-conflict period and the deployment of specialists
from international structures outside the United
Nations for post-conflict development.

Thirdly, in terms of resources, the report requires
further details, given that some of the
recommendations will, in our opinion, have serious
implications, not only for the current rules, but also for
the core principles governing the financing of United
Nations field operations. Here I refer in particular to
the degree of control by Member States over the
implementation of their decisions and to the use of the
Organization's resources that are made available under
mandates.

With respect to the recommendations on staff
policies, we also believe that there is a need to more
closely analyse the reforms recently completed in those
areas.

Financing and logistics policies need to be more
flexible in terms of how resources are allocated for
field mission budgets. Interaction among the various
agencies of the United Nations should be enhanced.
Also worth mentioning are the components for
deploying the global field support strategy, which is
being discussed in the General Assembly. We think
those ideas should be discussed in detail in the
Assembly's Fifth Committee before pursuing their
implementation.

We have noted that the report contains several
recommendations for creating specialized structures in
the Secretariat, such as a Civilian Partnerships Cell,
and for studying such partnerships and their creation
on the ground. That idea should be studied in advance
and its potential functions described in greater detail.
On the whole, however, we would prefer to retain the
mechanisms already in place.

Reserves could require considerable expense, and
there might not be enough specialists. We are ready to
continue working with the representatives of the
Secretariat in studying the details of the specialist
rosters and other mechanisms described in the report.

The review of the recommendations in the report
and of the Secretary-General could indeed help the
various organs form more effective operational and
economical approaches for the deployment of civilian
personnel in post-conflict situations.

