Mr. Pato (Papua New Guinea): Papua New Guinea
supports the position to be advanced by Tonga and
Maldives, as Chairs, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States and the Alliance of Small
Island States.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for ably steering
the work of the Security Council this month. We
commend New Zealand's initiatives and facilitation
of this important yet rare dialogue for small island
developing States (SIDS).

The General Assembly has recognized the unique
vulnerabilities of SIDS. We therefore strongly urge
the Security Council to give greater consideration to
the special circumstances of SIDS in relation to both
traditional and non-traditional security concerns. Much
has been said by the other speakers before me on this
issue.

The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change remains the primary forum to address
climate-change concerns. But more agencies of the
United Nations system and others are needed to be
engaged, including the General Assembly, the World
Bank, the Global Green Growth Institute, the Green
Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility,
alongside SIDS plans, the implementation of which
is constrained by lack of resources. A good example
of United Nations system team work is the One UN
office in Papua New Guinea, which coordinates all of
the activities of the United Nations agencies consistent
with national development priorities and programmes
for development, including on the impacts of climate
change.

The nexus between sustainable development,
peace and security is clear. Without peace and
security, sustainable development will be difficult. To
achieve sustainable development requires meaningful
partnerships, which requires the United Nations system
to enable SIDS' adherence to the rule of law and to
building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
and societies that promote and protect human rights
consistent with the United Nations Charter.

In that context, Papua New Guinea has committed
$150 million to Pacific SIDS over the next five years to
address some of their challenges in education, health,
capacity-building, climate change, and infrastructure
rehabilitation and development following natural
disasters such as the cyclone Pam in Vanuatu. Papua
New Guinea is also setting up and funding a small
islands State office for the Pacific Region.

On transnational crimes, human trafficking and
people smuggling, the United Nations system and the
Security Council should adopt methods to weed out
the root causes of illegal migration in countries of
origin and deal with the challenges faced by transit
nations - like Papua New Guinea - and destination
countries. Under Papua New Guinean national security
policy, necessary measures are being taken to combat
transnational crime, including scaling up efforts in
border monitoring, surveillance and control. But more
needs to be done.

For most SIDS, the ocean is the main source of
food security and an important resource, that is, the
blue economy, which needs protection so as to be able
to ensure sustainable development. SIDS are hampered
by resource constraints from being able to ensure
sustainable management and exploitation of fishery
resources and the blue economy. There is little or no
surveillance protection for those resources, some of
which problems, Mr. President, you have addressed.
Our fisheries and other marine resources are being
exploited by illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing. We request that United Nations agencies
provide relevant support through institutions such as
the Pacific Islands Forum and the Forum Fisheries
Agency, which are functioning effectively in SIDS
regions - particularly in the Pacific - so as to enable
sustainable management and protection.

All of that cannot be discussed without recognizing
the importance of increasing women's participation in
all gender-related activities aimed at preventing and
resolving armed conflict, the maintenance ofpeace and
security, and post-conflict peacebuilding. The lessons
that we have learned from our civil conflict on the
island of Bougainville in the 1990s is a case in point,
which has proved to us that women are just as capable
peacemakers and peacebuilders as men and that they
must be integrated in the decision-making process and
given leadership roles so as to enable development.

In conclusion, the challenges faced by SIDS are
serious. We need to take practical measures directed
at achieving the outcomes that we want. If the work
required is to develop templates for accessing resource
support for SIDS, the United Nations system must
accept responsibility for formulating them, so that,
over time, we can together build a sustainable and
prosperous world based upon the rule of law that
guarantees protection for all of us.

