Mr. Santos (Timor-Leste): I take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and to pledge to you my delegation's fullest
support. I would further like to express our
delegation's appreciation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Natalegawa, for the effective and
excellent manner in which he and his team conducted
the deliberations and the work of the Council during
the month of November.

Through you, Sir, allow me to express, on behalf
of my President, the Government of Timor-Leste and
the people of Timor-Leste, our most profound gratitude
for honouring us with the recent visit of the Security
Council to the country, led by Ambassador Kumalo of
South Africa.

We are particularly grateful to the Council
members who visited our nascent democracy for
enduring long travel hours and for having given their
precious time to travel all the way to one of the most
distant places from the vibrant city of New York.

Albeit considerable progress has been made since
the crisis in April 2006, the fact remains that the
challenges facing Timor-Leste are enormous, and
therefore, although the atmosphere of general
improvement of peace and security is welcome, it
should not be replaced by complacency or another
premature celebration. I wish to assure the Council that
the President of the Republic, the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste are doing our best and all
that we can to consolidate peace and stability in order,
first, to free our people from poverty and, secondly but
no less importantly, to absolve the United Nations of
its responsibilities in that regard.

In his speech to the General Assembly during the
general debate of the sixty-second session, the
President of the Republic, Mr. Ramos-Horta,
recognized that the international community faces a
number of critical situations around the world that are
more serious and with much greater strategic
importance and implications for regional and world
peace and security than the situation in Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste does not want to create a culture of
dependency. We have been dependent on others for too
long. In fact, we never struggled to be dependent, but
07-62902
to be sustainable and independent. This period is one in
which we need to be interdependent on our friends in
the international community through the key
multilateral mechanisms of the United Nations, and we
require continued support to assist us in the
consolidation of our goal. Therefore, I can state that
continued United Nations engagement is important to
further stabilize the situation, strengthen our national
institutions and consolidate peace and democracy.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our most sincere
gratitude to the Security Council for honouring us with
its visit, and I would like to thank the team members,
notably members of the Secretariat, who accompanied
the mission to Timor-Leste and helped pave the way
for a successful visit.

