Mr. Kamau (Kenya): My delegation commends
Italy for convening today's important open debate
on trafficking of persons in conflict situations and
welcomes the informative briefings. We also take note
of the report of the Secretary-General on trafficking in
persons in conflict, pursuant to resolution 2331 (2016)
(S/2017/939). We also take note of the briefings by the
representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and welcome and
appreciate their strong messages.

Kenya also pays special homage to Italy. Its
response to the migration crisis has been exemplary,
humane and civilized. The Government and the people
of Italy should be recognized for their humanity and
determination to project a human face to the crisis that
we are confronting.

Kenya condemns any form of human trafficking
and views it as an unacceptable affront to humankind.
Persons in areas affected by crises are especially
vulnerable to trafficking and other forms of exploitation,
including sexual exploitation, forced labour, removal
of organs and slavery. We recall the kidnapping of
schoolgirls in Chibok by Boko Haram, which was a
chilling reminder of how trafficking has evolved into
a weapon of terror that has been adopted by criminals.
No country or region is safe from these contemporary
forms of transnational organized crime.

Kenya is a signatory to the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and has enacted laws and initiated policies to
implement Security Council resolutions. The Kenya
Counter-trafficking in Persons Act has established the
necessary institutional mechanisms for the protection
and support of trafficked persons, which include
rehabilitation centres for victims oftrafficking. We also
pay particular attention to issues of illegal adoption of
children, economic and sexual exploitation, slavery and
forced labour.

The Victims Protection Act was enacted primarily
to protect vulnerable victims rescued from traffickers.
Our national plan of action offers a coherent and
realizable road map to address and combat human
trafficking, including through raising awareness and, at
the same time, prominently profiling human trafficking
issues in public as well as in media circles. Kenya calls
for enhanced international cooperation to enable all
Member States to hold accountable those responsible
for the atrocities committed in the form of trafficking
and other related crimes.

Like others, my delegation wishes to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the abhorrent
situation in Libya, where Africans are being auctioned
like chattel in open slave markets. Nothing can be more
distressing and abhorrent than slavery that is being
practiced overtly, in broad daylight and in front of
news cameras.

The International Court of Justice identified
protection from slavery as an obligation towards
all persons, one that is owed by every State to the
international community as a whole. The practice of
slavery has been universally recognized as a crime
against humanity, and the right to be free from
enslavement is considered so fundamental that all
nations with standing in the context of this particular
issue are expected to be able to bring the matter to the
International Court of Justice of their own free will.

I wish to remind the Council that the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011) significantly contributed to the
breakdown of law and order in Libya. This resolution,
which was adopted against the will of the African
Union, will always remain a stigma for and indictment
of the Security Council. It was indeed short-sighted
and a sign of hubris, and it has caused more suffering
and distress than it sought to address. It is the Security
Council's action that has led to Libya's 1,100-mile
coastline becoming an open border for traffickers and
smugglers who have become merchants of death and
untold human suffering. The Security Council therefore
has a special obligation to address the situation in Libya
and to do so with the same determination that it sought
to adopt resolution 1973 (2011).

Tragically, the plight of migrants crossing through
Libya has been exacerbated by the European Union
policy of financing, training and equipping undefined
groups in Libya to intercept and contain migrants
trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea and put them
in detention camps. This policy is inhumane and
should compel the international community to rise in
righteous indignation and condemnation and to demand
an immediate end to these discriminatory, if not racist,
policies ofthe European Union, which offend the human
conscience and abet the horrific violation of human
rights. Although resolution 1973 (2011) is the original
sin that paved the way to the opening of slave markets
in Libya, this dire situation is now being reinforced by
the European Union's sad and discriminatory responses
towards migrants.

The European Union must lead in seeking humane
and sustainable solutions for the migrants in detention
camps in Libya, including how to deal with those who
have already been sold into slavery. The solutions
must include creating legal pathways for the migrants,
seeking their resettlement in third countries and
voluntary repatriation in dignity for those willing to
return to their countries of origin and ensuring their
human rights are not further violated.

Kenya calls for swift action to stop the slave
auctions, requesting that the Security Council ensures
their immediate cessation and that those being held in
prisons or in other deplorable conditions are rescued.
Kenya also calls on the Security Council to work in close
consultation with the African Union to appoint a joint
commission of inquiry to comprehensively investigate
and inquire into the matter. We are convinced that these
are the issues most worthy of our urgent action as they
are the most blatant violations of human rights that we
have seen in our time.

