Ms. Sison (United States of America): After nearly
four years of negotiations and over half a century of
conflict, the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) have
reached a final peace accord that covers myriad complex
issues. Today the United States welcomes the support
of the Security Council to help Colombia implement its
final peace accord with the FARC, and congratulates
the parties for their sustained commitment to ending
the longest-running conflict in the Americas, which
tragically resulted in hundreds of thousands of
deaths and tens of thousands of kidnappings and
displaced millions of Colombians. We also thank
Cuba and Norway for the special roles they played as
co-guarantors, as well as Venezuela and Chile, which
supported the process.
As President Obama said,

"Even as we mark the end of an era of war,
we recognize that the work of achieving a just
and lasting peace is only beginning. Yet just as
the United States has been Colombia's partner in
a time of war, we will be Colombia's partner in
waging peace."

Through resolution 2307 (2016), the Security
Council makes clear that the United Nations also
stands with the Colombian people as they work towards
implementing the final peace accord. The agreement's
successful implementation is integral to the hard work
of securing a truly just and lasting peace, which all
those gathered here today know is something that the
Colombian people unquestionably deserve.

Today's resolution will ensure the readiness of the
United Nations monitoring and verification mission in
Colombia by updating the mandate with details that
were unavailable last January when resolution 2261
(2016) was adopted. The United States commends
those countries that will be playing a role in the United
Nations monitoring and verification mechanism to
monitor and verify the bilateral ceasefire, the cessation
of hostilities and the disarmament process.

The stakes for the success of the mission are high.
The recent killing of five human rights activists in
Colombia, including the assassination of Nestor Ivan
Martinez over the weekend, makes clear that the peace
is still fragile. The United Nations monitoring and
verification responsibilities will be critical to building
confidence between the parties and preventing a return
to armed conflict. With today's adoption, we are
confident it will be up to the task.

