The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Argentine Republic.

In this, my first statement to a United Nations body
as Foreign Minister of my country, I should like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, for her
presence here and for the important ideas contained in her
statement, of which we have duly taken note.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Security Council, as well as to the
Members of the Organization that are not currently
members of the Security Council, for having participated
in this meeting. Finally, I thank Ms. Catherine Bertini
very much for her statement and her ideas. The concepts
we have heard demonstrate the importance of the problem
caused by attacks against personnel participating in
peacekeeping operations and humanitarian missions.

My Government considers that these operations and
missions are an essential tool for maintaining international
peace and security and for post-conflict peace-building.
This is why the Argentine Republic has actively
participated in peacekeeping operations and at present is
the eighth-largest contributor of troops. Argentine
personnel are deployed in 10 of the 19 missions currently
under way.

At this point, I wish to reaffirm my Government's
commitment to the efforts of the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security, and I would
also especially like to express our willingness to
contribute, as far as possible, to the operations that this
Council authorizes.

In addition, in the humanitarian field, Argentina has
also promoted the creation of the "White Helmets", an
initiative aimed at putting at the disposal of the Secretary-
General reserve teams of trained national volunteers in
order to provide immediate support for United Nations
activities in emergency humanitarian assistance,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development. From 1996
to 1999, 629 "White Helmets" were deployed in 58
missions in 27 countries. It is my Government's intention
to continue contributing to the humanitarian efforts that
this Organization carries out.

The increasing requests for international
humanitarian assistance and the greater number of
peacekeeping operations during the last decade have
resulted in a greater presence of the Organization in
various regions of the world. There are currently 14,600
troops, police and observers serving the international
community in those zones, without counting personnel
doing only humanitarian work. The environment in which
these activities are carried out is one of increasing risk.
United Nations and associated personnel, as well as the
personnel of other humanitarian agencies, are working

 

under increasingly dangerous conditions, as is shown by the
frequency of attacks and incidents involving the use of
force.

When in 1998 the Secretary-General reported to the
Security Council on protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in conflict situations, he indicated
that in a six-year period 153 international and local United
Nations staff members had lost their lives in the service of
the Organization and that 43 others had been taken
hostages. These attacks, far from being accidental, in many
cases result precisely from the fact that they belong to, or
are somehow associated with, the Organization. Increasing
their safety will require a set of both practical and legal
measures.

In this context, we believe that peacekeeping
operations should have sufficiently financed, adequate and
realistic mandates, and that they should be implemented in
a timely, effective and impartial manner, ensuring that the
protection and safety of personnel is an integral part of the
planning and implementation of operations.

When even under those conditions incidents occur,
then investigation of the facts must be immediate, and in
the case of criminal attacks, we must ensure that those
responsible are prosecuted and punished through the
appropriate national or international machinery. The
punishment of those responsible is essential not only to
fight against impunity, but also to build a stable peace once
conflict ends.

In this regard, it is a remarkable step forward that
attacks against personnel, facilities, materiel, units or
vehicles involved in a peacekeeping or humanitarian
assistance mission have been included as a war crime in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Argentina
wishes to emphasize its satisfaction with this measure,
which is applicable both to international and domestic
armed conflicts.

We must remember, however, that the International
Criminal Court is no substitute for, but rather complements,
domestic legal systems. States cannot ignore their own
obligation to investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of
criminal acts; this responsibility is inescapable. In this
context, the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, which specifically
establishes that States parties must prosecute the
perpetrators of crimes or, failing that, extradite them to a
State that so requests, becomes extremely relevant.

Argentina is a party to this Convention, and we
wish to express our satisfaction at its entry into force in
January 1999. It would be desirable, nevertheless, to see
the still limited number of ratifications grow, and today
we have heard indications that there is progress in that
direction. Yet despite its importance, the Convention is
not applicable to all the individuals and organizations
present in zones of conflict: it does not adequately cover
locally recruited personnel in spite of their being a
majority of the victims, and it does not sufficiently
protect those who provide humanitarian assistance,
especially in areas not included in a peacekeeping
operation. These and other shortcomings of the
Convention should be analysed in order to develop a
better normative framework. In this regard, we wish to
strongly support the appeal made by the Secretary-
General, in his report of 8 September 1999 to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians (S/1999/957), that
the scope of application of the 1994 Convention be
expanded through a protocol.

Those who work tirelessly, giving all their effort,
their solidarity or their lives to alleviate the suffering of
their fellow human beings, deserve our deepest
appreciation, our gratitude and our commitment to do our
utmost to defend them. These individuals set an example
for all of us. By convening a debate on the issue of their
safety, Argentina wishes to call attention not only to the
serious risks that these people take voluntarily and
selflessly, but also to the urgent need to ensure their full
protection. Many have fallen; let this meeting be a sincere
and profound tribute to them.

This concern of ours responds to a comprehensive
philosophical and political vision, essentially focused on
the value we give to the principles that protect the life
and dignity of all human beings.

It is imperative that we do our utmost to adopt the
practical and legal measures needed to enhance the
protection of those who work to benefit humankind. Not
only are the acts that affect them blows against the
freedom and integrity of the individual, they can also
jeopardize the attainment of the goals of peacekeeping
operations and, even worse, the credibility of this
Organization.

Finally, I am pleased to announce that despite the
financial difficulties confronting our country, Argentina
will make a contribution of $50,000 to the Trust Fund for
Security of United Nations personnel established in 1998.
 

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belarus. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

