Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I, too, would like to
thank Egypt for having organized today's briefing on
this important topic and Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun for his valuable presentation this morning.

In the mid-1980s, Sweden introduced economic
sanctions against the apartheid regime of South Africa.
Those sanctions were essentially unilateral in nature
but had strong political symbolism. Since then, Sweden
has been engaged in processes aimed at making
sanctions more effective and transparent, including,
most recently, the High-level Review of United Nations
Sanctions (see S/2015/432). Existing efforts, such as
the High-level Review with its 150 recommendations,
remain relevant and should be followed up on so as
to improve the implementation and effectiveness of
United Nations sanctions.

Sanctions can be described as an effective measure
between words and war. We believe that United
Nations sanctions, when properly applied and well
calibrated within a broader political strategy, can
serve as a versatile tool for responding to security
challenges. That is why we have supported the effective
implementation of current sanctions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and support swift additional
measures in view of the recent violations, while at the
same time underlining that creative diplomatic efforts
and dialogue are urgently needed, in parallel, so as to
find a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive solution.

The legal basis for United Nations sanctions
derives from the Charter of the United Nations. The
sanctions instrument has evolved over time. Over the
past quarter of a century, the Security Council has
deployed sanctions with increasing regularity and
with increasingly broad aims. We must build on that
experience and learn from less effective measures, as
well as draw lessons from the successes.

The evolution from comprehensive to targeted
sanctions has largely addressed many concerns about
unintended consequences and adverse effects. Over
time, assessments and pre-assessments have been
conducted, and there has been a steady move towards
standardizing humanitarian exemptions. The Security
Council could, nevertheless, put even more emphasis
on the assessment of the impact of its measures, both
ex ante and ex post. Additionally, sanctions regimes
and measures should be periodically reviewed by
the Council to ensure that their objectives are being
properly met. The Council should also conduct periodic
reviews oflisted individuals and entities in all sanctions
regimes so as to ensure that information is up-to-date
and that the listings remain appropriate.

As we have heard from many colleagues here today,
sanctions can never be successful in isolation. They
must always be part of a broader political strategy,
featuring elements of peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. Sanctions must also be evaluated within
an overall approach to support peace and security.
When evaluating sanctions, one must remember that
every sanctions regime is unique and that targeted
sanctions have multiple purposes.

It is important to safeguard and build upon the
achievements made so far in the areas of the rule of law
and due process, in particular through the establishment
of the Office of the Ombudsperson. Our common
obligation to implement decisions by the Council
coexists with obligations to respect fundamental
human rights. By further improving fair and clear
procedures, the Council would render the sanctions tool
more effective and legitimate, thereby enhancing the
authority of the Council and that of the United Nations,
as a whole.

We would also like to see greater attention being
paid to women, peace and security and children in
armed conflict in both thematic and country-specific
actions on sanctions, for example, by adding sexual and
gender-based violence as criteria for designation and
inviting the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and Children
and Armed Conflict to brief sanctions committees.
Furthermore, we would like to see gender analysis
in the reporting of experts, including on the impacts
of sanctions and counter-terrorism strategies and the
gender dimensions of the flow of arms and the illicit
trafficking in humans, drugs and natural resources.

In conclusion, let me, once again, underline that
sanctions are a key instrument in the limited tool box
that the Council has at its disposal to prevent conflicts
and promote peace. We hope that today's discussion,
as well as efforts to implement the recommendations
of the High-level Review, and, not least, the ongoing
hard work in the sanctions committees will help to
further enhance the effectiveness and credibility of this
important tool.

