Mr. Ordorica (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like, as many other speakers have done, to
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements this morning.

For decades, the international community has
been witness to wars, tensions and violence in the
Middle East, often with no means to act, hoping that
this conflict would one day come to a definitive end
and give way to the peaceful coexistence of nations.
Today, no efforts have been spared in pursuit of that
goal. The United Nations and a number of States, both
within and beyond the region, have become directly
involved in this complex task. Nonetheless, the conflict
continues, and the goal that would provide for its
definitive solution - the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and economically and politically viable
Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully with Israel
within secure, internationally recognized borders -
has not been achieved.

Dialogue and negotiation must continue and
produce tangible results for Palestinians and Israelis.
The status quo is not an alternative, as it will only
exacerbate tensions and lead to further violence and
confrontation, directly affecting the civilian population
and destabilizing the region, especially given the
current unrest there. We therefore reiterate our concern
at the continuing stalemate in the negotiations between
the parties, which has weakened the prospects for
peace being achieved in the short and medium term.

During my country's recent term as an elected
member of the Security Council, we actively supported
efforts aimed at achieving peace in the region and
promoting greater involvement on the part of the
Council in seeking a lasting solution to this issue. In
20 monthly debates and a number of emergency
meetings in 2009 and 2010, we witnessed and
participated in the efforts of the Council to resolve the
conflict between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.

We remain convinced that the Security Council
needs to assume greater responsibility and continue to
do everything within its power to re-establish trust and
bring about a resumption of substantive negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. For
example, with the adoption, against all expectations, of
resolution 1860 (2009), we were able to call for a
definitive ceasefire in Gaza and for the opening of
border crossings to guarantee access for humanitarian
aid. Similarly, in June 2010, the Security Council was
able to speak in a single voice to condemn the clashes
during the attack on the humanitarian flotilla and request
an investigation of the facts. The Security Council also
came together to establish the parameters for a definitive
peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, as shown by the adoption of the presidential
statement of 11 May 2009 (S/PRST/2009/ 14).

Nonetheless, in spite the priority that the Security
Council attaches to the resolution of this conflict, those
efforts did not have a substantive impact on the ground.
In Gaza, resolution 1860 (2009) has not been fully
implemented, and the situation seems to have returned
to as it was before the military intervention. Rocket
attacks have resumed and the humanitarian situation of
the residents of the Gaza Strip deteriorates every day,
despite the partial opening of the border crossings.

As we have stated since January 2009, we believe
that the best way forward, taking Israel's legitimate
security concerns into consideration, is to establish an
international monitoring mechanism to ensure that the
ceasefire is upheld, border crossings fully opened and
the illicit trafficking of arms into Gaza effectively
controlled, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009).
Israeli settlements continue to expand in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, as do the corresponding
evictions and demolitions. We view such settlement

expansion and the demolition of Palestinian homes in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, as a serious obstacle to the peace process,
contrary to international law and detrimental to the
viability of a Palestinian State. We therefore call on
Israel to cease these activities immediately in order to
give the peace process a real chance.

Regarding the current situation and the recent
upsurge in violence, my country condemns all acts of
violence, including those promoted by extremist
religious elements in the Israeli settlements, and the
provocations by Palestinian groups. Such acts only fuel
further escalation in the violence. We also urge the
parties to refrain from any actions or statements that
may lead to incidents of violence and stress that those
responsible be punished in accordance with the law.

After a brief resumption resulting from the
considerable efforts undertaken by the United States
Government, it has not been possible to resume direct
peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, despite the fact that they represent the best
option for achieving a comprehensive, lasting and
mutually acceptable solution that would lead to the
establishment of a political and economically viable
Palestinian State, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map and the
Arab Peace Initiative, as well as the Quartet statements
of March and September 2010 and February 2011.

We have taken note of the report of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, on the progress made over the past
two years in the implementation the programme of the
thirteenth Government of the Palestinian Authority.
The Quartet supported that programme, through which
the Palestinian Authority is endeavouring to build the
institutions necessary for the establishment of a State.

The Mexican delegation would like to express its
concern regarding what is documented in Coordinator
Serry's report, namely, that the main obstacle to the
existence of a Palestinian State being declared is the
continuing Israeli occupation and the failure of a
negotiation process aimed at resolving the conflict
between both parties. We also support his indication
that it is of the greatest importance that the parties
overcome the current impasse and resume negotiations
in order to reach a framework agreement on a
permanent status that resolves all the core issues and
makes the two-State solution a reality.

We would also like to mention the three other
reports that which were presented on 13 April, in
Brussels, to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians,
on the progress achieved by the Palestinian Authority.

Our assessment of the situation in the Middle
East must take into account the situation in the region.
We note with concern the increase in inter-communal
tensions in Lebanon, which jeopardize the political
balance and the coexistence among the various groups
that compose Lebanese society. Violations of resolution
1701 (2006) continue, along with daily incursions by
Israeli armed forces into Lebanese territory. We call on
Israel and Lebanon, as well on as all political actors
involved, to comply with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and to avoid any
belligerent rhetoric, which could lead to an escalation
of violence. We trust that a Government will be formed
as a result of the consultations being led by Prime
Minister Mikati.

I should like to conclude by stating that the time
has come for difficult and momentous political
decisions to be taken by the leaders of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority for the benefit of their own
peoples and for the sake of international peace and
security. We deem the support of the Security Council
and of the international community to be of the utmost
importance in achieving that objective.

