The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Poland, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Jurczynska
(Poland) took at seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns the
3 October attack in Baghdad against the Polish
Ambassador to Iraq, which resulted in the
wounding of the Ambassador and the killing of
one member of his personal security detachment
team and injuries to two others. The attack also
killed at least one Iraqi civilian.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the victims of this
attack and to their families, and to the
Government of the Republic of Poland.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
the

and sponsors of this act to justice and urges all
States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, to cooperate with the Governments of
Poland and Iraq in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council also calls on the
international community to support the
Government of Iraq in exercising its
responsibility in providing protection to the
diplomatic community in Iraq, United Nations
staff and other foreign civilian personnel working
in Iraq.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.50 p.rn.
07-53073

