Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a
matter of increasing relevance.

Seventy-three years ago in San Francisco, we
committed ourselves to strengthening the three pillars
of the current international system, namely, peace and
security, human rights and development. Building
on that commitment, we developed institutions and
adopted rules. Those institutions and rules help us
resolve our differences peacefully. They enable us to
establish norms for dealing with global challenges,
from climate change to weapons of mass destruction.
They help regulate free trade and secure financial
services. We all know that those institutions and rules
are not perfect. The need for reform is well known. We
may not completely agree on how to best fix the system;
however, we can all agree on the benefits of a rules-
based world order. Also, we can all agree that the correct
approach is neither unilateralism nor exceptionalism.
Unilateralism is a departure from our common values.
It is not a sign of good leadership. Exceptionalism is a
departure from our joint responsibilities. It is not a sign
of strength. If we want everyone to commit to a rules-
based system, we need to lead by example. And the new
age of multilateralism can only start here, at United
Nations Headquarters. The United Nations system can
be more responsive, efficient and effective. It can once
again lead and inspire. We need to define our priorities
better to that end.

First, we must reform the Security Council
into a more transparent, democratic, representative
and accountable body. The more transparency the
Council displays while undertaking its work, the more
accountable it will be. The more it shares information,
consults and accepts input, the more effective it will
become. A Council that is more responsive to the
United Nations membership will be better placed to
meet the challenges of an increasingly complex world.
Any success in that process depends on a genuine spirit
of compromise among us, without exception. Let us
remember that, by signing the Charter of the United
Nations, we reaffirmed our faith in the equal rights of
nations large and small.

Secondly, the United Nations needs to devise more
effective ways of preventing conflicts and crises. To do
so, we must address the root causes properly. Building

and sustaining peace requires us to fight poverty,
inequality, extremism and discrimination as well. We
also need to promote human rights and the rule of
law. We need to ensure increased participation and
economic empowerment among all segments of society.
At the same time, the United Nations can make use of
Chapter VI tools more often. The guiding principles
of mediation and good offices have a solid foundation
in the Charter. That is why the Group of Friends of
Mediation, co-chaired by Turkey and Finland, strives
to increase the role of mediation in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.

Thirdly, the principle of local ownership should be
at the core of our collective efforts within the United
Nations system. Successful partnerships with local
Governments, civil society and the private sector are
key factors in effectively mobilizing resources. One
such recent initiative is the process on the global
compact on migration. Over the past 18 months,
we conducted together an inclusive and transparent
dialogue with the contribution of civil society. We were
able to bridge our differences. We collectively achieved
a positive outcome to create better lives for 260 million
migrants around the world. We now look forward to
the adoption of the global compact in Marrakesh. The
compact is an inspiring testament to the importance of
multilateralism. It is an example of the moral vision that
we can inject into the heart of the international system.

The underlying message during this open debate
has been the necessity to uphold multilateralism and
enhance international cooperation against all odds.
The Council has an important role to play to that end.
Increased transparency and effectiveness will further
enhance the legitimacy of this body. That, in turn,
will only strengthen the role of the United Nations in
achieving peace, security and economic prosperity
to the benefit of all, with a renewed commitment to
multilateralism.

