Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
informative briefing on the most recent events in Haiti
and on the activities of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Haiti.
Bolivia expresses its condolences for the loss of
life during the earthquake that struck the island on
6 October. We hope that the affected population can
recover quickly from that unfortunate event. In that
regard, we commend the humanitarian agencies of the
United Nations and MINUJUSTH for their support to
the Haitian Government following that event.

Given recent events, we believe Haiti must work
towards dialogue and political consensus to allow
it to overcome its current obstacles and boost its
economic development. We reiterate our commitment
to that brotherly country and call upon the international
community to continue its efforts to confront the
current challenges, mainly related to the security sector,
the rule of law and development. That support must
be carried out in close consultation and coordination
with the Haitian Government, in strict respect for its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

Similarly, we commend the progress in the areas
I just mentioned, in particular with regard to the law
for the creation, organization and functioning of the
National Council on Legal Aid, enacted on 26 October,
which is an important milestone for reducing pretrial
detention, thereby easing overcrowding in Haiti's jails.
We encourage the Government to take the necessary
measures for its implementation. Additionally, we urge
them to avoid delays in the appointment of judges so
as to preserve the rule of law and avoid overcrowding.

We also welcome the fact that the Haitian
Government has completed the evaluation phase of the
population and housing census, which will provide the
necessary information for putting in place sustainable
policies that will help it eradicate extreme poverty
and meet the challenge of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. We reiterate that doing so requires
that external cooperation be better aligned with
Government priorities, keeping in mind the scope of
those Goals and the implementation ofthe 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

Similarly, it is important to strengthen State
capacities to cope with natural disasters. In that regard,
we commend humanitarian actors such as UNICEF, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination Team for their coordinated assistance.
We call on the international community and donors
to provide financial support to consolidate the
humanitarian response plan.

We appreciate the progress made in the fight
against cholera through the Secretary-General's new
approach, and we welcome the Organization's continued
support to the Haitian authorities to help combat this
epidemic under the framework of the National Plan
for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti. We stress that
the Organization and its Members bear the collective
responsibility for eradicating that disease. In that
connection, we reiterate our call to the international
community to work and comply with its commitments
and to cooperate with the Republic of Haiti to build
robust sanitation and health systems. Cholera continues
to be a central problem that affects not only sanitation
and access to water but all areas of development and
stability in Haiti.

With regard to the progress on reaching the
benchmarks, we reiterate that work to that end must be
carried out in strict compliance with MINUJUSTH's
mandate in the areas of the rule of law and security,
in accordance with resolution 2350 (2017), in order to
consolidate stability in the country and make progress
towards sustainable development.

We commend the Mission's work on the community
violence-reduction programme, which involves at-risk
women and youth in activities that give them the tools
and training to generate revenue, while also fostering
community dialogue. We encourage the Mission
to continue that work, which has proven useful in
reducing crime.

Moreover, we welcome the support provided to
Government institutions in the areas of justice, human
rights and security, and commend the Mission's work
in assisting victims of sexual abuse and exploitation.
We encourage MINUJUSTH to continue those efforts
and, in line with the zero-tolerance principle, we
urge that the people responsible for those crimes be
punished accordingly.

Finally, we stress that there can be no development
without peace or peace without development. As such,
we believe that the international community should join
forces and enhance synergies with the Government in
the framework of the MINUJUSTH mandate.

As this is my delegation's last statement on this
issue as an elected, non-permanent member of the
Security Council, I would like to underscore that the
situation in Haiti - as described by various officials as
well as by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General - is clearly not a threat to international peace
and security. Therefore, it will no longer the purview
of the Security Council following the planned closure
of MINUJUSTH.

