Mr. Akindele (Nigeria): The delegation of
Nigeria congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council, confident that

your sterling qualities will stand you in very good stead
as you steer the Council in its onerous tasks and bring
about a fruitful outcome during the month of February.

We would like also to express our most sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his very
comprehensive and detailed report on the situation of
children affected by armed conflict (S/2007/757),
including the content and the tenor of its annexes I and
II. We also applaud the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, as well as that of all agencies involved in this
sphere of activity.

My delegation notes the key elements of the
report, relating, inter alia, to the fact that some
progress has been made in the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism; the development
and implementation of action plans; the mainstreaming
of the protection of children in United Nations
peacekeeping operations; compliance with regard to
ending the recruitment and exploitation of children;
rape and other sexual violence; abductions; denial of
humanitarian assistance and access to children; and
absence of respect for the rule of law by some parties
to armed conflict.

My delegation is indeed delighted to note that
some modicum of progress and some positive
developments have been recorded during the reporting
period, in that, in some instances, no new cases of
recruitment of children have occurred, and in that some
measures have been taken to effect the release of
children from the grip of certain armed forces for
rehabilitation. Other positive measures include
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for children, as well as investigations into
cases of abuse of the rights of children.

Nevertheless, we observe that there is a lot of
work still to be done, as violations of the rights of
children caught up in situations of armed conflict and
violations of humanitarian law have not abated. In this
connection, my delegation is of the view that it
behoves the international community not to rest on its
oars, but rather to rededicate itself to a greater
commitment to ending impunity for those who abuse
the rights of children. Indeed, is it not high time that
the international community tackled the question of the
abuse of the rights of children from the viewpoint of
prevention, rather than tackling its effects? A well
articulated conflict prevention mechanism or
framework would not only spare the international
community the tedium of being called upon, time and
again, to attend to festering conflicts - which continue
to occur in situations of poverty, marginalization,
political and economic exclusion, impunity,
lawlessness, injustice, et cetera - but could indeed
pave the way to finding a lasting solution to conflict.

My delegation therefore believes that effective
dialogue, poverty alleviation measures, technical
assistance, political and economic inclusion and
measures to tackle the root causes of conflict should go
pari passu with the relevant recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report.

With regard to conflict management, we urge that
good attention be paid to the illicit spread of small
arms and light weapons, which tend to fuel conflicts,
especially in developing countries. The case of West
Africa is a case in point, and that is why the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) found it
expedient to sign the Convention on Small Arms and
Light Weapons on 14 June 2004, in Abuja.

My delegation wholeheartedly endorses the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the role
of the International Criminal Court with regard to
violations of the rights of children that fall within its
purview and jurisdiction.

Nigeria considers the promotion and protection of
the rights of children as a top priority and has indeed
made remarkable progress in the domestication of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Indeed, as of
today, no fewer than 17 states of the Federation have
adopted the Nigerian Child Rights Act, which came
into force in 2003. Nigeria's commitment is
unshakeable with regard to the full implementation of
all the legal instruments relating to the rights of the
child. This, of course, includes the recent declaration
of the General Assembly's Commemorative High-level
Plenary Meeting Devoted to the Follow-up to the
Outcome of the Special Session on Children (General Assembly resolution 62/88).

Finally, in order to further strengthen the modest
but notable achievements made in protection of
children, particularly those in armed conflict, and to
move towards the goal of ending impunity and
bringing violators of children's rights to justice, we
urge States that are yet to do so to ratify and implement
the various conventions and protocols that guarantee

the safety, protection, promotion and continued
espousal of the rights of children in all situations,
particularly in armed conflict.

In the same vein, we urge all the relevant
agencies and stakeholders to pay the necessary
attention to rehabilitation, technical assistance,
capacity-building, reintegration programmes and other
post-conflict challenges, with the goal of ensuring
proper development of children in peace, love and
progress, away from the destructive situations of
conflict. We believe that the world will be a better
place by paying serious and committed attention to this
clarion call.

