Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to speak this afternoon before the
Security Council to discuss with you some of the
aspects of the humanitarian situation in Guinea.

I would like to begin, however, by congratulating
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of March and by thanking the delegation of
Tunisia for the excellent work that it carried out during
its presidency last month.

My delegation is very pleased to be able to
participate in this very important Council meeting to
discuss the humanitarian issue in West Africa. I would
like to welcome the presence of Mr. Lubbers, High
Commissioner for Refugees, and state how grateful my
Government is to him for the interest that he has shown
in the situation prevailing in my country, the Republic
of Guinea. This is the second time that Mr. Lubbers has
met with the Council to discuss the serious
humanitarian problems that have emerged in
southeastern Guinea. Soon after assuming the post of
High Commissioner, Mr. Lubbers devoted his first visit
to going to this part of Africa, which indeed represents
a real cause for concern for the international
community today.

Yesterday, the Council unanimously adopted an
important resolution on Liberia. By deciding quite
rightly to impose sanctions against this country, the
Council sent a strong message to the authorities in
Monrovia for them to cease their support to the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and other rebel
groups operating in the subregion. As you know, the
Republic of Guinea has offered a generous welcome in
its territory over the last 10 years to an impressive
number of refugees, as many as 800,000 at any one
time - a figure that represents more than 10 per cent
of its population.

The Republic of Guinea has been recognized as
the model in the way in which it has welcomed
refugees and in the generosity that it has shown
towards them. There is no need to state here that the
sole cause of the disturbing humanitarian situation in
the southeast of Guinea is the armed attacks
perpetrated by rebel groups with the support of the
Government of Liberia. These attacks have led to the
death of several hundred people, have caused much
damage to property and have lead to thousands of
people fleeing to neighbouring towns.

The camps where refugees were peacefully living
in perfect harmony with their Guinean hosts have not
been spared. The town of Gue'ckedou, which was
sheltering a large number of the refugees, became a
primary target. Today this town has almost been
completely destroyed by the fighting in its streets.
Recent armed attacks have created a serious
humanitarian situation that the High Commissioner was

able to describe to members because he saw it with his
own eyes.

Members will remember that as far back as
October 1999, expressing her concern after the first
rebel incursions across the Guinean border, Mrs. Ogata,
to whom my Government pays a well-deserved tribute,
invited the international community to do everything
possible to ensure that a country like Guinea, which
continues to generously assume the huge burden of
refugees, should not have to pay so high a price. Alas,
her words fell on deaf ears, and today the consequences
of these rebel incursions are visible in the suffering of
the hundreds of thousands of refugees who are
dispersed in the countryside and the thousands of
Guineans who have fled danger and death.

The tragic events that have taken place in the
southeastern part of Guinea have caused as much
suffering to Guineans as to the refugees. Bearing in
mind the desire of refugees to return to their country
and working closely with the Office of the High
Commissioner, the Government of Guinea has already
planned the measures necessary to provide safety for
the refugees until they repatriate.

However, even if it seems that conditions of
security have been organized within the territory of
Guinea, the success of the repatriation operation
requires taking into account the following conditions.
First, we must set up and make safe a humanitarian
corridor within the territory of Sierra Leone. Then we
must identify and make safe reception areas within
Sierra Leone. The Government of Guinea would like to
assure the Council that it is keen to do everything
possible to ensure the success of such an operation.

For those refugees who would like to remain in
Guinea and wait for the security situation at home to
improve, arrangements will be made, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), to transfer
them to new camps that this time will be far from the
borders, in the interior of the country. My Government
is confident that the international community will offer
all possible political, economic, financial and logistic
support to avoid aggravating what is considered by
many to be a humanitarian disaster in this part of
Africa, which has suffered so much from the
consequences of the civil war in Liberia and Sierra
Leone.

In supporting the adoption of sanctions against
Liberia, the goal pursued by my Government was not at
all to hamper the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), but to persuade the
authorities in Monrovia to withdraw their support from
the rebel movements operating in the subregion and to
foster a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Sierra
Leone.

My Government remains convinced that if the
Liberian authorities would respect all the commitments
contained in resolution 1343, adopted on 7 March
2001, peace and harmony would return to our
subregion.

My delegation would like again to encourage the
Security Council to do everything possible to restore
peace and security in West Africa. The goals we still
need to achieve are a ceasefire in Sierra Leone;
stopping the rebel incursions across the Guinean
border; security for all States in the region; the return
of refugees to Liberia and Sierra Leone; national
reconciliation within these two countries; and, finally,
resuming cooperation between these three countries in
the context of the Mano River Union.

Finally, I take this opportunity to launch an
appeal to the international community for increased aid
to my country to help us to continue to better support
and manage the burden stemming from the massive and
prolonged presence of refugees. I would like to thank
all those Governments that have offered aid to Guinea
within this framework. My delegation would also like
to express its gratitude to the Council for the work it
has done to maintain peace and security.

I also wish to take advantage of the fact that
today is International Women's Day to celebrate the
courageous initiatives undertaken by the women of the
Mano River Union countries in the cause of peace and
security in our subregion.

