Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We are very pleased to participate in this discussion
today. I believe it is a very timely and useful initiative
on your part, Mr. President, to give Security Council
members a chance to address their expectations of the
upcoming missions and to hear reactions and comments
from other members. I think we have had some useful
commentary and observations today that will better
inform our thinking, both about these two specific
missions and about the process.

Many speakers have already addressed the
important role that the United Nations and the Security
Council have to play in Africa, and they have put
forward various ideas about how that impact could be
improved. But I think we all recognize that the fact that
we are sending two Security Council missions to Africa
in the next 45 days indicates how important we think
Security Council engagement is in helping to find
solutions.

Of course, when we talk about Africa in the
Security Council, we tend to focus on crisis and on the
many problems that exist, and that is entirely correct.
The missions help us to do that better and in a more
focused way. I did want to note, however, that Africa
has come a long way in recent years. A decade ago,
single-party States and military dictatorship were the
norm on the continent; today, we see democracy in
approximately 33 African countries, according to a
recent United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report. Many countries are
making significant strides towards effective
governance and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The framework of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development reflects African
commitment to sustaining and expanding those positive
changes. That is all to be welcomed, and we strongly
support that process.

We have also seen some long-term conflicts come
to an end. Last October, we celebrated the tenth
anniversary of the signing of the Rome Peace Accords,
which brought peace to Mozambique. Sierra Leone and
Angola are emerging from long years of bloodshed and
are now on their way to post-conflict reconstruction
and economic revitalization.

But, as we all know too well, many parts of the
continent remain stuck in conflict, and there is much
work to be done by the United Nations, by the Security
Council and by all Member States of the United
Nations. The dire situation in the Ituri region has
commanded much of the Council's attention in recent
weeks - perhaps not as publicly as other issues we
have been addressing, but those on the Council know
how much time we have been spending on it - and
today we adopted a resolution to address that situation.
Much like the British in Sierra Leone, France has taken
the lead on a multinational force that we fully support
and for which we commend the French Government.
We expect the Security Council mission to enable the
Council to contribute in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to a long-term strategy to end that terrible
conflict.

As we look at the many trouble spots in Africa,
many of which have already been addressed today, we
seek to find ways to build sustained commitment from
the Council and from the United Nations, but, very
importantly - as some others have already pointed
out - from Africans themselves. We support the
efforts of neighbouring and other regional States to
help to resolve conflicts. The United States has
provided money and training assistance to several of
those operations and initiatives, and we will continue
to find ways to help to create the right context for
peace in each area of crisis.

The fragile peace process in Burundi continues to
require careful monitoring and sustained assistance,
and we were heartened by the transition of the
presidency on 1 May. In West Africa, the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire is precarious and, again, requires
international attention to ensure that the parties
continue to cooperate in implementing the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and that we all work to ensure
sufficient funding for the operations of the Economic
Community of West African States, which will be key
to the long-term success of this mission and of our
peace efforts.

The United States firmly supports sanctions
regimes directed against parties that are intent on
continuing the cycle of violence and instability. By
restricting access to the arms and the financing used to
undermine international security, sanctions can be a
valuable tool in minimizing threats. Our goal is not to
punish, but to use sanctions to change the policies of
regimes that threaten their neighbours, and we all know
who they are.

With respect to Liberia, the Security Council has
adopted strong sanctions measures. The Liberian
people are facing a severe economic and political crisis
brought about by years of civil war that President
Taylor has repeatedly exported across his neighbours'
borders. The upcoming peace talks in Ghana provide
an opportunity in which the Council may need to be
prepared to play an eventual support role.

Also, in the long term, support for conflict
resolution and prevention is well served by respect for
international human rights and humanitarian norms, as
well as a commitment to good governance. The United
States Government is currently involved in a variety of
programmes in several African countries designed to
promote democracy, good governance and economic
development. We also hope to work with our African
partners to further promote these goals through the
Millennium Challenge Account, which has good
governance, sound economic policy and investment in
people as its three pillars.

However, as Ambassador De La Sabliere and
others have pointed out, ultimately solutions to
Africa's conflicts must come from the parties to the
conflict themselves. They cannot be imposed from the
outside. Regional and international actors and the
Council can provide the necessary assistance to help
maintain peace, but genuine progress depends, in the
end, on the political will and meaningful positive steps
of the belligerents on the ground.

Our task - one that we hope the upcoming
Security Council missions will promote - is to push
belligerents to make the key choices for peace and then
to help the parties reach that end once they have made
that decision.

