Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having brought us to these
meetings here in Nairobi. This is a historic day, and we
trust that there will be an historic peace agreement. The
Security Council is meeting in Africa to assist in
solving, together with Africans and the regional
organizations, this long-standing crisis in Sudan.

We are gratified by the unanimous adoption of
today's resolution on Sudan. It is a well-balanced
resolution that gives strong support to the Naivasha
peace process, which is being mediated by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, without
ignoring the Council's long-standing concern about the
grave humanitarian situation in the Darfur region. The
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army have been urged to
conclude a comprehensive peace agreement by the end
of this year, and the Council has committed itself, once
the parties have met their commitments, to provide the
support necessary to ensure that the Sudan will be a
united, prosperous and peaceful country. The resolution
clearly states that the resolution of the Darfur conflict
in Darfur would create conditions conducive to the
delivery of such assistance.

A comprehensive peace agreement in the context
of the Naivasha process would give momentum to a
political settlement of the Darfur crisis. That would
send the clear and resounding message that there is an
alternative to violence and that peace can be achieved
by means of political negotiations. In that connection,
today's resolution emphasizes the importance of
making real progress in the peace talks facilitated by
the African Union in Abuja between the Government
of the Sudan and the Sudanese Liberation Army and
the Justice and Equality Movement. My delegation
feels that it is clear that the Council should act on
various fronts with regard to the Sudan to help in
finding a lasting solution to the country's problems.
There is an obvious interrelationship and
interdependence between the Naivasha peace process
and the humanitarian tragedy in Darfur.

Our intention today is to promote a final
agreement in the peace negotiations facilitated by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We are
pleased to note the commitment made by the parties in
the Declaration annexed to the resolution, to
implement by 31 December the protocols and annexes
negotiated within the Naivasha peace process and to
resolve outstanding issues.

We congratulate the parties on having entered
into this solemn commitment today. The united voice
of the Security Council in support of the parties'
commitment has been expressed in today's resolution,
and that will become increasingly relevant. Our
commitment to a final conclusion of the Naivasha
process must lead to a political settlement in Darfur.
Darfur is not simply a bargaining chip in the effort to
reach north-south peace. In our View, we do not
endanger the conclusion of a north-south agreement by
insisting that both parties meet their commitments on
Darfur relating to the ceasefire, to respect for human
rights, to putting an end to impunity and to ending
violence against civilians, and that they fulfil the
mandates set out in Security Council resolutions. To
the contrary, we recall the interconnection between the
two situations; and, in the final analysis, that is
politically smart. Now is the time to encourage a
commitment to peace between the north and the south
in the Sudan. We know that this will bring many
benefits in dealing with the other challenges in the
Sudan.

The results the Security Council achieved today
send a clear signal of support for preventive diplomacy,
for a multidimensional approach to solving problems
and for regional solutions to promote comprehensive
peace and security - in this case, the resolution of
African problems essentially by the Africans
themselves.

