Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): 1 would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report (S/2013/72)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation in today's meeting of the
Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Daeic', and thank him
and Mr. Hashim Thaci for their statements.

Azerbaijan's position with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and the
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration
of independence remain unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international legal
basis for a comprehensive settlement through a political
process and negotiations.

In that connection, we commend the leadership
in Belgrade and Pristina for their commitment and
determination to achieve substantial progress in the
dialogue facilitated by the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Catherine Ashton.

Unfortunately, it was not possible to agree on some
of the most difficult issues during the meeting held in
Brussels on 20 March. We encourage the sides to remain
committed to reaching agreements through a mutually
acceptable solution and to make further progress
during the next meeting, scheduled for 2 April. The
successful outcome of the dialogue is indispensable so
as to move forward in overcoming the burden of the
past, normalizing relations and bringing about lasting
stability for the region.

We emphasize the utmost importance of UNMIK's
presence and activities in Kosovo. As the Secretary-
General notes in his report, during the reporting
period the Mission continued to work closely with the
communities on the ground and to collaborate with
all other mandated international presences to enhance
the prospects of success in the political dialogue.
It is important that UNMIK maintain and further
develop its key role in ensuring the coordination of all
international efforts under its status-neutral framework,
as is envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999).

According to the report, the overall security
situation remained generally calm during the reporting
period, with the exception of northern Kosovo, where
some serious incidents were reported. Indeed, ethnically
motivated attacks and violence, acts of vandalism of
religious sites and other forms of religious intolerance
have continued, affecting first and foremost the rights
and freedoms of minority communities in Kosovo.
Needless to say, the atmosphere of impunity for such
violations will hardly contribute to enhancing public
confidence or to building the foundation for long-term
reconciliation.

The voluntary return of internally displaced persons
to Kosovo again showed few signs of improvement
during the reporting period. At the same time, we
commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to
promote dialogue between potential returnees and the
receiving communities. According to the report, some
progress was also made in the provision of municipal
support for housing construction and refurbishment, as
well as in the implementation of the UNHCR return
and reintegration project. These are encouraging
developments that should be further supported and
promoted.

We agree with the Secretary-General that of
equal importance to the high-level political process
are sustained and well-grounded efforts to promote
reconciliation and to increase trust among the
communities in Kosovo. In that regard, the preservation
of the region's rich cultural diversity and the further
promotion of its cultural and spiritual heritage on
the basis of ethnic and religious tolerance should
undoubtedly remain one of the key objectives.

The establishment of tools and the strengthening
of the principle of justice and the rule of law are also
imperative to building confidence and achieving a
lasting political settlement. In that regard, we take
note of the information regarding the ongoing criminal
investigation by the Special Investigative Task Force
into the report related to a wide range of alleged
criminal offences, including organized crime, the
inhuman treatment of people and organ trafficking. We
are encouraged by the high-level political commitments
throughout the region to support the investigation
conducted by the Task Force.

We note also that during the reporting period
UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress
on the issue of missing persons, which remains one of
the essential aspects of reconciliation. We encourage
the sides and international partners to intensify their
efforts and enhance coordination to that end.
In conclusion, I should like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif, for
its efforts and for its important role in the maintenance
of peace and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.

