We welcome the delegation of the Niger as President of the Security Council for the month of September and wish you, Ambassador Abarry, every success. We also thank the Indonesian delegation and Permanent Representative Djani for the efforts and leadership of the Council during the challenging month of August. We thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams for her report on the situation in Libya. We also thank Guenter Sautter, Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for his report on the work of that body. Russia remains convinced that the Libyan crisis can be resolved only by political and diplomatic means. There is no alternative to a peaceful solution. We have consistently advocated the establishment of a sustainable cessation of hostilities in Libya and an end to the bloodshed that has been tearing the country apart since NATO?'s intervention in 2011. In that regard, the recent statements by the Head of the Government of National Accord, Mr. F. Serraj, and the head of the Libyan Parliament, Mr. A. Saleh, give cause for cautious optimism. We call on the parties to launch the Libyan national dialogue as soonas possible within the mechanisms created by the Berlin Conference and approved by resolution 2510 (2020). We confirmed this position during the most recent teleconference of the Berlin Conference follow-up committee, as well as in contacts with interested parties. At the same time, we proceed from the principle that we have repeatedly voiced that any decisions and recommendations must be coordinated and approved by the Libyans themselves. Without this, no success can be achieved. Although the military situation has stabilized, we cannot exclude a fresh escalation at any moment. The ongoing armed conflict has a negative impact on the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the population. Mass protests were held in Tripoli demanding urgent measures to remedy the situation. We are also very concerned at the rapid increase in cases of the coronavirus disease. We call on the Libyan authorities to respond promptly to these challenges and on the international community to continue humanitarian assistance. We are worried about reports of ongoing violations of the arms embargo in Libya. We are convinced that the supply of weapons and foreign terrorist fighters to this country must be stopped. "Pumping" Libya with weapons, which started back in 2011, as well as the presence of Western military specialists with unknown missions, further fuels the crisis and, accordingly, increases radical sentiments and the spread of the terrorist threat throughout the African continent. We reiterate our approach to peaceful settlement in Libya. This process should be Libyan-owned and Libyan-led. All issues, including those related to the situation around Sirte and Al-Jufra, should be discussed within established mechanisms. Progress on military and economic tracks could become a door opener for inclusive dialogue on the political modalities of the comprehensive settlement. We believe that in the current critical situation all States that have leverage over the warring Libyan parties must do their best to help launch the negotiation process. In addition to statements on the ceasefire, a number of peace initiatives have recently been voiced, including by the head of the Libyan Parliament. Mr. Aguila Saleh, and the President of Egypt, Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, supported by many influential States. We believe that the aforementioned ideas could form the basis for political discussions within the framework of the process of a comprehensive Libyan settlement. On our part, we will continue contacts with countries interested in stabilizing Libya, including Turkey, on the basis of the statement adopted by our two countries on 22 July. The most recent round of such contacts was held on 31 August. At the same time, we stress that the central and leading role in the Libyan settlement belongs to the United Nations. We believe that a new Special Representative can help move forward the political process and coordinate all existing initiatives and ideas. We call on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative as soon as possible and on Security Council members to contribute to this process, which has dragged on unjustifiably and is clearly impeding international efforts. We have already heard accusations of Russian interference in Libya. I am sure that there will be a follow-up to the ones that we originally heard. In this regard, I would like to reiterate what I said in our previous statements. We have repeatedly reiterated that not a single Russian serviceman is currently in the combat zone in Libya. There are no reports of them participating in armed clashes or dying there. Behind all this there is a clear desire to divert attention from the destructive role played in Libya by those who are the loudest today in paying lip service to the fate of ordinary Libyans. Such behaviour will not mislead the Libyans or their neighbours, who are well aware of who has in fact pushed the region into chaos. We are very surprised that those who spread accusations about so-called Russian involvement in Libya are turning a blind eye to their own military presence, in both the capacity of national armed forces and through private military companies, in both the west and east of Libya. They send weapons and ammunition to different armed groups, train them and recruit mercenaries. We call on those delegations to stop these hypocritical accusations.
