Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Kai Eide, for
presenting the special report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1806 (2008) on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.

South Africa welcomes the successful outcomes
of the international Conference in Support of
Afghanistan that was held in Paris on 12 June 2008.
That meeting was another important step in enhancing
the partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community. We are pleased that the Paris
conference resulted in pledges of international
assistance totalling about $20 billion. We hope that
those pledges will be translated into actual
commitments and will make a difference in improving
the lives of the Afghan people.

My delegation continues to support the central
and impartial role of UNAMA under the leadership of
Special Representative Eide in leading the coordination
of international efforts and in coordinating between the
Afghan Government and the international community.
We further support the strengthening of UNAMA's
coordination capacity to enable the mission itself to
make a significant difference on the ground.

South Africa reaffirms its support for the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy under the
ownership of the Afghan people. We concur with the
assessment of the Secretary-General that the
implementation of this Strategy will require the strong
support of the international community. My delegation
supports a common approach that will integrate
security, governance, the rule of law, human rights and
social and economic development in Afghanistan.

While the partnership between the Afghan people
and the international community continues to
strengthen, the persistent threat to security posed by
insurgent and terrorist activities is the main challenge
to Afghanistan's nation-building efforts and stability.

South Africa expresses its concern regarding the
recent terrorist attacks targeting innocent civilians,
children and diplomats, as well as any attempt to
destabilize Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the
importance of regional cooperation as an effective
means to promote security, governance and
development in Afghanistan. In that context, my
delegation welcomes the Special Representative's
fruitful visits to Iran and Pakistan. We would support
similar visits in the future aimed at strengthening
regional cooperation in creating a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.

Finally, we thank the Italian delegation for
preparing a draft presidential statement on Afghanistan.
South Africa is committed to working with other
delegations to ensure its early adoption.

