Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for your rapid response
and for your interest in holding this emergency meeting
to consider the ongoing crisis and the deteriorating
situation in the Middle East.

My delegation forcefully condemns the recent
Israeli operations against Palestinian President Yasser
Arafat. We believe that these Israeli measures represent
a dangerous development that is threatening the
security of the region as a whole and is likely to sow
chaos and collapse. Such acts of aggression -
including physical liquidations, the destruction of
homes and national institutions, the invasion of camps,
arbitrary mass arrests, threats against the security of
villages and the victimization of large numbers of
civilians - will not guarantee security for Israel and
never have guaranteed it. Moreover, this aggression is a
flagrant Violation of agreements concluded between the
two parties and of the fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law and relevant
international instruments and norms. We condemn and
reject these entirely unjustified acts. We also condemn
the targeting and killing of civilians by both parties.
The Jordanian trade office in the Palestinian Authority
area has been attacked and destroyed by Israeli forces.
That, too, we vigorously condemn.

We urge the Security Council to discharge its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
by dispatching international forces to protect the
Palestinian people, its legitimate leadership and its
national institutions. In the light of ongoing Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian Authority and the
occupied territories, we urge the Security Council to
demand that Israel immediately withdraw from the
territories it has occupied and implement Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002). Israel must
also be urged to respect the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We also call on the Council to
ensure Israel's respect for resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) by allowing the establishment of an
independent State on Palestinian national territory with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

