Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The adoption of today's draft resolution by
the Security Council is an extraordinary event. The draft
resolution expresses the collective will of the Council's

 

members to support the peace process being stepped up in
Tajikistan.

Russia welcomes the progress noted in the Secretary-
General' s report in implementing the General Agreement on
the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan, as well as the constructive cooperation of the
Government and the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) in
discharging their obligations under the agreements. This
shows that the peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations
and the entire international community have not been in
vain and that the tiny seedlings of peace are putting down
roots, albeit with difficulty, in the war-torn soil of
Tajikistan.

The signing of the General Agreement and the start of
the work of the Commission on National Reconciliation
open prospects for overcoming the political and military
confrontation and for the achievement of peace and national
reconciliation in that country. It is important that the
Security Council has achieved agreement on the need to
help to consolidate this trend and to show solidarity with
the Tajik people, which so sorely needs general emergency
assistance.

Russia commends the work done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Gerd Merrem,
and the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT). We are satisfied by the deepening cooperation
between UNMOT and the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) collective peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan.

The return of Tajikistan to a peaceful life is a new
task for UNMOT. This determined the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on expanding the mandate and
increasing the size of the Mission, which the Security
Council is prepared to endorse.

Serious attention continues to need to be given to
providing security for UNMOT personnel. We welcome the
creation of the joint unit of the Government of the Republic
of Tajikistan and the United Tajik Opposition, which has
just been referred to by the Permanent Representative of
Tajikistan. This step has major political significance, apart
from its military importance. In the event of specific
requests from UNMOT, then, with the agreement of the
parties, the collective peacekeeping forces of the CIS are
prepared to assist.

The mandate of the force, which was recently
extended to 31 December, officially established this
function. In accordance with the request of the Tajik side,
made to the President of Russia as the Chairman of the
Council of Heads of State of the CIS, the collective
peacekeeping forces of the CIS are also prepared to
provide assistance in discharging the inter-Tajik
agreements, particularly in the military area.

Repatriation of refugees, reintegration of recent
participants in hostilities and other tasks included in the
General Agreement place an additional burden on the
war-torn economy of Tajikistan. Within the framework of
international donor efforts, Russia is considering the
possibility of giving assistance - in addition to the
significant bilateral humanitarian, financial, economic and
other assistance already given to Tajikistan - to
implement specific programmes and projects to ease the
consequences of war and restore the country's national
economy. Coordinating the international efforts in this
area is the job of the Vienna international donor
conference in support of the peace process in Tajikistan.

The establishment of stable peace and national
reconciliation in Tajikistan is important for the Central
Asian region and beyond. It will help the efforts of the
international community to combat the drugs trade,
terrorism and arms smuggling. Russia - together with
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the members of the Contact Group of
guarantors - intends to actively assist compliance with
all the provisions of the General Agreement, in the
interests of the restoration and democratic development of
Tajikistan and the prosperity of its people.

I hope that the draft resolution will be adopted
unanimously.

