Ms. Bird (Australia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's important debate.
The maintenance of international law, and through
that, of international peace and security, is a pillar of
the Charter of the United Nations. In past statements,
the Council has explicitly affirmed its commitment
to an international order based on the rule of law
and international law. In doing so, it has explicitly
recognized the contribution that the international order
makes both to addressing our common challenges and
to the maintenance of peace and security. Australia
would like to take this opportunity to highlight two
key issues 4 the Council's role in ending impunity
for serious international crimes and in promoting the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

First, the Council has itself made clear its
commitment to combating impunity for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. It has underlined the important role that
international justice plays in the prevention of armed
conflict. Australia agrees thatjustice and accountability
must be at the core of the international rules-based
order, as it is at the core of the social contract between
States and their citizens at the domestic level.

Judge Meron's remarks give us cause to reflect on
the significant legacy of the ad hoc tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, which were created
when the Council expressed a common resolve to deny
impunity to perpetrators of serious international crimes.
That resolve was evident in the Council's referrals of
the situations in Darfur and Libya to the International
Criminal Court. Regrettably, we have not witnessed the
same resolve for Syria. We have been dismayed by the
use of the veto to block the Council's ability to act in the
face of the horrors we have witnessed there. We urge
the Security Council to once again lead by example in
the fight against impunity and the maintenance of the
international rules-based order.

Secondly, Article 1 of the Charter states that the
settlement of international disputes shouldbe undertaken
in conformity with international law. That was included
on the initiative ofa permanent member of the Council.
The Council has also stated its commitment to actively
supporting the peaceful settlement of disputes between
Member States, in conformity with Chapter VI of the
Charter. Australia and Timor-Leste have demonstrated
how that can be done to the benefit of both parties,
this year concluding the first-ever conciliation under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and setting maritime boundaries. Australia calls on
the Council to continue to actively encourage States to
settle disputes by peaceful means, including through
the use of the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice.

