Ms. Laj (Denmark): First of all, I should like to
welcome Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), to the Council. I thank him for a
comprehensive, interesting and encouraging briefing.
This is only the second time that Mr. Jessen-Petersen
has reported to the Council, and we are already full of
respect for the impressive results he has achieved so
far.

The representative of Luxembourg will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union.
Denmark fully associates itself with that statement.

I would like to express my gratitude for the report
of the Secretary-General that we have before us today,
which contains UNMIK's second quarterly technical
assessment of standards implementation in Kosovo. We
will discuss a third assessment in May. Thus, we are at
the halfway point in this essential but intricate process,
which will have decisive influence on the future of
Kosovo and indeed on the stability and prosperity of
the broader region of Southeastern Europe. It is
encouraging that the report highlights tangible progress
in the reporting period, and we welcome that. Tribute
should be paid to UNMIK and to the Special
Representative, but also to the new Government, which
has demonstrated real commitment and determination.

It is, however, notable and perhaps to be expected
that the report concludes that at this stage progress in
some key areas remains insufficient and further work is
needed. We may be at the halfway point in time, but we
are not yet halfway in implementation. It is therefore
important that the Council today give its full support to
the Special Representative and his staff in their
admirable efforts to keep up the pace of the process.
No one involved in standards implementation can
afford to slow down now. The momentum must be
maintained, and the focus should be strictly kept on the
prioritized standards concerning the rule of law,
freedom of movement, returns, functioning local
institutions and security. In that way, our overall aim of
securing a multi-ethnic Kosovo will be kept constantly
in sight.

With a decision on a comprehensive midyear
review on the horizon, we will in the coming months
closely follow and measure the political commitment
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
of the Kosovar communities in general to the standards
process. Realistically, the 400 or so detailed indicators
laid out in the Standards Implementation Plan will take
some years to fulfil completely. But without an
unambiguous demonstration of the political will and
the administrative capacity to do it, we will not be able
to move beyond the present phase.

In that regard, we call on all authorities and
communities of Kosovo to engage in dialogue and
standards implementation. The continued
unwillingness of the Kosovo Serbs to do that is
worrying, counterproductive for themselves and
unhelpful for the process. The Provisional Institutions
cannot be held accountable for delays caused by the
unwillingness of the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
process. Belgrade and other opinion leaders in Kosovo
bear their fair share of the responsibility for rectifying
that situation. I welcome the fact that Belgrade has
decided to resume direct dialogue with Pristina and
that the working group on missing persons will meet in
early March.

The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
should be given a real chance to show their worth. We
support a further transfer from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of all competencies not directly
involving sovereignty. That should be accompanied by
greater accountability and increased capacity-building.
In other areas, the Provisional Institutions should be
consulted in order to create a sense of local ownership.

Decentralization is an equally important element
in the way forward, as it is instrumental in forming a
basis for the political integration of minority
communities and for the dissolution of parallel
structures. We support the decentralization plan of
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions, while we
encourage Belgrade to take up the advisory role for the
Kosovo Serbs that has been reserved for it in these
discussions.

In his last briefing to the Security Council three
months ago, the Special Representative stressed that
the international community would soon have to move
beyond managing Kosovo as a "holding operation".
My Government shares that view. A decision to start
negotiations on Kosovo's final status should come this
year. But there is no automaticity as to the start of
talks. And while the reintegration of Kosovo into
Serbia or the territorial division of Kosovo into Serb
and Albanian areas may not be feasible solutions, there
is no predetermined outcome of such talks. Any
outcome will be conditioned primarily on the
authorities' ability to secure a democratic and multi-
ethnic Kosovo.

As any solution should be based on the broadest
possible acceptance both locally and in Belgrade, it is
our hope that all parties will participate in a
constructive manner. Also crucial to such a process
will be an endeavour to deal efficiently with Kosovo's
dire economic situation. It is important for the efforts
to secure economic growth and employment in Kosovo
that UNMIK have access to international lending
institutions. The clarification of property rights and, at
a later stage, of Kosovo's future status will help to
attract severely needed foreign direct investments. In
general, probably only a regional approach to
economic development and a common long-term
European perspective will provide the framework
necessary for narrowing the economic gap with the rest
of Europe.

Finally, I should like to stress that an
unconditional prerequisite for maintaining the positive
momentum we now see in Kosovo is the maintenance
and even the strengthening of security. Security in
Kosovo has improved considerably since last March.
We recognize and welcome that. But as the difficult
questions of decentralization and rebuilding a multi-
ethnic society are successfully dealt with, as suspected
war criminals are summoned to the Tribunal in The
Hague and as status talks approach, security could
come under pressure. Some observers warn us that new
inter-ethnic violence could erupt. Let us hope that they
are overly alarmist.

But if such a scenario materializes, there will be
no room for compromise or for pragmatic acceptance
of impunity. Criminals responsible for the riots of
March last year are being prosecuted, and the
international community should be equally steadfast
with regard to situations that might arise in the future.

Kosovo is entering a decisive period, and
therefore it is particularly important that any political
moves be safeguarded with the right level of military
and police preparedness. The UNMIK police and the
Kosovo Police Service have shown great skill and
professionalism in tackling difficult situations - for
instance, during the visit to Kosovo of Serbian
President Tadic. KFOR has strengthened its operational
capabilities, and we welcome NATO's intent to
maintain its strong presence to deal with challenges
that may arise. The Council should make absolutely
clear that no group will be allowed to make political
gains through provocations or through violence or the
threat thereof.

So on the basis of what we have heard here today,
it is with a strong sense of optimism and progress that
we encourage the Council, the Secretary-General and
the Special Representative to stay the course and to
keep up the pace of standards implementation as we
move into what will probably prove to be a very
decisive year for Kosovo.
