Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the first report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Daesh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering the
threat (S/2016/92). The report is submitted pursuant to
resolution 2253 (2015), which the Council unanimously
adopted last December in a meeting (see S/PV.7587)
that included Ministers of Finance from around the
world - an expression of the strong determination of
Member States to address the threat that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) represents to the
international community and to the principles and
values of the Charter of the United Nations.

Paragraph 97 of the resolution requests the
Secretary-General to provide an initial strategic-level
report that demonstrates and reflects the gravity of this
threat, including

"foreign terrorist fighters joining ISIL and

associated groups and entities, and the sources

of financing of these groups as well as their
planning and facilitation of attacks".
The report also reflects the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering this
threat, and contains recommendations for Member
States now how to mitigate it, as well as ways in
which the United Nations can support these goals. As
requested by the Council, the report was prepared

"with the input of CTED, in close collaboration
with the Monitoring Team, as well as other relevant
United Nations actors",

including the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF), the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and the Office of the Special Envoy for Syria.

Data and imagery provided by Member States on
potential routes of illicit trade in oil and oil products
taken by ISIL could not be independently verified by the
United Nations. Moreover, differences in the material
provided point to the difficulty in establishing exact
routes and distribution networks, given the variety
and flexibility adopted by ISIL. It thus underscores
the imperative of close coordination and cooperation
among Member States, as demonstrated by the adoption
of Security Council resolution 2253 (2015).

The report provides a strategic-level assessment of
the threat. It highlights the fact that ISIL's emergence
has been facilitated by the protracted conflicts and
instability in Iraq and Syria, as well as the weakening of
State institutions and the inability of States to exercise
effective control over territory and borders. The group,
which has benefited from a flow of financial resources
and its ties with transnational organized criminals, is
expanding its operations to other regions. ISIL's global
expansion strategy may be a reaction to recent territorial
losses inflicted by international military efforts. In
this context, the swift expansion of ISIL operations
across West and North Africa, the Middle East, and
South and South-East Asia; the increasing number of
terrorist groups pledging allegiance to its cause; and
the substantial flow of foreign terrorist fighters from
around the world are sources of major concern.

ISIL continues to perpetrate appalling human rights
abuses against populations under its control, including
mass executions, widespread torture, amputations,
ethno-sectarian attacks, sexual violence, enslavement
and the systematic recruitment and abuse of children.
The Secretary-General has said previously that some
of ISIL's crimes, if proven, constitute crimes against
humanity. This situation has led to a humanitarian
crisis of unprecedented proportions. In Syria alone,
around 12 million people have been forced to flee
their homes, and more than 13.5 million are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Large-scale, systematic
destruction and looting of cultural sites are also part of
the ISIL strategy.

The report also analyses ISIL finances, highlighting
its capacity to rapidly and effectively mobilize vast
resources. The main funding sources include the
exploitation of oil and other natural resources, so-
called taxing, confiscation, the looting of archeological
sites, external donations, ransom payments and other
financing techniques, such as the use of the Internet
and social media to raise funds.

The attraction of ISIL to potential recruits continues
unabated, particularly among young people in both
developed and developing States. It is estimated that
around 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters, originating
from over 100 Member States and driven by a number
of social, economic and geopolitical conditions,
combined with individual circumstances, are actively
engaged with ISIL and associated groups. These groups
are using the Internet and social media as a promotional
and recruitment tool. Information and communication
technologies play a crucial role in foreign terrorist
fighters' preparations to travel to join ISIL and its
affiliates, the training and sharing of effective practices
and the planning of attacks.

ISIL sympathizers, acting alone or in small
cells, effectively expanded the geographical scope
and complexity of their attacks in the second half of
2015, both in terms of planning and facilitation, as the
attacks in Beirut, Paris and Jakarta demonstrated. The
combination of home-grown small cells and terrorists
who travel back and forth from Syria and Iraq, as well
as the use of sophisticated technologies to plan the
attacks, new logistical and training techniques, suicide
attackers and rosters of foreign terrorist fighters with
specialized skills all represent new and complex
challenges.

In its second part, the report stresses that, while
the primary responsibility for countering the threat of
ISIL lies with Member States, the United Nations and
other international organizations have a critical role
to play in supporting the efforts of Member States,
and have already taken a number of measures in this
regard. These include the assessments of the threat
and of States' capacities undertaken by the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; the development by
the CTITF and the United Nations Centre for Counter-
Terrorism (UNCCT) of a United Nations capacity-
building implementation plan for countering the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters; and the development of
capacity-building programmes and projects such as
those being implemented by UNCCT, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, UNESCO, the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, UN-Women and INTERPOL, among others.

In the third part of the report, the Secretary-General
provides a number of strategic responses for Member
States and the United Nations to address the threat of
ISIL. These include addressing the underlying political
and socioeconomic causes of relevant conflicts,
particularly in Syria, and strengthening the operational
and legal framework needed to choke off ISIL funding.

In the context of countering the financing of
terrorism, Member States should ensure the timely
exchange of information and financial intelligence,
implement relevant Security Council resolutions and
strengthen their collaboration with private-sector actors
to address the threat. The United Nations should support
these efforts in a more comprehensive way, particularly
in its field operations, including by enhancing its
research on the nexus between ISIL and transnational
organized crime and stepping up technical assistance to
build Member States' capacities.

In order to counter recruitment and address
violent extremism and radicalization, Governments
should consider developing national plans of action
to prevent violent extremism, focus preventive efforts
on education and youth, and strengthen strategies and
legal frameworks to address the abuse of information
and communication technologies. The United Nations
should support these efforts, including through
measures proposed by the United Nations plan of action
to prevent violent extremism, which is currently under
consideration, and the development of new tools that
will facilitate cooperation between investigators and
prosecutors involved in terrorism cases.
Member States should criminalize foreign terrorist
fighters' travel in accordance with relevant resolutions
and take measures to strengthen their border-
management regimes, including by using INTERPOL
databases, assessing foreign terrorist fighters' travel
routes and trends on a continuous basis, and improving
the exchange ofinformation between States. The United
Nations should step up capacity-building assistance in
that context.

From preventive to security and criminal justice
measures, Member States should strengthen their tools
to disrupt ISIL's capacity to plan and facilitate attacks,
including through the use of special investigative
techniques and effective inter-agency coordination.
Applying a case-by-case approach to ISIL returnees
and ensuring the support of the United Nations in
protecting cultural heritage is also recommended.

In conclusion, despite the efforts of the international
community to counter ISIL through military, financial
and law enforcement measures, and the substantial
losses inflicted upon ISIL, the group continues to pose
one of the major challenges of our time to international
peace and security. In the face of that common threat, I
would like to echo the Secretary-General's call to unity
and to action, including in finding political solutions to
the conflicts in Syria and Libya. I would like to assure
the Council that the United Nations is committed to
supporting Member States' efforts.

The Secretary-General will provide an update
of this report to the Council in four months' time, as
mandated by resolution 2253 (2015).

