Lord Ashdown: Seeing the lateness of the hour, I
am reminded of when I was first elected as a young
member of the British Parliament. I think, as something
of a surprise, I defeated a rather older Member of
Parliament from another party, who had held the seat.
He came to me afterwards when the results had been
announced and said "My boy, I give you one piece of
advice: never stand long between an audience and its
meal". I am rather conscious that I am standing
between Council members and theirs. So, I think I had
better be fairly swift.

I will try to respond to the particular points made
to me. But I want briefly to express my thanks to those
countries whose interventions were dedicated to
offering us expressions of support. If I touch on them
quickly that is not in any sense to underestimate the
gratitude which I know my colleagues in the
international community, and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities too, feel for those expressions
of support, which range from the verbal ones in the
Council - as valuable as they are - to the practical
ones in terms of police and troops on the ground. I
would like to thank especially Chile, Spain, Angola,
the Philippines, Romania, Brazil, China, Pakistan,
Benin and France. Their representatives have expressed
their support, and I am very grateful for that. Others
had specific points that I will touch on in what I hope
is a brief response.

I shall first touch on this very delicate and, as
Prime Minister Terzic has quite rightly said, very
complex issue on the de-registration of police, on
which Mr. Guehenno made an extremely important and
useful contribution earlier on. I am grateful to him for
his cooperation and for the work that we have been
doing together for some time.

The position is up to the Council to decide. It is
not my responsibility. It is the Council's responsibility.
This was a United Nations-mandated area under annex
11 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My mandate is under annex
10. So, I hope the Council will now address this along
the lines that Mr. Guehenno has suggested. I stand read
to help in that process, but action on that lies with the
Council.

Incidentally, let me make the point that just as my
mandate does not currently extend to an area which is
related to annex 11 - rather than to my mandate,
under annex 10 - that also applies to the European
Union Police Mission, whose mandate is being
carefully negotiated and does not include - at least at
the moment - involvement in carrying out decisions
issued with the full authority of the Security Council.
Its mandate would have to be changed for it to become
involved in that process. That is a legal point, but I
think it is an important one to make to the Council.
As the Council has heard in what Prime Minister
Terzic said, this is going to be very, very difficult for
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to carry out.
There are 150 appeals in place, affecting people's
livelihoods, before the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is true to say that it was Bosnia and
Herzegovina's responsibility to pass the appropriate
legislation a year ago. That is the truth, but it is not the
whole truth. Others are also involved. At that stage,
Bosnia and Herzegovina was doing what it was told to
do on all matters related to police. I just think it is
important that I should register with the Council that,
although this must be done in the way that Mr.
Guehenno has suggested that all members have
confirmed, it needs to be done with sensitivity and
concern.

I make only two appeals to the Council. The first
is to reinforce the appeal made by the representative of
the United Kingdom: some kind of review process is
necessary here in order not only that justice should be
done but that it should be seen to be done.

And secondly, in view of the extreme difficulties
that this may put on Prime Minister Terzic's
Government, I hope it will be done in a manner in
which I know Mr. Guehenno is intending to act
anyway: in consultation with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities. I think they need to be
brought into the process of how we put this right. In
my judgement, it would be wrong for us simply to act
without consulting with them. The Council has heard
Prime Minister Terzic's commitment to do what is
necessary. I think it is necessary to bring them into the
circle of consultation when the Council decides how to
proceed. However, there can be no doubt that the
authority of the United Nations and the Security
Council must be fully exercised in this matter, and
there can be no doubt about what the outcome should
be.

May I briefly comment on some other points. The
representative of Russia mentioned that all these
reforms have taken place within Dayton, and he is
right. I think it may well be that in the past we allowed
the Dayton Agreement to be exploited for its
opportunities for obstructionism. What we have learned
in the past year or 18 months - and I express my
gratitude for the support of the Russian Federation in
this respect - is that we have begun to exploit the
Dayton framework for its opportunities for reform.

I am firmly of the view that my powers rest at the
limits of Dayton; I cannot go beyond Dayton. What we
need to do to reform Bosnia and Herzegovina will have
to be done within Dayton, using the procedures of
Dayton to amend itself.

On the issue of the Bonn Powers, it has been my
practice - and it will continue to be so - to
coordinate in the closest way possible with my Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board
colleagues, among the ambassadors of the Steering
Board in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, more formally,
in our regular meetings throughout the year. We do not
always agree about how to proceed. But I am grateful,
indeed, for the support from PIC members, especially
sometimes when they do not necessarily agree with
everything that I am doing. That cohesion is very
important to us.

Germany talked about identity with the State.
What I think we are looking at in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and what is being seen now, is the
advantage of looking at things as a process, not as an
event. What we need is processes that lead us from
where we are to where we want to be. It is true, as
Germany says, that there are many in Herzegovina -
Croats - who do not have a sense of identity with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also true that there are
many Serbs in Republika Srpska that do not have a
sense of identity with the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But I cannot pass a law that commands
them to love their State, however much some might
require me to do so.

What we can do - what is practically possible -
is to build an efficient, functioning State that serves its
citizens. Then, when the State serves its citizens by
providing them with the rule of law, the opportunity of
a job, a chance to educate their children and a decent
health service, over time, citizens will first trust their
State, and then have a sense of identity with it. The
establishment of a citizen's identity in the State is not
an event, it is a process. And that process begins with
providing good governance for citizens, something to
which I know the Prime Minister is committed, as,
indeed, am I.

The United Kingdom asked about the regional
context. This is vital to us. We can make no progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina except - as the
representative of Croatia said - in concert with our
neighbours. The Balkans either moves ahead in
concert, or it does not move ahead. And we have seen
in the past how much that can affect, in a malevolent
way, the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I was asked to make a judgement about how the
regional relationships stand. After a recent visit to
Zagreb, I remain convinced and reassured - and I
warmly welcome this - that the constructive policy
followed by the Government of Croatia will continue
and may even accelerate under the new Government.
This is a great asset to us in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
is too early for us to say what the situation will be in
Belgrade, because that Government is hardly formed,
and its nature and characteristics we do not know.
Although it may be undiplomatic of me to do so, Mr.
President, I think I should share with you the thought
that while we look to Zagreb with confidence about the
future, we look with some nervousness to see what will
happen in Belgrade. We hope that that will continue, as
in the past.

One question touched on the exit strategy. It is
right and proper that we should begin to address this.
Next year will be the tenth anniversary of Dayton. It is
important that we start thinking about this. In my view,
the international community cannot exist in Bosnia on
one day, and no longer exist the next. It is a transitional
process. It may well pass from a High Representative
to a European special representative. There are issues
about the use of the Bonn Powers. All of these have to
be addressed. But Prime Minister Terzic is correct in
saying two things, to which I would draw attention.
The first is that this is not an exit strategy for the
international community; it is an entry strategy for
Bosnia and Herzegovina into Euro-Atlantic
institutions. That is the context in which it will be
taking place. Secondly, the changed relationship
reflected by the Prime Minister's presence here today
is very much part of the beginning of a process to alter
the nature of the international community's
engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina as we
progressively hand things over to our colleagues.

My penultimate point is this: Algeria mentioned
the emphasis on the judiciary, and I very much
welcome that. It is very important. I want to underline
again that one current cause for nervousness on my part
relates to the fact that the independence of the judiciary
in Bosnia and Herzegovina - which ought to be an
issue upon which we cannot and must not compromise
if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to achieve statehood as a
modern European State - both in terms of
appointments and the decision-making process, is
currently under pressure. I cannot hide that from the
Council. I believe that in the next two to three weeks
we will see that pressure mounting. It must be resisted;
there can be no compromise on the question of
independent appointments to and the action of the
judiciary.
My last point is simply to say that the
representative of Ireland, speaking on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union, expressed a view
which I hold very strongly. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
passing out of the era of Dayton and into the era of
Brussels. More and more, the pull of Brussels and
Atlantic relationships is taking over from the push of
the Bonn Powers. The magnetic draw of Europe and
the Atlantic institutions is now the driving force for
reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that alters the
context of our engagement.

I will sum up simply by saying that if I have
given an optimistic report, it is because I feel
optimistic about the steps that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has, remarkably, been able to make. I do not believe
any country - any country - that I know of in
history, and certainly none within my experience, has
come so far, so fast, from such a terrible war as Bosnia
and Herzegovina has managed to do, with the
assistance of the international community.

We are making progress, but we still have a long
way to go. Pakistan is correct in saying that the break-
up of those criminal networks is a job yet to be
completed. But Bosnia and Herzegovina is now
palpably and definitely passing out of the dark tunnel
of conflict and embarking on the bright road that leads
to Europe and the Atlantic institutions. That road is
long. It is going to be tough. And we could still fail.
We need two things. We need from the international
community what has been expressed so powerfully -
and I am grateful for it - today around the room:
continued support to see this thing through to success.
And from the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities and
my colleagues within those authorities, we need an
accelerated process of reform.

