Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala): My
delegation thanks you wholeheartedly, Mr. President,
for having convened this crucial debate on mediation
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. This open
debate is a distinct opportunity to exchange views on
how Member States can best support mediation as a
means for attaining the peaceful settlement of disputes.
We also want to thank the United Kingdom delegation,
of course, for the concept note prepared as a basis
for our deliberations (S/2018/586, annex), as well as
the briefers.

Guatemala recognizes the critical importance
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
regarding the pacific settlement of disputes, along
with the provisions set forth in Chapter VII to
prevent conflict.

Although mediation is one of the most important
tools, it is rarely implemented at an early stage in the
development of any potential source of struggle. If
Violence is the dominant characteristic of a controversy,
mediation ought to play a very important dissuading
role at the onset in order to prevent the escalation
of hostilities, and not, as is usually the case, when
violence is already rampant. Indeed, when international
law recognizes mediation as one of the most important
means to prevent or to resolve disputes or conflicts,
it does so on the basis that any effort predicated on
mediation must take into account the root causes and
the dynamics of the conflict, along with the interests,
needs, traditions and sociopolitical idiosyncrasies of
the population concerned. Effective mediation produces
good results when the those circumstances are properly
considered so that the efforts are not either misdirected
or wasted, as improvisation is of course not advisable.

There is no silver bullet in mediation methods,
and certainly there is no conventional practice that
may be imposed from abroad unless there is a keen
and conversant mediator with a deep knowledge and
an awareness of the root causes and the nature of the
conflict, as well as the composition and the expectations
of the conflicting parties. However, ideally, a mediator
must also possess an acumen of good practices and
confidence-building measures. Notwithstanding what
I have just said, we add that an able mediator must
also have a sense of belonging and identify with the
population concerned and its plight. Indeed, this
morning, the Secretary-General said:

"Successful mediation and the peaceful settlement
of disputes requires a deep understanding of leaders
and their constituencies and strong political will."

On the other hand, sustaining peace means the
engagement ofpeople of goodwill, including mediators,
so that the social discontent of a population is not
exacerbated into conflict. Furthermore, sustaining
peace proposes a preventive scheme to ameliorate the
conditions that beset the development and the welfare
of the people - a state of affairs that, if it is not
addressed, may be conducive to conflict. I again cite
the Secretary-General this morning, saying that a call
for diplomacy for peace is a call for sustaining peace.

(spoke in Spanish)

This Organization, the United Nations, continues to
be the best reference for peace and represents the hope
that the world has of achieving it. No other organization
has that mandate or the moral or political authority to
fulfil it. That is why we firmly believe that the concepts
of sustainable peace and prevention pre-emptively
resolve the unmet needs of the population, which, when
not met, can degenerate into conflict, including the
violation of human rights, the denial of opportunities,
and social exclusion. Therefore, it is also crucial to
provide sufficient resources to any peacekeeping
operation agreed by the Security Council, which must
be free of foreign interference not authorized by the
Council. Likewise, peace missions must have a clear,
viable and realistic mandate that includes mediation
with a defined time frame among its objectives.

In conclusion, we can only highlight the importance
of resolution 1325 (2000), which points out that women
are essential actors in the resolution of any conflict.
Women are agents of positive change and are efficient
and knowledgeable administrators of the reality of
their environment. As such, their participation in
peace processes as mediators is essential. We are
pleased to note that in recent years their contribution to
peacekeeping operations has been highly valued.

