Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. At the same
time, we would like to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his fifth report on this subject, as
well as for the valuable recommendations contained
therein.

We also wish to thank and congratulate the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
his introduction of the Secretary-General's report as
well as the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Jacques Forster, for
his presentation before this Council.

The Security Council is considering a new
resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, five years after the adoption of resolution
1296 (2000). In spite of the positive impact of this rule
and its immediate predecessor, resolution 1265 (1999),
the years since then have been marked by a truly
disturbing situation with respect to this subject. We
understand that the Security Council, facing the new
challenges that this situation brings, must adjust and
improve the existing tools.

As we have previously stated before this Council,
there is no national security issue that can prevail over
the primary obligation of all States to fulfil the rules of
international humanitarian law contained in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. The
international community cannot and must not remain
indifferent when atrocities are committed against
civilian populations. In such circumstances where
national legal systems fail, the international community
must not remain inert; it must assume its responsibility.
This is why the International Criminal Court was
created, in Rome. The Court has a fundamental role to
play - to prosecute those who perpetrate crimes not
judged domestically.

In expressing our condemnation of the damaging
and generalized consequences of armed conflicts on
civilians, we cannot ignore the particular way that
armed conflicts affect women, children and other
vulnerable groups. In this respect, in our opinion, the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), on women,
peace and security, and 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005),
on children in armed conflict, as well as other relevant
standards of this Council, must continue to be
developed in depth.

The attacks against civilian populations or other
protected persons and the systematic, manifest and
generalized violations of international humanitarian
law and international law regarding human rights in
armed conflict situations are a threat to international
peace and security and require adequate consideration
and response from the international community. In this
context, we would like to recall that this Council has
expressed its willingness to examine from this
perspective those situations that affect refugees and
internally displaced persons and to adopt, when
necessary, adequate measures to contribute to the
establishment of a secure atmosphere for civilians
threatened by conflicts, as well as to consider the
advisability and feasibility of establishing provisional
zones and corridors of security to protect civilians and
guide humanitarian assistance.

The secure and unhindered access of
humanitarian personnel, including those recruited
locally, to places where armed conflicts are taking
place, is essential. States affected by conflicts, as well
as neighbouring States, must cooperate with the United
Nations in facilitating such access.

In the broad context of this debate, it seems to us
opportune to recall the agreement reached at the recent
High-level Plenary Meeting with respect to the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, taking into consideration the individual
responsibility of States and the international
community as a whole to act in those cases through the
United Nations, including the Security Council.

With respect to the special situation of the
vulnerability of refugee camps and internally displaced
people, it is our understanding that the Council should,
in certain cases presenting a special threat, consider the
deployment of a peacekeeping presence, including
regional forces, when the State concerned is not in
conditions to provide such protection.

The Council must continue to develop the tools
that it has at its disposal to face the needs deriving
from the new conflicts, which affect the security and
the well-being of civilian populations. In that context,
we underline the importance of supporting the
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions of
the Organization by means of mandates that take into
consideration the needs deriving from the protection of
civilians in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Furthermore, it is important that States and forces
that participate in peace processes and agreements
should take specific measures for the protection of
civilians and their rights in the post-conflict situation,
including both their physical security and the various
aspects of the restoration of the rule of law.

Finally, we support the proposal of the Secretary-
General for the Security Council to update the existing
framework for the protection of civilians through a
mechanism for collecting information concerning the
protection of civilians and for reporting protection
incidents in the countries whose situations are on the
Council's agenda, especially those countries that have
been the site of intensive military operations, with the
aim of achieving a greater focus on the issue of the
protection of civilians in the Security Council's work
and deliberations.

