Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
express the State ofPalestine's congratulations to China
on its skilled leadership in the presidency ofthe Security
Council this month and also express appreciation for
the convening of today's important open debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his briefing on the current situation and
for his continuous efforts to address this long-standing
issue on the United Nations agenda in the interest of
peace andjustice.

Since our last debate in January, we have
addressed the Security Council on a near-weekly basis
regarding the critical situation in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of Israel's
illegal and destructive policies and measures. In each
communication to the Council, we have tried to draw
urgent attention to the grave breaches of international
humanitarian law and human rights violations being
systematically committed by the occupying Power,
including its occupying forces and terrorist settlers. We
have equally appealed for urgent action, in line with
international law, to compel Israel to halt its crimes and
violations, which are inflicting widespread suffering on
the Palestinian civilian population, further inflaming
tensions and destabilizing the situation, destroying the
two-State solution and sabotaging the chances for a
peaceful solution.

Regrettably, this has all been to no avail. The
Security Council remains paralysed, failing to
uphold its obligations in accordance with its Charter
duties, international law and its own resolutions. It
continues - debate after debate, consultation after
consultation and letter after letter - to disregard
the global calls to act seriously to stanch this open,
bleeding wound in the international body by upholding
international law and fulfilling its duty to advance a
solution to the conflict that would assist the Palestinian
people to finally realize the freedom, rights and
justice they have been unjustly denied and to achieve
Palestinian-Israeli peace, security and coexistence.

Indeed, those are the principal objectives at the
core of every appeal we have made to the Council,
week after week, month after month, year after year,
decade after decade. Our appeals have all been made
in full accordance with international law, not founded
on some baseless claim or desire. Nothing that we
come to this Chamber to ask for is beyond the realm of
legality, beyond the parameters ofjustice or beyond the
imperatives of peace.

And yet, every time we approach the Security
Council, we are chided by a Council member and told
that it is either not the right time or not the appropriate
venue to address the matter, or, ironically, that the peace
process will somehow be undermined by our seeking
rights and peace, or that the doors of the Council are
totally closed, period.

When will it ever be the right time to approach the
Council? At what point of crisis will the Council be
galvanized to finally act?
After years of restraint - years of a dramatic
decline in the situation to dangerous levels; years of
unquantifiable loss and suffering for the Palestinian
people; years of destruction of the two-State solution
and obstruction of the prospects for peace; and years of
immense damage to the Security Council's credibility
and the rule of international law - we can no longer
wait and can no longer accept excuses and pretexts,
domestic or otherwise, that permit violations of the law
and of our people's rights by the occupying Power, with
total impunity.

On the ground, the corrosive attrition of the two-
State solution by Israel's illegal settlement activities
has been unrelenting. The confiscation and de facto
annexation of land, settlement construction, wall
construction, the demolition of Palestinian homes
and property, and the forced transfer of Palestinian
civilians continue unabated, all with utter contempt
for and in grave breach of international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Security
Council's resolutions, and in blatant mockery of the
international community's demands for an end to all
Israeli settlement activities.

During the 26 January open debate (see S/PV.7610),
we heard loud and clear the reaffirmations of the
illegality of Israel's settlement activities and the
unanimous calls for a halt to all such poIicies and
measures. What we have witnessed instead is the
intensification of this illegal behaviour, further
fragmenting the contiguity of our State's territory and
gravely undermining the viability of the two-State
solution on the pre-1967 borders.

Thousands more dunums of Palestinian land have
been confiscated by Israel in the West Bank, with more
than 2,300 dunums slated for expropriation south of
Jericho and more than 1,200 dunums south of Nablus
in the span of one week alone. Home demolitions by
the occupying Power have also alarmingly spiked,
as reported by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
with more than 586 homes or structures demolished
and more than 700 Palestinians forcibly displaced and
rendered homeless since the start of the year.

Bedouin Palestine refugees have been especially
affected by the demolitions, and entire communities are
threatened with forced transfer. Of course, the recent
period has also witnessed the advancement of plans for
the construction of hundreds of additional settlement
units, including in the past week, when the occupying
Power decided to proceed with the construction of at
least 250 settlement units, which will end up housing
thousands more Israeli settlers, adding to the over
650,000 settlers already illegally transferred to the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

The stark reality is that, as reported by the Israeli
organization Peace Now, plans for the construction of
Israeli settlements increased by 250 per cent in the first
quarter of 2016, as compared to the same period last
year. We are therefore compelled to ask the Council:
does that not seriously call into question, once again,
the credibility of Israel's professed commitment to the
two-State solution, or of ever ending its occupation of
our land? How can those facts in any way be reconciled
with the Council's clear demands for an end to Israel's
settlement activities and to all attempts to alter the
demography, character and status of the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, according to its own resolutions? When will
the Council hold Israel accountable for those violations
and insist on compliance, the minimum, most essential
requirement for upholding the law, overcoming that
major obstacle to peace and preserving the possibility
of the two-State solution?

In tandem with Israel's colonization of our land,
it continues its aggression against our people, with
Palestinian casualties mounting as a result of daily
military raids by Israeli occupying forces and violence
and terror attacks by extremist Israeli settlers, in no
small part fuelled by the incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric of Israeli Government officials, including by
the Israeli Prime Minister and members of his Cabinet,
and by extremist religious figures.

Since the current unrest began, in October 2015,
more than 200 Palestinian men, women and children
have been killed, with the bodies of many of those
killed withheld by the occupying Power, even denying
them dignity in death. As they did in the war on Gaza
in 2014, the occupying forces have also continued to
use excessive force, injuring more than 16,000 people,
including thousands of children and women, in the past
six months. That same period has also witnessed the
detention of more than 4,000 Palestinians, adding to
the ranks of over 7,000 Palestinians, among them 450
children, now imprisoned or detained by Israel.

Our children and youth are being especially
targeted and traumatized by this cruel occupation as
Israeli occupying forces operate on a blatant shoot-
to-kill policy, with children as young as 13 years of
age shot and killed without consequences. The stories
of Palestinian children and youth killed in broad
daylight, including those extrajudicially murdered
by the occupying forces, have become too numerous
to recount. Nevertheless, in our weekly letters to the
Council, we have tried to draw attention to those brutal
murders and to share the names of the innocent human
lives so violently taken and so tragically lost.

Faced with such relentless aggression by the
occupation, Palestinian children, one generation after
another, are being permanently scarred and the present
and future fabric of our society is being destroyed.
And yet the Security Council remains silent and the
Palestinian people continue to be denied the protection
they are in dire need of, and entitled to, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. The reality is that
a defenceless civilian population is being left to the
merciless brutality of this military occupation, which
has lasted almost half a century, an occupation whose
forces are armed to the teeth with the most lethal and
sophisticated military weaponry.

Our appeals for protection have been met with
sympathy at best and indifference at worst. We have
been repeatedly told to be reasonable about what the
Council can or cannot do, in spite of the Council's
own legislation, including resolutions 605 (1987)
and 904 (1994), which clearly call the for protection
of the Palestinian people, and in spite of the study of
precedents shared by the Secretary-General with the
Council in October 2015, which has not been the subject
of one serious discussion. The failure to protect, as in
all other cases in history, will only foster greater Israeli
impunity and disregard for Palestinian life, endangering
even more innocent civilians. The Security Council has
not even held a discussion on the issue of protection.
How shameful of an act is that on the shoulders of the
members of the Security Council.

At a time when the situation is reaching boiling

point, the passivity and silence of the Security Council
is truly shocking. Stopping the deterioration of the
situation and salvaging the prospects for peace require
responsible action without delay. While we have heard
repeatedly how unsustainable the status quo is, in fact
there is no status quo and the situation, far from being
static, is worsening every single day, inching towards
an implosion.

The Council cannot stand idly by waiting for the
next full-blown crisis. It is illogical and unacceptable
to continue appeasing Israel's intransigence and
arrogant, reckless flouting of the law. Israel must be
held accountable for its crimes and violations of an
entire people's rights, including to self-determination
and freedom, once and for all. We have said it before in
the Chamber and we must repeat it again: the crisis is
existential and we can no longer wait.

We will therefore act responsibly to uphold our
duties to the Palestinian people and will continue
to do whatever we can in the international arena,
foremost here at the United Nations and fully based
on international law, using all diplomatic, political,
legal and non-violent means, to redress the plight of
our people, alleviate their suffering and advance the
realization of their rights, justice and peace.

We have therefore begun our efforts and continue
our appeals for the Council to act through the adoption
of a clear and firm draft resolution to address the
immediate issues before us, including, inter alia, the
illegality of the Israeli settlement campaign and its
destructive impact on the two-State solution; the
increasing extremism and violence of Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians and the need for their
protection; and the urgency of international and
regional efforts, particularly within the context of the
Arab Peace Initiative, to create a credible political
horizon and support the parties to de-escalate the
volatile situation, rebuild trust and uphold their legal
obligations and commitments towards resolving all
final status issues and achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

Consultations are under way with Egypt, as the
Arab representative in the Security Council, along with
our other partners in the Arab Ministerial Committee,
for a decision on when to formally proceed. We
welcome the support of all concerned parties in regard
to that effort and the calls for the Council to uphold
its duties towards the question of Palestine before the
situation further unravels, more innocent lives are lost
and the two-State solution is relegated to the archives
of history.

In that regard, we also commend the efforts
being undertaken by the Quartet, as well as by the
Government of France. We note that the French
initiative in particular emphasizes the urgency of the
matter - a matter that cannot be shelved or placed
on a backburner until all other crises in the Middle
East are resolved and one that, if left unattended, will
only foster greater Israeli impunity and create a more
fertile ground for radicalization on both sides - and
also significantly emphasizes the need for a collective
process, with the serious engagement and support of
international and regional partners, including a role for
the Security Council, to help the parties resolve all final
status issues and finally bring an end to the occupation
and the conflict as whole.

It is time to stop managing the conflict. This
conflict is not intractable. Its solution has long been
known and firmly rooted in United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
international community must move beyond slogans
and professing its commitment to human rights, justice
and the two-State solution in theory, and actually
mobilize the political will to resolve the conflict. The
alleviation of the humanitarian crisis in Palestine can
never replace a just solution as the ultimate objective.

It is surreal to witness the collective hand-wringing
of the international community at the deplorable
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, as if it were
caused by an uncontrollable natural disaster rather
than the man-made disaster that it really is, wantonly
inflicted by the Israeli war machine and the illegal Israeli
blockade - by air, land and sea - that has isolated,
impoverished, traumatized and dehumanized the entire
Palestinian civilian population of Gaza. Despite the
deeply regrettable political divide in Palestine and the
prolonged efforts to achieve reconciliation and unity
as a matter of national urgency, the failure to bridge
that divide cannot be used as an excuse to continue
imprisoning 1.8 million people and forcing them to live
in the ruins of war and in mass deprivation.

Faced with that reality, in addition to Israel's
relentless onslaught against the Palestinian civilian
population and colonization in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, how can it be expected that
our people, especially our youth, maintain any belief
in international law and the international community's
promises to uphold it? How can they maintain any hope
that this injustice will end? And, in the absence of hope
and belief, how is it possible to stave off despair and
push back against the tide of radicalism and extremism
plaguing our world?

The time is long overdue for ending the
suffering of the Palestinian people under this illegal
foreign occupation and ensuring the realization of
their inalienable human rights, including to self-
determination and freedom in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a
just solution to the Palestine plight, the most protracted
refugee crisis in the world. If reason, responsibility
and legal obligations fail to move the Council, perhaps
reflecting on the immense human suffering caused by
this inhumane occupation might create compassion and
invoke moral responsibility to act.

There are too many compelling human stories to
tell, but I wish to conclude with one today. On a recent
visit to the Aida refugee camp in the West Bank, an
Australian Premier, Michael Baird, met with a group of
young Palestinian children and asked one of the boys
what he dreamed of becoming when he was older. The
boy's response was,

"It's hard to have dreams when you know they can't
come true."

When children feel they cannot even dream, we must
acknowledge the depths of despair and hopelessness
and human devastation that this occupation and conflict
have wrought. We must also acknowledge the depths of
our failure. We can no longer ignore or postpone the
urgency to act. Reviving their hope, rectifying this
historic injustice, making peace a reality and saving
the future generations of both Palestinian and Israeli
children depend upon it.

