Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to thank the Slovak presidency
of the Security Council and Minister Jan Kubis in
particular for organizing this very useful debate on an
important topic. We hope very much that today's
debate will move understanding of the security sector
reform forward and will improve its integration in
Security Council activities.

At the risk of repeating what other colleagues
have said, I would like to begin by saying something
about the concept, while underlining two points. The
first is the importance I see between development and
security. Security issues are not just military issues.
They are also a precondition to development and to
combating poverty, and we see this in every crisis. If a
reliable degree of security is not restored, all
development activity is jeopardized.

The second point - and this has also been
emphasized by many speakers before me - is the need
to approach security sector reform from a holistic point
of View, integrating security sector reform within a
broader process of improving governance. This, of
course, makes the task more complicated, because it
means that one must act simultaneously in different
domains - police, judiciary and military, as we see in
the example of Haiti.

There is brainstorming now under way in many
international forums. France, with its partners, is
working on the conceptual approach within the
European Union and in the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. The approach we are
following seeks the consolidation of State institutions,
the improvement of the well being of the population,
guarantees of physical safety and the possibility for the
population to exercise its political, economic and social
rights. The concept of security sector reform is now
uppermost in the crafting of European security and
defense policy, as will be emphasized by the German
representative, speaking in a moment on behalf of the
European Union.

The second point I would like to make is that we
have to reflect on the specific responsibility of the
Security Council in this field. At a time when we are
setting up the Peacebuilding Commission, it is
important for the Council to think about activities that
will be necessary in post-conflict periods, just when
the crisis is over, so that this activity can continue
naturally in the post-conflict timetable. This means that
the Security Council will have to take the organization
of security system reform into consideration very early
on, as it is doing more and more often in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. But the question of the
exact scope and responsibility of the Security Council
as regards security sector reform, as compared to other
international institutions or bilateral partners, that role
of the Council, that specific responsibility of the
Council, is something that I do not think can be defined
ahead of time. It will depend on the circumstances in
each given case. I do not think there are any easy
nostrums that can be applied.

On the other hand, we also have to bear in mind,
to the extent possible, that the international community
must act in support of a national plan, the success of
which requires the will of the State concerned. This
ownership of national planning is indispensable. The
international community cannot achieve anything
useful in this field if the legitimate Government is not
at the very core of the effort.

My country, side by side with its partners in the
international community, is endeavouring to fully take
into consideration the issue of security sector reform in
its actions in support of peacekeeping operations and in
post-conflict situations. There are four examples I
would like to put forward.

In the Central African Republic, after the success
of the elections in 2005, France committed itself to
supporting a return to peace and stabilization in the
context of an integrated project that included the
police, the judiciary and the media.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at a
time when we are thinking once again about the new
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the distribution
of tasks between the European Union and the United
Nations Mission, as regards security, is going to be a
crucial topic. European Union police missions and the
European Union advisory and assistance mission for
security reform are making an indispensable
contribution. France will be consolidating its own
interventions in this country in the areas of police, the
judiciary and military reform.
In Burundi, we are developing a project to
support the training of the Burundi police - the new
forces - and this has been set up, together with
complementary Belgian and Dutch programmes, as
well as the programme of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi, which took over from the
United Nations Mission in Burundi on 1 January.

In Haiti, where international action now fully
integrates the idea of a complete reform of State
security, my country has contributed to the
reorganization of the Haitian police's structures. We
note with interest that the Haitian authorities have
taken ownership to a considerably greater extent of this
process, and we see this in the requests made recently
by the Port-au-Prince authorities to the international
community.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
security sector reform remains a crucial challenge,
because it is vital to stability and development. It is
also a very complex matter, since it calls for
simultaneous action in different areas, involving a
great number of actors. One of the challenges is
precisely to create synergy and to coordinate all the
actors well. What is true in peacekeeping operations as
countries seek to emerge from crisis is even more
important in post-conflict situations, where one may
think the emergency has been reduced, but perhaps it is
not, and this leads sometimes to a reduced mobilization
on the part of the international community.

We therefore have high expectations of the
Peacebuilding Commission in terms of enhancing
synergies and ensuring such coordination. I would like
to add that France will be particularly interested in the
advice that the Peacebuilding Commission continues to
provide to the Security Council on security sector
reform in the context of its work on Burundi and Sierra
Leone. My delegation will also follow closely any
information referred to us by the Secretary-General
regarding a more broad-ranging vision that he may
have of this concept within the overall United Nations
system.

