Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my
delegation's appreciation for the work that you have
been carrying out as President of the Security Council
for this month. We would like also to thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
briefing.

International humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its two Additional
Protocols, establishes clear provisions with regard to
the protection of civilians, the issue the Council is
considering today. The Government of Colombia
shares the concerns expressed with regard to violations
of those norms and reiterates its firm commitment to
them.

In that connection, we would like also to stress
several aspects of the issue. In keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
international humanitarian law, Governments bear
primary responsibility to protect civilians, while
United Nations agencies and other international
community actors can provide support for the
implementation of existing provisions. That should be
done in keeping with State sovereignty and in
accordance with guidelines provided by the
Government in question. In that respect, it is important
to draw a clear distinction between the protection of
civilians and the provision of humanitarian assistance.

Colombia appreciates the work done by the
United Nations agencies in the area of humanitarian
assistance, and we stress the importance of such work
being carried out on the basis of the principles of
impartiality, neutrality, humanity and independence.
That will enable us to guarantee the humanitarian
character of any operation of that type. We would like
also to underline the importance of prevention-related
activities as the most effective way of protecting
populations. Efforts to that end should focus on
providing such populations with a favourable and
secure environment so that they can improve their
living conditions.

My delegation likewise wishes to make a few
comments with regard to the reference to Colombia in
the statement made by the Under-Secretary-General,
referring to situations in which civilians have been the
deliberate targets of acts of violence, resulting in a
climate of fear and in destabilization. With respect to
Colombia, my delegation would like to make it clear
that reference must be made to situations in which
crimes were committed by violent groups acting on the
margins of the law. In his briefing, the Under-
Secretary-General referred to assassinations,
disappearances and other violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law committed by
armed persons, without making it clear exactly to
which actors he was referring. This should not be
understood as alluding to the legitimate armed forces
of the Colombian State, which are working daily to
improve the security and stability of the country and to
protect the population from the criminal acts of violent
groups.

As we have stated in the Council on previous
occasions, specific incidents of violence have been
caused by illegal armed groups, financed by illicit
activities such as drug trafficking, and have claimed
civilian victims. My Government, which was
democratically elected, remains firmly committed to
the promotion of comprehensive policies aimed at
restoring security throughout our national territory.
Since 2002 those policies have enabled us to reduce
criminality across the board and to bring about stability
and trust and create new conditions conducive to the
effective protection of the population.

