Mr. Serry: Let me congratulate you, Sir, on your
stewardship of the Council this month, and express a few
words of gratitude for the support I have received over
the past two years from the Permanent Representatives
of Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, South Korea and
Rwanda. Their presence in the Security Council will
be missed.

I brief the Council today against the backdrop
of a dramatic year, during which we have witnessed
a serious effort to achieve a negotiated settlement
stalling yet again, a devastating 51-day war in Gaza,
and increased violence and tension throughout the West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem. Israel is heading to
the polls. The recent collapse of the ruling coalition,
less than two years into its tenure, has paved the way for
early general elections, scheduled for 17 March 2015.
As the country begins this new Chapter, the deadly
diplomatic vacuum can be no excuse for either side to
let the present situation get even worse.

Now is the time to de-escalate and refrain from
provocative steps, rebuild trust and set conditions for a
return to negotiations that will resolve the conflict. As
the Secretary-General and I have consistently warned,
hope for a lasting solution to the conflict must be
restored before it is too late. Israelis and Palestinians
still demand an end to the conflict, despite their
strong malaise concerning the peace process itself.
Making headway in at least salvaging prospects for
resolving the conflict will require the active role of
the international community. We cannot walk away
from our responsibility to advocate for a meaningful
framework for peace.

In a continuation of an ongoing trend in Europe,
parliaments in France, Spain and Portugal have adopted
non-binding resolutions that call upon their respective
Governments to recognize a Palestinian State. These
are significant developments that serve to highlight
growing impatience at the continued lack of real
progress in achieving a two-State solution, and that
Governments are under increased public pressure to
promote an end to the conflict once and for all. I note
the recent League of Arab States meeting in Cairo,
where it was agreed to present to the Security Council
a draft resolution setting a timeframe for the creation
of a Palestinian State. I understand that consultations
are also ongoing among Council members to present a
draft resolution outlining the parameters of an Israeli-
Palestinian final status agreement.

While they are important, we must recognize that
these actions are not a substitute for a genuine peace
process, which will need to be negotiated between both
parties. The Secretary-General hopes that Security
Council action will generate constructive momentum
towards the creation of a meaningful and effective
framework for renewed negotiations. Such a move by
the Security Council would constitute a major step on
this conflict since the adoption of resolution 242 (1967)
almost 50 years ago.

In the meantime, the situation on the ground remains
explosive. I am deeply troubled by the recent escalation
of tensions in Jerusalem and the West Bank, as daily
clashes continue to take place between Palestinians
and Israelis. While the conflict has consistently had
religious underpinnings, what is increasingly worrying
is that it is now becoming more religiously inspired.

On 18 November, two Palestinians killed five
Israelis and injured several others at a West Jerusalem
synagogue before being shot dead by Israeli police.
The Secretary-General strongly condemned the attack,
for which there can be no justification whatsoever. He
rejects any attempts to honor those who carried out
such crimes. On 29 November, a Jewish-Arab school in
Jerusalem was set on fire and vandalized with anti-Arab
graffiti. Several Israelis were arrested in connection
with the crime, which was strongly condemned by Prime
Minister Netanyahu. Overall, a total of633 Palestinians,
including 73 children, have been injured and another
406 arrested by Israeli security forces during the past
month. Nine Israeli soldiers and 20 Israeli settlers
have also been injured in clashes with Palestinians. On
10 December, Palestinian Minister Ziad Abu Ein died
after protest activity near the village of Turmus Ayya
that resulted in a confrontation with Israeli security
forces. The Council encouraged the parties to ensure
that a swift and transparent investigation into the
circumstances of his death is undertaken.

I would also like to acknowledge that constructive
steps have been taken by parties concerned to
de-escalate the tensions surrounding the holy sites, as
per the understandings reached in Amman last month
in the presence of United States Secretary of State
Kerry. The Secretary-General and I hope that these
commitments to maintaining the status quo regarding
the holy sites will continue to be implemented. We note
that there has been a decrease in the number of Jewish
activists visiting the holy compound and a lifting of
access restrictions on Muslim worshippers. For the
first time since 2007, Palestinians from Gaza have been
permitted to worship at the Al-Aqsa Mosque. These are
encouraging developments that should be continued.
President Abbas' calls for calm have also been welcome.

In contrast, I am very concerned that Israel has
reinstated its practice of punitive demolitions after
almost a complete halt for nearly a decade. During the
reporting period, six structures were demolished in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, resulting in the
displacement of 21 Palestinians, including 11 children.
One of these demolitions was of a punitive nature; on
19 November, the Israel Defense Forces demolished the
family house of the Palestinian who, on 22 October,
drove his car into a light train station, killing two.
These acts, targeting family homes of perpetrators of
attacks against Israeli citizens, are a form of collective
penalty that contravenes international law and risk
undermining the already fragile situation. They are
wrong and counterproductive.

I will now turn to the situation in Gaza,
where despite some initial setbacks, the delivery
of construction material via the temporary Gaza
reconstruction mechanism continues and, in fact, has
been scaled up significantly over the past two weeks.
As of 10 December, more than 17,000 individuals
requiring construction material for shelter repairs had
been cleared to purchase materials under the temporary
mechanism. Of those, close to 8,000 home owners had
been notified and procured materials as of last night.
The Ministry of Public Works will now notify a further
10,000 individuals over the course of this week, and
around 25,000 home owners are expected to have access
to construction materials by the end of December.

Construction materials are entering Gaza in
quantities ensuring sufficient stocks for vendors. On
7 December, 44 trucks loaded with close to 1,800 tons
of cement for reconstruction entered Gaza via the
Kerem Shalom crossing. It was the largest quantity
shipped in one day in years. In total, over 22,000
tons of construction material have been imported by
private sector vendors to date, of which over 17,000
tons have already been procured by individuals. I must
re-emphasize, however, that the temporary mechanism
is not a substitute for the lifting of all closures on Gaza,
as laid out in resolution 1860 (2009). Trade between
Gaza and the West bank has been re-established, yet
remains much below the potential. Transfers of fish and
vegetables from Gaza to the West Bank rose from one
truck per day to 11 trucks per day in November.

Despite these positive developments, the situation
remains very fragile. Up to 80,000 families are living
in houses that have sustained varying degrees of
damage, while 18 school buildings belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East continue to serve as collective
centres for some 19,000 internally displaced persons.
The urgency of addressing these needs is compounded
by the extreme weather Gaza has experienced in recent
weeks with the early arrival of the rainy winter season.

As the mechanism begins operating at scale,
forging a clear and realistic plan for Gaza will be vital if
we want to give Gazans hope. I envisage the following
three priorities to be achieved in the next three years.
We must deliver affordable energy, sufficient water
and the physical reconstruction of Gaza. The Strip's
chronic electricity shortages cannot be met by endless
and costly interim measures, however necessary in the
short term. Gaza needs access to natural gas if its only
power plant is to create affordable energy, as well as
a desalinization plant that will meet its pressing water
needs. I believe that it is possible to address these
pressing needs if we can be assured that crossings will
be open for all required materials to enter the Strip in
predictable and transparent flows, while addressing
reasonable Israeli security concerns. The temporary
mechanism is an important tool only in this regard.

Let me be clear, those ambitious goals cannot be
reached without urgent and consistent international
engagement. But any vision for Gaza's future
cannot escape the current reality on the ground. The
acceleration of Gaza's reconstruction process is being
held back by several factors, many of which are political:
the ceasefire between Israel and the Palestinians in
Gaza has still not been solidified; and the Government
of National Consensus in Gaza has still not taken up
its rightful governance and security functions and has
no control over the crossings; civil service reform is
urgently required and thousands of Government staff
are still not being paid. Perhaps most urgently, the
reconstruction effort still requires funds. Firm donor
commitment to fulfill pledges made at the Cairo
conference in October is crucial. The lack of progress
on those fronts can fatally undermine our capacity to
face the challenges ahead and bring back hope to the
people of Gaza.

I also hope that challenging security considerations
will soon be overcome for Egypt to reopen the Rafah
crossing, which remains crucial as a terminal for people
to leave or enter.

If those and other challenging issues are not
addressed, the atmosphere in an already devastated
Gaza will only worsen. We are beginning to see the
security implications of those persistent pressures on
Gazan society. Recent incidents include one Palestinian
civilian being shot and killed by Israeli security
forces on 23 November - for the first time since
the ceasefire - and militants reportedly test-fired a
total of 20 rockets towards the sea. Reports are also
increasing that extremist elements are seeking to gain
a foothold in Gaza. On 12 December, an explosion took
place on the perimeter of the French Cultural Centre
compound in Gaza, injuring two guards. That was the
second time that the French Cultural Centre had been
targeted. We note the condemnation of the attack by
Hamas. Pending the transfer of security responsibilities
to the Government of National Consensus, we continue
to hold Hamas responsible for the safety of United
Nations and all international staff in Gaza.

I must warn that Gaza can now go both ways. We
have an opportunity to make advances. But if critical
issues remain unresolved, I fear we may be heading
towards another implosion with dire consequences.

Before concluding, let me say a few words about
Syria, the Golan and Lebanon. The Secretary-General's
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, is continuing
consultations on his proposed action plan for conflict,
including operationalizing a freeze in the city ofAleppo.
The precise parameters of the freeze plus arrangements
are now being negotiated separately with the Syrian
parties and on the basis of wide consultations inside
and outside of Syria. The Special Envoy completed a
visit to Istanbul and Gaziantep last week and will visit
Riyadh later this week. His deputy recently visited
Tehran and arrived in Damascus on 12 December.
The proposed Aleppo freeze is distinct from previous
local ceasefires and is intended as a building block
towards an inclusive national political process, without
preconditions, based on the framework of the Geneva
communique (8/2012/522, annex).

The situation in the Golan remains volatile, with
intermittent heavy clashes between the Syrian armed
forces and armed groups occurring in the areas of
separation and limitation. On 7 December, the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force observed two
aircraft from the Alpha side flying north-east over the
area of separation and entering the area of limitation
on the Bravo side. That is a violation of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Those events
jeopardize the ceasefire between Israel and Syria.
On 17 December, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations will brief the Council on the
situation.

Turning to Lebanon, the Deputy Secretary-General
is currently in Beirut for a two-day visit on the occasion
of the launch of the new Lebanon crisis response plan
to address the refugee presence in the country. The
visit is an opportunity to reaffirm the solidarity and
commitment of the United Nations, consistent with the
Security Council's support for Lebanon' stability and
security, which remains fragile.

On 8 December, three Syrians in Arsal were killed
by a Syrian air strike. On 5 December, a member of
the Lebanese security forces was executed by his
captors, while 25 other Lebanese soldiers and security
personnel are still being held hostage by the Al-Nusra
Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. On
2 December, six Lebanese soldiers were killed in an
attack on an army patrol by militants near Ras Baalbek,
by the Syrian border. We strongly condemn all attacks
on the Lebanese Armed Forces.

On the political front, Speaker Berri has announced
that preparations are under way for dialogue between
Hizbullah and the Future Movement, and that a first
session may be expected before the end of the year. We
encourage such efforts, which may ease tensions and
help address outstanding concerns, the most pressing of
which remains the resolution of the seven month-long
vacuum in the presidency.
In conclusion, we have reached a dramatic
moment in the quest for peace between Israel and the
Palestinians, particularly if that peace - as we have
consistently advocated - is to be based on a two-State
solution. I feel that 2014 changed the course of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and that the future is more
uncertain than ever. As I have alerted the Council, I
am deeply concerned that a one-State reality is on the
parties' doorstep if they fail to address the present
deadlock.

The people of Israel and Palestine deserve
better. They are in need of hope - hope that their
future will see peace and the end of conflict at last.
Reversing the trust deficit must now take precedence.
Prolonging the status quo is a sure-fire route to failure.
The international community, including the Security
Council, has a responsibility and an important role to
play in shaping a way ahead. Yet ultimately it is for
Palestinians and Israelis and their leaderships to take
the courageous steps, now more necessary than ever, to
salvage a peaceful and secure future for their people.

