Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) today. It is the first Security Council resolution
on the Israel-Palestine issue in over seven years.
The adoption of the resolution is first and foremost a
clear reinforcement of the international community's
conviction that a two-State solution remains the only
viable route to sustained Arab-Israeli peace.

As the Quartet report in July 2016 highlighted, the
foundations of peace - trust and goodwill - are being
corroded from all sides because ofviolence, incitement,
demolitions and settlement activity. Ultimately, as long
as terrorists are treated as martyrs, peace will be distant.
The scourge of anti-Semitic, racist and hateful language
must be excised from the region. It is critical that the
Palestinian leadership implement the recommendations
ofthe Quartet report and continue their efforts to tackle
terror and incitement, strengthen institutions and
develop a sustainable economy. The United Kingdom
will continue to provide the Palestinian authority with
professional support in helping develop its security
institutions.

But goodwill alone will not secure peace. Today's
resolution is a sober recognition that the two-State
solution is slipping away. By undermining the
prospects for a contiguous Palestinian State, settlement
construction is corroding the possibility of a two-State
solution. Since the Oslo process in 1993, the population
of settlements has doubled to 570,000, including 85,000
settlers deep in the West Bank. The Quartet report
warns of sliding into a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation and conflict. That is no future at all.

The United Kingdom is a dear and close friend of
the State of Israel. We reject all efforts to delegitimize
or undermine Israel. The movement for boycotts,
divestment and sanctions, rooted as it is in a culture of
prejudice and hostility to Israel, is a barrier to peace.
My Government will never support any resolution that
advances the cause of boycotts or delegitimization in
any way. It is because of our steadfast and stalwart
commitment to Israel's security - and its existence
as the Jewish homeland - that we voted for today's
resolution and worked tirelessly to secure a balanced
final text. We believe that Israeli settlement activity
represents a clear and present danger to our shared vision
of two States for two peoples. The United Kingdom's
long-standing View is that settlement expansion is
illegal and not in Israel's long-term interests.

Today's resolution also takes important and balanced
steps to support peace through, first of all, calling for
immediate steps to prevent incitement and all acts of
violence against civilians, including terror. It also calls
for a strengthening of efforts to combat terrorism,
including through existing security coordination,
as well as clearly condemning all acts of terrorism.
Secondly, the resolution calls upon both parties to act
on the basis of international law and to refrain from
provocative actions in order to build trust and create
the conditions for peace. Thirdly, the resolution calls
upon all parties to exert collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations on all final-status issues, urging
the intensification and acceleration of international and
regional efforts to support a comprehensive peace.

We have long held that if negotiations are to
be successful, they will need to lead to a safe and
secure Israel, living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders with agreed
land-swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capitol of both
States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees.

In closing, we recognize that the adoption of the
resolution will not change the situation on the ground
overnight. The year 2017 will not be an easy year for the
Israel-Palestine issue, 50 years since the Six-Day War
and the subsequent occupation of Gaza and the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and 100 years since
my country issued the Balfour Declaration. However,
we must all uphold our responsibility, as the Council
has finally upheld its responsibility today, in order to
deliver the long-term security that Israelis deserve and
the statehood and end to the occupation that Palestinians
are calling out for.

