Mr. Makei (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for your important and timely initiative to
hold a discussion in the Security Council on cooperation
with the three regional organizations, namely the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).

It is particularly pertinent to consider this issue
through the prism of maintaining international peace
and security, especially in the context of combating
terrorism. The Republic ofBelarus is a member ofCSTO
and CIS and an observer State of SCO. We greatly value
the potential of those organizations and contribute to
ensuring their effective functioning. It is important to
note that at previous session of the General Assembly,
three resolutions concerning cooperation with those
bodies were unanimously adopted (resolutions 73/334, 73/331 and 73/16), thereby confirming the wide
recognition of their contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security and testifying to their
international status.

We welcome the signing in November 2018 of
the memorandum of cooperation between the CSTO
secretariat and the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism. Let us be objective - the world is not
becoming any more predictable. A lack of trust in
the relations between States has led to an increase in
confrontational rhetoric and open disregard for the
norms and principles of international law, as well as
to attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of States
or to destabilize the situation in various regions and
countries of the world to benefit specific forces. That
situation has only contributed to the spread of one of
the main threats to international peace and security,
namely terrorism.
Unfortunately, terrorist activities do not stand still;
rather, they constantly evolve with the changing world.
We hear more and more about new and atypical forms
of terrorism. Most recently, a high-level international
conference on the topic of combating terrorism through
innovative approaches and the use of new and emerging
technologies was held in Minsk, in cooperation with
the United Nations.

The conference brought together countries of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and was an unprecedented event for our region.
Countries representing Virtually all the international
organizations active in the European and Eurasian
region, including CSTO, CIS and SCO, took part. We
hope that the outcome of the conference will serve as
an excellent basis for intensifying the efforts of States
and international organizations to create a broad
international anti-terrorist coalition.

Speaking at the opening of the conference, the
President of the Republic of Belarus, Alyaksandr
Lukashenko, proposed an initiative to form a "belt
of digital good-neighbourliness". In our opinion,
the conclusion of international agreements and
arrangements, both bilateral and multilateral, will make
it possible to ensure information security and restore
trust, as well as more effectively counteract the threats
and challenges of terrorism, including in cyberspace.
I would like to note that under the CSTO
framework, an agreement on cooperation in the field of
international information security is already in force.
The success of bilateral and regional mechanisms
in that area could contribute to the development of a
common understanding regarding a global instrument
on international information security. It would be
very useful for CSTO, CIS, SCO and the OSCE,
and its platform for cooperative security, which is
a good mechanism for the cooperation of regional
organizations, to take an active stance in that regard.

We are convinced that only through decisive joint
efforts of all States and close coordination of the
efforts of international and regional organizations,
under the auspices of the United Nations, will we be
able to effectively counter terrorism and make a real
contribution to strengthening our common security.
That is why Belarus supports the development of
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in order
to maintain international peace, security and stability.
This is a requirement oftoday's world and a precondition
for sustainable development of countries and peoples
and for creating peaceful, secure conditions to achieve
progress and prosperity.

