Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
having convened this debate on the issue of small
arms.

In a world facing the problems of insecurity,
hunger and disease, small arms and light weapons are
immediate and inexcusable aggravating factors. When
we hear about "small arms", the term makes us
unconsciously reduce the threat that they represent.
Portable weapons, ranging from revolvers to
antipersonnel mines, cause between 60 and 90 per cent
of the deaths that occur in conflict areas. A great part
of the cost in lives is borne by children and non-
combatants. Many others are uprooted from their
homes and lands.

Wherever we look, the consequences of these
small arms are devastating and more lethal than those
of other weapon systems; that is why they have been
characterized as true weapons of mass destruction. The
lack of reliable information, including on the legitimate
small arms trade, represents an important challenge to
reducing their lethal effects. According to the Small
Arms Survey, we know more about statistics and
transfers concerning nuclear, chemical and
conventional arms than about small arms.
The economic, social and human costs of this
problem are undoubtedly greater than the economic

gains from the production and sale of these weapons
for countries and companies engaged in that industry.
The resources used to alleviate the harmful effects of
small arms use up scarce commodities that could
otherwise be allocated to other economic, social and
cultural development projects.

It is appropriately and timely that the Security
Council face up to the moral imperative presented by
this situation and put an end to this lethal scourge.
There are various initiatives that we can consider.

First of all, in the report before us today
(S/2008/258), the Secretary-General makes several
recommendations that directly concern the work and
the mandate of the Security Council. The Council
could form an ad hoc working group to study those
recommendations. The group could examine other
issues, such as the best way to correct the defects in the
Programme of Action relevant to the Council's
mandate. We could use as a guide the regimes
governing the trade in chemical precursors for
narcotics and materials for other weapons of mass
destruction. With the same resolve, we could
promote - and make binding - systems to regulate
the production, trade and transfer of small arms.

The Secretary-General informs us that activities
related to the illicit trade in small arms have resulted in
violations of all the arms embargoes imposed by the
Council. That is why we must, in consultations or in
the Council's subsidiary organs, examine issues related
to the small arms trade whenever we review the
implementation of arms embargo regimes and the
mandates of peacekeeping missions.

As we are debating here, thousands of victims are
dying throughout the world under fire from licensed,
illegal or smuggled weapons. Today's debate should
serve as a platform that spurs us towards new decisive
initiatives to combat the worst effects of the use of
small arms.

