Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, as well as the Force Commanders ofthe African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) for their briefings on the situations in their
missions. I too want to join my colleagues in expressing
our gratitude to all peacekeepers for their dedicated
service, often in extremely difficult conditions, as well
as honouring the memory of those who have laid down
their lives in the service of peace.

I have a few questions I want to ask, but before I do
so, I have a few comments to make about peacekeeping
that we are all familiar with but that are still important.
The success of any United Nations peacekeeping
operation depends on peacekeepers' constructive
day-to-day interaction both with the authorities of
the countries to which they are deployed and with the
parties to the conflict, and following through on the
mission's tasks that are key in the host country without
pursuing secondary or marginal mandates.

We know that host countries bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians, establishing
the political process, addressing the root causes of
crises and promoting post-conflict reconstruction.
We believe there is potential for countries hosting
peacekeeping operations to connect fully with the
triangular cooperation between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries,
which would certainly improve the effectiveness of
the mechanism in question. Peacekeeping operations
clearly should not be a substitute for the authorities
of host countries, but should rather provide them with
the assistance they need at the implementation stage of
the strategy for dealing with a crisis, and the priority
should be to increase the capicity of the authorities
themselves in order to avoid relapses into conflict.
It is in countries where missions have been able to
achieve credible and effective cooperation with the
host Governments that they have been able to establish
conditions conducive to ensuring national reconciliation
and post-crisis reconstruction. I would like to address
the Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and mention that
we believe it is important to assure a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and we hope that
this will be happening in Darfur in the context of the
drawdown and full withdrawal planned for 2020.

Needless to say, the problems related to improving
peacekeeping missions' effectiveness and ensuring
Blue Helmets' security are as pertinent as ever. The
effectiveness of a peacekeeping operation depends
directly on how well the consensus-based agreements of
States on peacekeeping issues are carried out, including
by both the Secretariat and the missions on the ground. It
is those agreements that reflect the shared commitments
that the States have expressed their willingness to
assume. In that connection, I want to remind the
Council that the action plan for the report on Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers by former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
dos Santos Cruz should be implemented only within the
parameters agreed on by the General Assembly Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Intelligence
in peacekeeping, information-gathering and analysis
can be used only to ensure the safety of peacekeepers
and the protection of civilians. Any misuse of those
instruments, including for political purposes, risks
undermining trust in United Nations peacekeeping
activities. In that regard, in line with your request,
Sir, I would like to ask the Force Commanders if they
are guided in their activities by the recommendations
outlined in the Cruz report and if so, how they are
guided by them.

We would also like to note that the mandates of
some Security Council missions, including those of
UNFICYP, have already incorporated the performance
policy framework strategy even before the Secretariat's
finalization of the document. Has it already been
incorporated into the mission's work? We hope that
before it is put into practice by the Secretariat and
the missions, it will go through all the necessary
coordinating procedures in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. In the spirit of partnership
all interested States, including troop-contributing
countries, should take part in the discussions on
it. We hope that UNFICYP will also be guided by
that approach.

