The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Ethiopia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia and Zimbabwe in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
of the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objections, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Stagno
Ugarte (Costa Rica), Mr. Kmonicek (Czech Republic), Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia), Mr. Nakayama
(Federated States of Micronesia), Mr. Shobokshi
(Saudi Arabia), Ms. Novotna (Slovakia) and
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
26 March 2003 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2003/372 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Wednesday, 26 March 2003, on the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
26 March 2003 from the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan to the United Nations, which reads as
follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Group, I have the honour to request that
Ambassador Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, be allowed to
participate in the debate in the Security Council
on the item entitled 'The situation between Iraq
and Kuwait', in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/371.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Mokhtar Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamani to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.


