Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to address the Security Council on
behalf of the Government of Burundi, as well as on
my own behalf, on the occasion of the adoption of
resolution 2137 (2014), on the United Nations Office
in Burundi (BNUB), which determines the future of
our cooperation with the United Nations. The peace
dividend that Burundians are now enjoying is the result
of joint efforts of Burundians and the international
community.

Here in the Chamber on 28 January (see S/PV.7104),
the Government of Burundi called on the international
community to take into account the significant
progress made by our country in many areas. We also
expressed the desire to move on to a new framework
of cooperation with the United Nations, with BNUB
gradually yielding to a United Nations country team
in Burundi.

I want to thank all the members of the Security
Council for preparing the resolution while taking into
account the concerns of Burundians, national ownership
and sovereignty. My gratitude goes in particular to
France for its facilitation efforts, which led to the
satisfaction of all. My deep gratitude is proportionate
to the difficulties its Ambassador had to overcome.

Some delegations were initially reluctant to
support the position of the Government of Burundi,
citing certain problems related to the domestic political
situation. I understand their concerns and I sincerely
thank them. I know they certainly want the best for
my country. However, I would like to reassure the
Council that Burundians have been chastened by years
of fratricidal politico-ethnic conflicts, and have finally
decided to bury the hatchet when it comes to war.

The apparent differences betweem Burundi's
political actors and civil society should not be of great
concern to the members of the Council - they are
often merely part of the political posturing associated
with learning about democracy. It is also a good thing
that political parties, private media, trade unions and
non-governmental organizations are free to express
themselves. The State intervenes only rarely, in
instances of extreme contempt and to ensure public
order.

The decision to close BNUB at the end of this year
will mark the beginning of a new form of collaboration
with the Government of Burundi as well as the end of a
successful mission.

Issues related to human rights, the protection of
civilians, transitional justice, the electoral process and,
above all, development are concerns that we take to
heart.

I conclude my remarks by thanking the Council
again for this resolution. I also wish to inform members
that Burundi takes note of the recommendations of the
Security Council.

We reiterate our commitment to continue moving
forward to consolidate peace, as well as to cooperate
with the United Nations and other partners to merit the
multifaceted support from which we have heretofore
benefited from the international community. That
support will continue to help us as we strive for growth
and seek to combat poverty.

Through the Council, I would like to take this
opportunity to inform the international community of the
disaster that struck my country last Sunday, 9 February.
Torrential rains have destroyed infrastructure and
left more than 60 dead, most of them children. The
Government calls for international solidarity to help
cope with that humanitarian crisis.

