Mr. Griitter (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Slovakia for having organized this
open debate on security sector reform, which follows
up on the international workshop held in July 2006 and
on two round tables organized late last year on the
same subject. Having addressed the question in July
2005, the Security Council now reaffirms the
importance of security sector reform both for
establishing lasting peace and for consolidating peace
in countries affected by crises and conflicts.

Switzerland is convinced that a shared approach
of the whole United Nations system is essential when
dealing with security sector reform issues during all
phases of conflict. Such an approach should take into
account the needs not only of peacekeeping operations,
but also of long-term reconstruction and sustainable
development.

My country stresses the need for broad-based and
coherent coordination in this field. Particular attention
must be paid to the link between the concept of
security sector reform and related areas, such as the
rule of law; transitional justice; the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
including child soldiers; small arms control; and
gender equality. Strengthening respect for human rights
and, in general, social and economic development must
also be taken into account.

Security sector reform requires an integrated and
holistic approach. If security sector reform is to
produce concrete results, it must encompass all aspects
of security, addressing not only army and police
reform, but also institutions responsible for
prosecution, criminal justice and penitentiary
administration.

Switzerland would also like to highlight the issue
of governance, which is an integral part of security
sector reform. Security sector reform is essentially
shaped by political considerations. Its activities do not
amount merely to providing technical assistance to
governmental players in the field of security; it is also
imperative that they be subject to principles of good
governance and democracy.

The Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of
Armed Forces, an international foundation established
and co-financed by Switzerland, has solid experience

in the field of SSR in general and of parliamentary
oversight of the security sector in particular.
Switzerland is convinced that the Centre could be a
partner of choice for the United Nations.

The challenges are particularly great for countries
in the post-conflict phase. Security sector reform
programmes must contribute to overcoming the
specific legacies of an armed conflict - such as the
proliferation of small arms, anti-personnel landmines,
the presence of former combatants and unpunished war
crimes. In that regard, Switzerland would like to stress
the crucial importance of the involvement of non-State
actors - armed and civil society players - in SSR
programmes.

The Security Council is contemplating requesting
the Secretary-General to present a report on the United
Nations approach to security sector reform.
Switzerland supports the preparation of such a report,
which we believe should include the following
elements: the importance of ownership of the SSR
process by national Governments and local players; the
need for coordination among the various actors of the
Organization involved in this sector; the importance of
security sector reform for the consolidation of peace
and development; and sustainable financing for SSR
programmes.

Switzerland is convinced that security sector
reform programmes that are well coordinated and
carried out over the long term can contribute to world
peace and stability and to poverty reduction.
Switzerland looks forward to the Secretary-General's
future report and to the practical recommendations that
it will contain on promoting action and progress in this
field.

