Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on my reflections as Chair of both
the Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003),
concerning Iraq and Kuwait.

In the realization of its mandate contained in
document S/PRST/2001/3, the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations held several meetings to
consider mission-specific and cross-cutting challenges
faced by United Nations peacekeeping missions.

First, the programme of work for the year focused
on challenges specific to various United Nations
peacekeeping missions and, of course, to cross-cutting
issues such as transition and exit strategies, inter-
2

mission cooperation and capacity gaps and
development. The mission-specific discussions
highlighted some of the core issues that continue to
encumber the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates, such as the transfer of personnel and
equipment at the end of a mandate, operational
coordination, the protection of civilians and the
shortage of military helicopters.

The discussions on thematic issues were also very
instructive. On transition and exit strategies, the point
was cogently made that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding were both integral parts of the same
process. It was understood that transition strategies
referred not to the shift from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, but rather from peacekeeping to other
configurations of the United Nations presence. To
ensure that transition strategies are sensitive to the
nuances encountered in the field, the need to avoid
setting excessively rigid benchmarks for deployment or
drawdown was also highlighted.

In reviewing the concept of inter-mission
cooperation, it was emphasized that such cooperation
was not the panacea needed to fill in capacity gaps.
Contemporary peacekeeping missions that share
geographic proximity stand to benefit from interaction.
Greater political buy-in, adequate equipment and
resources, and strict adherence to the principles of
democratic policing were identified as critical to
bridging capacity gaps and surmounting capacity
development challenges.

At its final substantive meeting, the Working
Group appraised the triangular relationship between
the Secretariat, the Security Council, and the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs). While the TCCs acknowledged an
improvement in the triangular relationship, they noted
that Security Council resolution 1353 (2001)
envisioned more than information sharing. In that
regard, they urged that the views of TCCs should be
sought before an assessment mission was carried out,
during strategic redeployments and at the start-up,
transition and drawdown of a mission.

I believe that it has been 10 years since the
Council established the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. Perhaps the value added by
the Working Group is the platform that it has provided
for enhanced informal interactive dialogue among the
various stakeholders on generic and specific
11-63690
peacekeeping issues. By maintaining a flexible
programme of work over the reporting period, the
Working Group successfully accommodated the views
and concerns of TCCs as they arose. The Working
Group benefited immensely by drawing substantially
from the issues that were of specific importance during
our negotiations at the last regular session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly (C-34), held in March.

I also believe that the discussions of the Working
Group can enrich the debates of this Council during the
crucial phases of a mission's life cycle, especially the
mandate renewal, mission planning and technical
assessment stages. In that regard, the Working Group
should continue to work in partnership with the
Secretariat and the TCCs in incorporating case studies
into its thematic discussions.

We strongly recommend that such case studies be
drawn from peacekeeping missions whose
authorizations are set to expire in the months ahead, as
well as missions in which strategic actions that can
have an impact on the mandate are contemplated.

The Working Group witnessed not only an
improvement in the substantive participation of the
TCCs at its meetings, but also their significant
contribution to the framework of its agenda. Our
obligation is to reciprocate that support by ensuring
that the outcomes of our meetings are indeed translated
into action by both the Council and the Secretariat.
Regular reporting on the activities of the Working
Group to the Council will be the first vital step in the
right direction towards achieving that objective.
Keeping the format of our meetings informal and
further adapting it to a solution-oriented platform are
indeed imperative.

Bearing in mind that the concerns of the TCCs
and PCCs are sometime as diverse as the solutions they
proffer to existing challenges, the Working Group
should also become a consensus-building platform. I
believe that the Working Group will benefit immensely
from proposals made by both the TCCs and the
Secretariat. It is indeed my expectation that the final
report of the Working Group will incorporate all of
those proposals.

The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations has continued to grow in
strength and relevance. In order to sustain its unique
role in United Nations peacekeeping, we must make
11-63690

certain that no gains are lost by consolidating the
progress achieved thus far. As we draw the curtains on
an eventful year in global peacekeeping operations, we
must relentlessly strive to ensure not only that United
Nations peacekeeping is described as a global
partnership, but also that it is objectively seen to be so.
I have had the special privilege of chairing not only the
Special Committee, but also this Working Group in the
Security Council. It has allowed me to connect the
dots.

Allow me to say a few words in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003), which deals with
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. The Committee
was established by Security Council resolution 1518
(2003) to continue to identify, in accordance with
paragraphs 19 and 23 of resolution 1483 (2003),
individuals and entities whose funds, other financial
assets and economic resources should be frozen and
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq. While
the Committee has not held any meetings this year, it
has continued to consider the relevant issues brought to
its attention.

In particular, the Committee received a letter
dated 27 February from the focal point regarding a
delisting request for two persons included on the
Committee's list of individuals. A separate delisting
request from a Member State had previously been
submitted to the Committee for the same two
individuals. On 3 June, the Committee agreed to
remove from the list the names of the two individuals
who had applied for delisting through the focal point.

In a related development, a delisting request for a
third individual, which had been submitted in 2007 by
a Member State and had remained pending before the
Committee, was also resolved. The holds that had
previously been placed by the individual Committee
members were lifted, and the individual concerned was
removed from the Committee's list of individuals on
6 December. I am pleased to report that the delisting of
those three individuals has brought to a conclusion one
of two separate matters that had been pending before
the Committee since 2007. I remain hopeful that the
second long-pending issue may also be resolved before
the end of this year.

The Committee received two communications
dated 23 June from the Permanent Mission of Iraq
proposing the addition of eight names to the list of
3
individuals established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003) and an amendment to the
entries for two names already inscribed on that list.
That request remains pending before the Committee.
The Committee also received a letter, dated 22 June,
from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
informing the Committee of Kuwait's decision to
transfer frozen Iraqi assets deposited in Kuwaiti banks
since 1990 to the Development Fund for Iraq, in
accordance with paragraph 23 of resolution 1483
(2003).

The Committee received a letter, dated 5 May,
from the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations regarding the implementation of the
arms embargo concerning Iraq. In its reply to the
Permanent Representative of Australia, the Committee
noted that its mandate did not authorize it to provide
guidance on questions pertaining to the implementation
of the arms embargo. In that connection, I would again
wish to recall that the Security Council decided, in
resolution 1518 (2003), that the mandate of the
Committee would be kept under review and that the
Council would consider authorizing the Committee to
undertake the additional task of observing Member
States' fulfilment of their obligations in connection
with the arms embargo on Iraq, as reaffirmed in
paragraph 10 of resolution 1483 (2003).

To date, the Committee has not been authorized
to undertake any additional tasks in that regard. The
remaining prohibitions on the supply of arms to Iraq,
which exclude arms and related materiel required by
the Government of Iraq, are therefore not currently
accompanied by a Security Council mechanism, such
as a committee or a monitoring mechanism with a
mandate to oversee the implementation of those
particular measures. 1 would like to conclude by
recalling that the Security Council, in its resolution
1546 (2004), stressed the importance for all States to
abide strictly by the remaining measures, and called
upon the Government of Iraq to ensure that appropriate
implementation procedures were in place.

I would like thank the members of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the 1518
Committee for their constructive contributions and for
the quality of their cooperation. I would also like to
thank the delegation of India for having effectively
fulfilled the function of Vice-Chair of the 1518
Committee. Let me also extend my thanks to the
Secretariat for its tireless and diligent support. On
behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish every success
to the incoming Chairs of the Working Group and the
Committee.

