Mr. Pompeo (United States of America): I thank
representatives for the kind words. I appreciate them.

Just two days ago, the Head of the Aerospace
Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Amir
Hajizadeh, boasted that Iran is capable of building
missiles with a range beyond 2,000 kilometres. He said,

"We have the ability to build missiles with broader
ranges. We don't have limitations from a technical
perspective."

He also said that there are many enemy bases
within 800 kilometres of Iran - in other words, within
striking distance of Iranian missiles. He bragged that
Iran carries out 40 to 50 tests per year.

As I will talk about further, it is clear that the Iranian
regime ballistic missile activity has grown since the
nuclear deal. Iran has exploited the goodwill of nations
and defied multiple Security Council resolutions in its
quest for a robust ballistic missile force. The United
States will never stand for that; no nation that seeks
peace and prosperity in the Middle East should either.

The Council has been telling Iran to stop testing
and proliferating ballistic missiles in one form or
another since 2006. From 2010 to 2015 Iran was subject
to resolution 1929 (2010), the strictest resolution
addressing the Iranian ballistic missiles to date. In that
resolution, the Security Council decided that Iran shall
not undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using ballistic missile technology, and that
States shall take the necessary measures to prevent
the transfer of technology or technical assistance
to Iran related to such activities. That provision of
resolution 1929 (2010) imposed a legal prohibition on
Iran's ballistic missile activity. There was the force of
law behind those words. Nevertheless, Iran conducted
multiple ballistic missile launches between 2010 and
2015, in flagrant violation of that resolution.

What did we do in response? Did we increase
accountability in Iran for serial violations of
international law? We did quite the opposite. In fact,
the level of accountability in Iran has diminished, while
the risk has increased. In connection with the Iranian
regime's engagement in nuclear talks and at the Obama
Administration's urging, the Security Council replaced
resolution 1929 (2010) with resolution 2231 (2015).
The latter calls upon Iran not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons. Notwithstanding that
change in language, the world's concerns remain.

When we collectively call on Iran to cease its
ballistic missile activity, we must agree to stop it
now. But Iran is as defiant of the world's insistence
as ever - because here we are, for the twelfth year
in a row, meeting about Iran's ballistic missiles
and addressing an incredibly problematic data set.
Iran's pace of missile activity, including its missile
launches and tests, has not diminished since the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was adopted.
In fact, Iran's missile testing and proliferation is
growing. Today Iran has the largest arsenal of ballistic
missiles in the Middle East. It has more than 10 ballistic
missile systems in its inventory or in development. It
has hundreds of missiles, and they pose a threat to our
partners in the region.

More recently, in 2016, while the JCPOA was in
effect, Iran unveiled two new short-range ballistic
missiles that it claims are capable of striking targets
between 500 and 700 kilometres. In January 2017, while
the JCPOA was in effect, Iran launched a medium-range
missile that was designed to carry a payload greater
than 500 kilograms and that could be used to carry
nuclear warheads. Its suspected range also approaches
2,000 kilometres, which is far enough to target Athens,
Sofia, Bucharest and other major European cities. If
the Commander of the Aerospace Force of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps is telling the truth and Iran
does have capabilities beyond a 2,000-kilometre range,
other European capitals are at risk as well.

In July 2017, when United States was still a party to
the JCPOA, Iran tested a Simorgh space-launch vehicle.
The United States, France, Germany and the United
Kingdom all assessed that the launch was inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015) because space-launch
vehicles use a technology similar to intercontinental
ballistic missiles. Iran has exported ballistic missile
systems as well - most recently to Yemen. We have
hard evidence that Iran is providing missiles, training
and support to the Houthis and that the Iranian-Houthi
missile arsenal is fully engaged. That poses a threat
to innocent civilians, including Americans living in
Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Dubai, as well as people of
all nationalities who travel on civilian aircraft in that
region. Iran is also transferring ballistic missile systems
to Shia militias in Iraq. Just look at the past two weeks.
The Iranian regime test-fired a medium-range ballistic
missile that is capable of carrying multiple warheads.
Our goodwill gestures have been futile in correcting
the Iranian regime's reckless missile activity and its
destructive behaviours. No nation can dispute that Iran
openly defies resolution 2231 (2015).

The United States is not alone in raising these
concerns. I would like to thank France, Germany and
the United Kingdom for raising concerns about Iranian
missile proliferation to the Secretariat. I would also
like to thank our partners from Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, who are working with United
Nations inspectors to recover material debris of the
Iranian-supplied missiles, rockets and unmanned
aerial vehicles launched into their countries by Houthi
forces in Yemen. Our Israeli allies have brought further
evidence to the Security Council about Iran's continued
launches ofballistic missiles that are inherently capable
of carrying nuclear weapons. Israel has also given
evidence to the Secretariat of Iran's transfer of weapons
systems to its proxies all over the Middle East - in
defiance of what we have insisted that they should do.

We must now ask ourselves which steps we must
take to confront that malign Iranian activity. If Iran
continues stocking up on ballistic missiles, the security
of our people will be at risk. If we fail to restore
deterrence, we will run the risk of conflict escalating
in the region. If we do nothing, we will convey to all
other malign actors that they, too, can defy the Security
Council with impunity. As all members of the Council
know well, the Charter of the United Nations bestows
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We all take that responsibility seriously. The United
States seeks to work with all other members of the
Council to reimpose on Iran the ballistic missile
restrictions outlined in resolution 1929 (2010).

Beyond addressing Iran's ballistic missile
activities, the Council should not lift the arms embargo
on Iran in 2020. That country is in non-compliance with
multiple Security Council resolutions, including those
related to Al-Qaida, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Yemen and
Somalia. Even as we sit here today, Iran is harbouring
Al-Qaida, supporting Taliban militants in Afghanistan,
arming terrorists in Lebanon, facilitating illicit trade
in Somali charcoal to benefit Al-Shabaab and training
and equipping Shia militias in Iraq, even as we sit here
today. It is also stoking conflict in Syria and Yemen.
The Council must address those malign activities; it
cannot reward Iran by lifting the arms embargo. We
also call on the Council to establish inspection and
interdiction measures in ports and on the high seas
to thwart Iran's continuing efforts to circumvent the
existing arms restrictions.

Some have questioned our decision to withdraw
from the JCPOA. We reply that it is self-evident why we

did so: they are based on the very conversation we are
having here today. Prior to the deal, Western leaders
made grand claims about how the JCPOA would usher
in a new era of moderation from the Iranian regime.
Indeed, America's own President said that

"ideally we would see a situation in which Iran,
seeing sanctions reduced, would start focusing on
its economy, on training its people, on re-entering
the world community, to lessening its provocative
activities in the region."
But what we actually see is that, to date, the JCPOA
has without a doubt shielded the Islamic Republic of
Iran from being accountable for the risks it presents
to the world. The Iranian regime is pursuing the same
destructive, revolutionary goals that it has for the past
39 years, except now it has more money to achieve them
thanks to the nuclear deal.

I am here today first and foremost in my capacity as
the Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Under President Trump, the security of our people and
our allies comes first. But, in the finest traditions of
American leadership, the United States will continue to
unite sovereign nations in their responsibility to work
for the peace and security of their own people and a
stable international order. The United States is going
to continue to be relentless in building a coalition of
responsible nations that are serious about confronting
the Iranian regime's reckless ballistic missile activity,
as well as the way it treats its own people. That type of
malign activity is something that the United States will
continue to stand side by side with the people of Iran.
They have been the worst victims of the regime for
nearly 40 years, and they have the unwavering support
of the United States.

Finally, in May the Trump Administration clearly
defined the 12 areas on which we are demanding
change from Iran. If Iran makes a fundamental
strategic shift and honours those demands, we would
be prepared to ease our pressure campaign and support
the modernization and reintegration of the Iranian
economy into the international economic system. But
relief from our pressure will come about only when
we see tangible, demonstrated and sustained shifts in
Tehran's policies.

