The President: I thank for Ms. Qadeem for
her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United
Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

In January 2017, the Secretary-General gave the
Security Council a challenge. He asked the question
of how we can use our powers under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations more effectively to
prevent conflict (see S/PV.7857). Although Chapter VI
is about more than mediation, it is an important part
of the answer. The Security Council is often uniquely
placed to support mediation efforts to prevent and
indeed resolve conflict. But the Council is far from
being the only actor.

The complex nature of modern conflict, which the
Secretary-General and others have already referred
to, means that averting or ending violence requires a
concerted approach from a range of actors, both within
the family of the United Nations and outside it. That
includes regional and subregional organizations, civil
society, religious leaders and, as we have just heard,
women's mediation networks.
I am therefore delighted and pleased that we have
heard from representatives of those groups today. I
would particularly like to thank the Most Reverend
Archbishop of Canterbury and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem
for their very insightful, expert and thoughtful
briefings to the Council today. As Ms. Qadeem said,
in peacemaking in conflict resolution we must speak to
the core humanity of people and, to echo a phrase used
by the Most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, it is
only then that we will achieve the "people's peace".

In the United Kingdom, we have seen the
importance of mediation first-hand. The division and
violence in Northern Ireland took years of sustained
negotiations to resolve, and finally ended with the
signing of the Belfast Agreement, also known as the
Good Friday Agreement, in 1998. It shows the value
of patient and persistent mediation, and the 20 years of
peace that have followed illustrate clearly why we must
give mediation efforts our utmost and full support.

Today, as we look around the world, in Yemen
and Libya Martin Griffiths and Ghassan Salame are
leading efforts to facilitate peaceful resolutions to
some of the most complex and long-running conflicts,
with great human cost. But we should not make the
mistake of thinking that mediation works only at the
national level. In countries like the Central African
Republic and Mali, we have seen the importance of
community-level mediation conducted or facilitated by
peacekeeping missions.

In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
has successfully facilitated mediation between armed
groups in several areas of the country, such as the
agreement signed in the town Bouar in December 2017.
MINUSCA is also involved in strengthening local
capacity to resolve conflicts, building trust between
communities and advocating the participation of
women and young people.

In Mali, the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali recognizes the importance of community
engagement and local mediation. It is essential in
protecting civilians and in stabilizing communities
and the country. It has facilitated the training of 703
mediators, including 225 women, who have served on
community-based mediation panels.

More broadly, the United Nations has made good
progress in the past decade to professionalize and
strengthen its mediation role with the establishment
of the Mediation Support Unit in 2006, the Standby
Team of Senior Mediation Advisers in 2008 and the
High-level Advisory Board for Mediation in 2017. The
United Nations special political missions play quite a
unique role in fostering and supporting dialogue and
preventing conflict.

If we cast our minds back to last December,
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, former President of Nigeria
and a member of the High-level Advisory Board, as we
heard from the Secretary-General, travelled to Liberia
on the Secretary-General's behalf to support the first
peaceful transfer of power in Liberia's history. Thus,
there is much we can already be proud of in terms of
what has been achieved. But equally, on reflecting on
what has been achieved, it is important to recognize
there is much more to do.

We now need to look forward towards the coming
decade and address the changing nature of conflicts,
their complexity and the increasing number of
mediation actors. The United Kingdom believes that
the Security Council has a pivotal and important role
to play in that respect. We must include mediation in
the toolkit that the Council uses to prevent and resolve
conflicts. That includes working effectively with
mediators from regional and subregional organizations.
We therefore welcome the United Nations work to
strengthen capacity in that particular area. It also
means considering conflict resolution and mediation
when we mandate peacekeeping and special political
missions. We should learn and build on the examples of
Mali and the Central African Republic, and ensure that
mediation support is properly resourced.

Lastly but most importantly, as we have heard
already, and as set out in resolution 1325 (2000), we must
ensure without question the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in conflict resolution as leaders
and decision-makers at both the national and the local
levels. Women's participation should not be an option.
It is a central and pivotal part of conflict resolution. It
is key to ensuring conflict resolution and lasting peace.
It is a matter of ensuring respect for human rights and
ensuring gender equality. As we all know - and we
should reflect on this * the evidence points to that.
When one considers the research, it also confirms
that, where women are involved in peacekeeping, it
increases the probability of peace lasting much longer.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's efforts
to promote gender parity in the United Nations, but
also recognize that it is incumbent upon all of us - the
United Nations system, Member States, civil society
and religious leaders - to do more to promote women's
participation in conflict prevention and resolution at all
levels, including the appointment of women mediators.

Let me assure the Council that the United Kingdom
is taking its responsibility very seriously, and we are
therefore committing £1.6 million to the development
of the Women Mediators across the Commonwealth
network, to which Ms. Mossarat Qadeem alluded.
Of course, the voice of young people must also be
included. What is clear is the fact that the nature of
conflict evolves, and as it evolves mediation will be
needed more than ever. The United Nations must
stand ready to ensure that it is equal to the task. Let
me assure all colleagues and Member States across the
United Nations and beyond that the United Kingdom
will remain committed to supporting the Secretary-
General in his efforts and focus to both professionalize
and enhance the United Nations approach to mediation,
with women rightfully playing a full, pivotal and
equal part.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

