Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to add my voice to those of speakers before me in
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honore,
for her briefing and for her and her team's flawless
work to help Haiti.

The report of the Secretary-General covering the
period under consideration (S/2014/617) shows that the
situation has improved. The main State institutions
have been strengthened and the return and resettlement
of internally displaced persons has been 90 per cent
accomplished, while significant progress has been
made in combating the cholera epidemic. However,
there are a number of issues that make this improved
situation a fragile one.

On the political front, the problem of the composition
of the Electoral Council still divides the executive, the
political parties, the parliamentarians and the opposition.
Chad supports the efforts to maintain an inter-Haitian
dialogue process and commends the signing of the El
Rancho Accord, which is an encouraging development
and a sign of the political stakeholders' willingness to
put an end to their differences. In order to strengthen
the rule of law, promote socioeconomic development
and restore lasting stability, Chad urges all the parties
concerned to redouble their efforts to hold local and
parliamentary elections in Haiti as speedily and as soon
as possible.

In spite of overall improvement in the area of
security, public order is still at risk, particularly by
problems with crime, gang violence and civil unrest
related to the continuing political and economic
crisis. Chad welcomes the forthcoming increase in the
numbers of Haitian National Police officers to 15,000
by 2016 and the reform of the prison system. As we
know, every security problem is ultimately rooted in
social inequality and poverty. Fighting those scourges
will help improve the underlying causes of insecurity.
In that regard, Chad encourages the country's
Government and the United Nations to continue to aid
and support Haiti in the processes of stabilization and
peacebuilding.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, Chad
welcomes the fact that the number of displaced persons
has fallen by 90 per cent since 2010. However, critical
needs still have to be met in the areas ofbasic sanitation
and malnutrition. Overall, 70,000 displaced persons are
still living in very precarious conditions. Chad urges
the Government to seek solutions for these people based
on sustainable development. We commend the 82 per
cent drop in cholera cases compared to the same period
last year, and we encourage initiatives aimed at fighting
the disease, including the total sanitation programme
launched by the Secretary-General in July. We urge
donors to step up their efforts to find the financing
needed to completely eradicate cholera in Haiti.

After 10 years of MINUSTAH's activity and 13
Security Council resolutions, we believe that Haiti is
at a turning point in its consolidation of stability and
democracy. The leadership, the political stakeholders
and the country's population as a whole must seize this
historic opportunity to consolidate their achievements
and put the country on a path to sustainable stability
and economic development. This new responsibility
should be undertaken within the framework of a gradual
and progressive transfer of authority. In that context,
MINUSTAH should maintain a presence adequate to the
task of helping Haiti's institutions confront risks to its
security, especially during the electoral period. In that
regard, Chad welcomes the extension of MINUSTAH's
mandate through 15 October 2015, in accordance with
the drawdown plan and timetable proposed by the
Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we would like to congratulate and
thank all who have contributed to Haiti's stabilization
and development, and we encourage the Haitian
Government, which, thanks to the support of all United
Nations entities and other relevant stakeholders, will be
taking over from MINUSTAH.

