Mr. Augusto (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): On behalf of my country, I
wish to address the Security Council as the current
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) on behalf of the member countries of
the CPLP, namely, Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-
Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe
and Timor-Leste.

As Angola participates in this important meeting
of the Security Council, which includes Brazil and
Portugal as non-permanent members, dedicated to an
assessment of the situation in Guinea-Bissau, with
particular emphasis on issues related to the reform of
the security sector, we are fully aware of the
importance of cooperation among the multilateral and
bilateral actors involved in the stabilization of Guinea-
Bissau under the auspices of the United Nations, whose
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
been doing a clearly outstanding job, which we are
pleased to commend.

Under the coordination of the United Nations and
in close partnership with the Government of Guinea-
Bissau, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the European
Union and the CPLP are committed to the
implementation of the road map for security sector
reform with determination and a genuine desire to
achieve the expected results, namely, the effective
subordination of Guinea-Bissau's armed forces and
other defence and security institutions to political
control. That process includes upgrading and
refurbishing these bodies in order to safeguard
institutions, the democratic regime and the reform of
the justice sector so that it can count on the appropriate
means to effectively combat impunity, organized crime
and drug trafficking.

Beyond the multilateral aspect, CPLP member
countries have shown a great sense of solidarity and
commitment to that process at the bilateral level.
Tangible efforts that contribute directly to achieving
the goals of the road map have been implemented at
various levels, with an emphasis on the important
political and diplomatic roles of Cape Verde,
Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and Timor-Leste
in promoting dialogue with a view to national
reconciliation in Guinea-Bissau.

Brazil is developing a training programme for
Guinea-Bissau's security forces that includes the
establishment of a training centre, including Brazilian
instructors, for the three security branches, namely, the
public order police, the State information service and
the judiciary police. Brazil will also establish a training
centre for military officers. Moreover, Brazil continues
to provide training for the youth of Guinea-Bissau at
Brazilian military academies.

Portugal is carrying out a basic police training
programme, including refresher courses in public
security and judicial policing. It is also training judges
and prison guards and supporting the implementation
of the country's organic laws, which were developed
with the support of the European Union.

Last February, Angola established a mission to
support security and defence sector reform in Guinea-
Bissau, which will provide military and technical
assistance to defence and security organs and help to
rebuild the military infrastructure. The Angolan
Government has contributed a total of $30 million in
that regard.

The CPLP welcomes the current climate of truce
that is now being felt in Guinea-Bissau, and especially
the good relations among its national institutions,
political forces and civil society, with an emphasis on
the ongoing national dialogue involving the Guinean
diaspora.

Following discussions last November with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank at a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, member countries
were encouraged to support the deliberations of both
financial institutions on Guinea-Bissau. In December,
the IMF and the World Bank declared that Guinea-
Bissau had reached the completion point in the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and decided to
support debt relief for the country in the amount of
more than $1 billion. In that context, on 10 May, Paris
Club creditors announced the forgiveness of $283
million of Guinea-Bissau's debt. The CPLP welcomes
the decisions of the IMF, the World Bank and the Paris
Club.

In addition to recognizing the efforts of the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the progress that
has been made, those actions, along with other bilateral
and multilateral initiatives, reflect the convergence of
views within the international community with regard to an
assessment of the situation in the country.

Taking into account the negative impact of illicit
drugs in Guinea-Bissau and the West African subregion, the
CPLP welcomes and supports the recent commitment of
ECOWAS authorities to mobilizing West African countries
against transnational organized crime. We also stress the
need for close collaboration with the High-level Policy
Committee of the West Africa Coast Initiative. The
Committee has adopted a set of recommendations that
include the holding of a donors' conference to extend
financial support for international activities under the
Initiative and support the implementation of the ECOWAS
plan of action. The Initiative provides an appropriate
response to the transnational nature of drug trafficking
through the establishment of transnational crime units in
countries that have joined the Initiative. The international
community must now support the operationalization of the
transnational crime unit in Bissau. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau has already appointed a board of directors
and president for the unit, who will begin work later this
month.

It is very important to strengthen international
cooperation in combating transnational organized crime
based on the principle of common and shared
responsibility. Countries of origin, transit and destination
must become increasingly involved in combating drug
trafficking.

The CPLP notes with satisfaction the adoption by the
National Steering Committee, on 15 June, of a
peacebuilding priority plan for Guinea-Bissau for the
period 2011-2013. The CPLP therefore calls for $16.8
million from the Peacebuilding Fund to quickly be made
available to expedite the implementation of planned
activities, so as to prevent uncertainty and insecurity in the
country.

Guinea-Bissau still faces challenges in several areas,
including combating impunity and drug trafficking, the
need to bring the military under the control of civilian
authorities, and the demobilization and retraining of the
personnel of the armed forces.

The CPLP has taken note of the information provided
by the Minister of Defence on the schedule of actions to be
performed by the Government of Guinea-Bissau. In that
regard, I would like to stress the importance of quickly
rendering operational the armed forces pension fund, which
is a key step in the overall security sector reform process.
The international community's commitment is crucial in

that connection. We therefore welcome the decision of
ECOWAS heads of State and Government to contribute $45
million to the fund, out of the total $63 million contributed
to security sector reform. CPLP member countries will also
contribute. We call on Guinea-Bissau's other partners,
especially those that have supported the security sector
reform process, to make similar contributions.

The CPLP also calls for understanding on the part of
international and bilateral partners with regard to the need
to mobilize additional resources to contribute to the
successful implementation of national poverty reduction
strategies, as well as the joint CPLP-ECOWAS road map
for security sector reform. We believe that only then can the
gains of peacebuilding and political stability in Guinea-
Bissau be made sustainable and irreversible.

For the process to be successful, the CPLP
encourages the Government of Guinea-Bissau, as well as
the country's political movements and civil society in
general, to join the efforts of the international community
for the full implementation of the ongoing programme to
ensure peace, security, stability and socio-economic
development in the country.

The European Union has duly raised some concerns
that are shared by all those who defend democracy and the
rule of law. Responses and solutions to those concerns must
now be found. It is therefore imperative that Guinea-
Bissau's partners not isolate or alienate the country, but act
with understanding to support and participate in this
massive effort to rebuild the country and forge unity and
national reconciliation.

Finally, the CPLP also encourages the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau to continue to undertake the necessary
efforts to pursue a policy of good governance, to promote
respect for human rights and to combat impunity, drug
trafficking and organized crime, thereby sending positive
signals to attract major international and bilateral donors.

