Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank the United
States and C6te d'Ivoire for the initiative they have
taken in convening this meeting. I also thank Special
Representative Chambas and Commissioner Chergui
for their briefings.

I would also like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute to the memory of all the victims of the recent
violence in the Sahel, including the most recent violence
in the Niger.

I would like to begin by echoing the briefing of
Mr. Chambas and stress that we must avoid any confusion
between terrorism, extremism, intercommunal
violence, inter-ethnic conflict, religious conflict and
violence of an insurrectional nature. We must not fall
into the trap of interpreting the realities that shake
the area in a simplistic manner. In particular, we must
refrain from stigmatizing any one community.

As many others before me have said, a security
response alone will not suffice, even if it is obviously
indispensable. The context in the region is well
known - climate change, high population growth,
social inequalities, insurgency, governance that is
weak or even sometimes non-existent, challenges to
the legitimacy of the State, increased competition
for natural resources, illegal trafficking and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. These
elements are well described in the 2018 study on
conflicts between herders and farmers released by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
whose 20 concrete recommendations address the short,
medium and longer term. We know that the solutions
exist, and now we must implement them.

A feeling of injustice is a major factor in instability.
In West Africa, a very large proportion of what are
known as formal court judgments concern land
disputes. These judgments are regularly negatively
influenced by personal interests or even corruption.
The State is therefore not only perceived as biased
but, above all, it loses its legitimacy in the eyes of its
citizens. Accordingly, it is not insignificant to note that
among the flagship measures put in place in northern
Mali during the occupation of that country in 2012 by
jihadist insurgents, a particularly violent and abject
form ofjustice was applied. Nomadic communities also
experience the same sense of injustice, for example, in
the context of rising livestock theft.

For Belgium, the answer to this sentiment of injustice
and impunity lies in restoring and strengthening the
rule of law by stimulating, where useful, synergies
between formal and traditional justice so that they
complement each other. It is a concrete way to combat
the terrorist narrative, thereby tackling one of the deep
roots of the violence. The partnership for security and
stability in the Sahel initiative is consistent with idea of
strengthening the legitimacy of the State and therefore
deserves our support.

The lack of security for the civilian population
is another major vector of the spiralling violence in
the region. Militias are being formed to defend their
livelihoods, villages and families. This failure of the
State requires us - the international community - to
continue to strengthen our support for the security and
defence forces in West Africa. However, I would stress
that it is the primary responsibility of individual States
to ensure the safety of their citizens. In the medium
term, this involves winning - and sometimes winning
back - hearts and minds, as security forces need to
be accepted by the people. In order to achieve this end,
not only is it obvious that the security forces have to
be effective, but they also have to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law.

