Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish at the outset to welcome Mr. Roed-Larsen, the
Secretary-General's Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, to today's open meeting. I also
wish to thank him for his briefing on the latest
developments in the Middle East.

Since the last open briefing of the Security
Council, the Palestinian-Israeli situation has taken a
sharp turn for the worse. Both sides are again bogged
down in a vicious cycle of countering violence with
violence. That state of affairs has become a source of
great concern for the international community. A series
of suicide bombings has occurred in Israel. At the same
time, the Israeli army continues to carry out targeted
killings, resulting in many casualties and deaths of
innocent civilians and undermining the Middle East
peace process. Equally disturbing is the fact that Israel
made a decision in principle on 11 September to expel
President Arafat of the Palestinian Authority, thus
exacerbating further the already tense situation.

China attaches great importance to maintaining
peace and security in the Middle East region. We are
deeply worried about the current situation in Israel and
Palestine. We condemn the suicide bombings that have
resulted in casualties and the death of innocent
civilians. We also condemn the targeted operations of
the Israeli Government and oppose its decision in
principle to expel President Arafat. President Arafat is
the duly elected, legitimate leader of the Palestinian
people. The Israeli Cabinet's decision is of no help to
the Middle East peace process. We ask that the Israeli
side exercise caution, in order to prevent further
deterioration of the situation.

The history of the question of Palestine and Israel
fully demonstrates that force cannot bring real peace
and security and that dialogue is the only way to
resolve the issue. In the current situation, there is an
even greater need for the Palestinian and Israeli leaders
to demonstrate political courage and, in the long-term
interests of the people of both sides, to return
expeditiously to the right track and engage in political
negotiations. We strongly urge the Israeli and
Palestinian sides to renounce Violence and the policy of
targeted killings and, at the same time, to take effective
measures to implement in earnest the obligations set
forth in the roadmap. That is the only way the Middle
East peace process will move forward.

Under the current circumstances, it is equally
important that the international community make even
greater efforts to create conditions conducive to the
successful implementation of the road map. We
sincerely hope that, with the support and assistance of
the international community, the Middle East region,
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle of land
for peace, will achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace as soon as possible.

