Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (Spoke in Arabic): I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success in your deliberations.

I also extend my sincere condolences to the
Chinese delegation for the earthquake in China, which
has caused grave loss of life and property.

Since the most recent open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, held in January, the
stakeholders in the peace process have made intensive
efforts and the international community has striven to
establish conditions conducive to a resumption of
negotiations in order to end the stalemate in the region.
At that time, we looked forward to a detente and
improvement in the situation that would reactivate the
negotiations. However, in recent months, a number of
incidents and escalations have further exacerbated
tensions and the situation in the region.

Israel's intransigent position, intensification of
settlement activities and recent acts of aggression
towards the Palestinian people have undermined efforts
to relaunch negotiations, despite broad international
support and the efforts of the influential parties
concerned, especially the United States of America, to
resume indirect talks between the two parties that
would pave the way towards substantive consultations
to address the root causes of the conflict. These
endeavours have been supported by the Arab States in a
statement issued by the follow-up committee on the
Arab Peace Initiative, embodying a constructive
position that reflects the eagerness of Arab countries to
support any effort to implement the will of peace.

Unfortunately, the ongoing appeals of various
States and regional and international organizations
have not been met with a positive response from the
Israeli occupation forces, which have continued to act
provocatively and to disavow agreements and terms of
reference previously agreed with a view to attaining a
peaceful settlement of the situation. In that respect, I
should like to reiterate my country's full condemnation
of Israel's policy of maintaining the status quo. I recall
in that respect the statement of President Zine
El Abidine Ben Ali at the recent Arab summit in Sirte,
Libya, in which he said that

"Israel's ongoing acts of provocation,
maintenance of the status quo, and deliberate
intent to thwart any serious attempt to resume
negotiations can only deepen the despair and
frustration of the Arabs and of peace-loving
nations throughout the world, and will aggravate
the regional tensions and stalemate".

I also recall His Excellency's position on the
same occasion concerning Tunisia's categorical
rejection of Israel's schemes to alter the identity of
Jerusalem and to forcefully displace its population, in
particular in East Jerusalem, which it occupied in 1967
and seeks today to annex, in flagrant defiance of the
will of the international community.

In a statement issued by its Ministry for Foreign
Affairs on 11 March, Tunisia denounced the decision
of the Israeli Government to build 1,600 settlement
units in Jerusalem and the West Bank. This plan was
denounced by all parties concerned, including the
Secretary-General in his statement of 9 March, the
Quartet and a number of regional and international
organizations. Despite the clear, firm and unwavering
positions adopted in this respect, Israel's illegitimate
practices have continued unabated, calling for
immediate and decisive intervention on the part of the
international community to compel it to respect the
resolutions of international legitimacy and its
commitments under agreements and resolutions
previously concluded.

The maintenance of the deteriorating status quo
in the Gaza Strip, which is causing a large-scale
humanitarian, economic and social crisis; settlement
activities in Jerusalem and the West Bank; the
desecration of holy places; the use of force against
Palestinian civilians and deprival of their basic rights;
the forced displacement of numerous Palestinians in

the West Bank and Jerusalem; and Israel's
intransigence and the impossible conditions it has set,
hindering the resumption of the peace process, will
clearly freeze and kill any prospects for the peace we
all seek. This is all taking place in a region ill-equipped
to endure this tense and deteriorating situation, which
is a real cause of alarm and the source of tangible
problems and tension on the ground.

Tunisia reiterates once again its call on the
international partners, foremost among which is the
Quartet, to step up their efforts to force Israel to end its
acts of provocation and to engage seriously in the
peace efforts. On the basis of its adherence to the
principles of peace, justice, detente and the will to
implement peace, Tunisia calls on the international
community to mitigate the suffering of the brotherly
Palestinian people by improving their humanitarian,
economic and social circumstances. My country
reaffirms that a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
can be achieved only through dialogue and negotiation,
which require the parties to abstain from all acts of
provocation and violence and from any activity likely
to prejudge the outcome of negotiations on the main
substantive issues in the Arab-Israeli conflict,
especially the question of Jerusalem and the borders of
the future Palestinian State.

The Palestinian question has always been a top
priority for Tunisia, which has consistently stood with
the brotherly Palestinian people in its just endeavour to
recover its national rights and to establish its
independent State on its national soil. In that respect,
Tunisia reaffirms its support for all serious efforts to
find a just and lasting settlement to the Arab-Israeli
conflict that would restore the occupied Arab territories
on the basis of resolutions of international legitimacy
and the terms of reference of the peace process,
including the Arab Peace Initiative.

With respect to the two sisterly countries of
Lebanon and Syria, I reiterate my country's demand
that Israel fully withdraw from Syrian and Lebanese
territory, in line with the option of attaining a
comprehensive settlement of all aspects of the Middle
East crisis, and in a way that will provide peace and
security for all peoples of the region.

