Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing on several
areas of Africa: Ethiopia, Somalia and the Sudan.

At the moment, the humanitarian situations in
some parts of Africa have aroused widespread concern
in the international community. China is deeply
sympathetic and concerned about the problems faced
by the countries and peoples affected. We appeal to the
international community to make a joint effort to
provide and increase humanitarian assistance to help
those countries and peoples overcome their crises.

Africa faces many varied and complex
humanitarian difficulties. For example, in the Darfur
region of the Sudan the causes of the humanitarian
difficulties include the political crisis triggered by
traditional ethnic and tribal discord, the long-term
economic underdevelopment that has led to extreme
poverty, and conflicts resulting from rivalry over such
local resources as water and pastures. Turning to the
Horn of Africa, the main cause of the humanitarian
tragedy in Somalia is the large-scale armed conflict in
that country and the resulting large numbers of civilian
casualties and internally displaced persons.

Given the diverse causes of humanitarian crises,
the international community's response should be
differentiated and well targeted. First and foremost, a
peaceful environment is necessary to resolve such
crises. It is of the utmost urgency to curb armed
conflicts in the areas concerned, to achieve
breakthroughs in the respective political processes and
to eliminate the political causes for the deterioration of
the situations. Only in that way can we lay the
groundwork for easing the humanitarian crises.

Secondly, it is necessary to promote harmony and
unity in the countries and regions concerned, as well as
to achieve reconciliation and cooperation between
tribes and ethnic groups. The existence of humanitarian
crises is ultimately a question of development. The
international community should attach importance to

the socio-economic development of these African
regions, take a long-term view and formulate a well-
targeted development strategy at an early date. Only
when local livelihoods are improved can conflicts
gradually be eliminated and the harmonious
development of ethnic groups and tribes, as well as
harmony between man and nature, be ensured.

In sum, easing and ultimately resolving the
humanitarian crises in parts of Africa requires
identifying the remedies suited to the problems,
tackling symptoms and underlying causes, talking less
and doing more and avoiding the politicization of
humanitarian issues or reducing humanitarian issues to
a tool to exert political pressure.

China commends the United Nations and other
international humanitarian relief organizations for their
tireless efforts throughout the years. We appeal to all
those concerned to leverage their advantages, pool
their strengths and jointly resolve humanitarian crises
in Africa. Donors should faithfully fulfil their pledges
of assistance and make up shortfalls in funding
humanitarian assistance. In providing assistance, the
international community should also strengthen
coordination and cooperation with the Governments of
the countries concerned and do a good job in a worthy
cause in order to achieve a win-win situation.

I should also like to say that, compared with the
intense international attention on the issue of Darfur,
the humanitarian crisis in Somalia has received less
attention. China urges the international community to
attach the same importance to Somalia. We appeal to
additional international relief agencies to undertake
activities in Somalia.

The Government and the people of China have
consistently attached great importance to the
humanitarian situation in Africa. Along with the rest of
international community, we have increased our
assistance to a number of countries in the continent. In
recent years, my Government, within the limits of its
capabilities, has in various ways actively participated
in international humanitarian efforts for Africa.

With regard to Darfur, China not only attaches
importance to the political and peacekeeping process,
but has also provided Darfur and the African Union
Mission in the Sudan with considerable humanitarian
assistance and donations. Chinese enterprises have
drilled scores of wells in Darfur and have begun a
large-scale water supply project to ease the drinking

water problems of the local population. China's
departments have also donated teaching equipment in
order to support Darfur's education sector.

We have also played an active role in easing the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia.

China's efforts have garnered the praise and
recognition of the countries and peoples of Africa and
of the international community.

As in the past, China will actively participate in
the efforts of the international community to which I
have referred.

