Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. O'Brien has described a brutal situation
in my country and I am in full agreement with his
description. However, I differ with him in ascribing the
manifestations and reasons for that brutality. Today I
will therefore try to shed some light on the reality of
that brutality, which is shedding my people's blood,
destroying our infrastructure and bringing all kinds of
terrorists to my country. As a matter of fact, this brutal
situation has been contributed to by some States that sit
on the Security Council.

It is regrettable that, despite the fact that about five
years have passed since the crisis began in Syria, some
Governments still insist on using the humanitarian
situation as a justification in order to achieve their
narrow political ends, as if the suffering of the Syrian
people were a mere commodity to be used for trafficking
and political blackmail by this or that Government. The
extent of the hypocrisy and cheap political exploitation
of human suffering may perhaps be made clear through
the way in which those States treat the humanitarian

situation in Syria by comparison to their treatment of
such situations in other States.

The Security Council has adopted 15 resolutions
on the situation in Syria, four of which relate to the
humanitarian situation in the country. Every year it
has held dozens of formal and informal meetings, now
almost daily. However, in that time we have had no
resolutions dealing with the disastrous humanitarian
situations in Palestine, Libya, Yemen or Somalia,
despite the fact that in one Security Council meeting
Mr. O'Brien indicated that the humanitarian situation
in Yemen was far worse than that in Syria: more than
80 per cent of the Yemeni people are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.

As a Government, we cannot deny that there is a
humanitarian crisis in Syria. Millions of people are
displaced, refugees or disadvantaged. However, we
deplore the mistaken way that the crisis has been dealt
with so far. Looking at the situation from a partial
perspective, in isolation from the external, political,
military and economic interference in Syria, we do not
deny the depth ofthe humanitarian crisis, as the Council
well knows. However, we reject any suggestion that it
can be dealt with seriously without dealing with the
origins of and reasons for the crisis, which are rooted
in the spread of armed terrorist groups supported from
outside and their proliferation in our villages and cities
while using civilians as human shields.

The Under-Secretary-General called such externally
supported armed terrorist groups "non-State armed
groups". We have witnessed no humanitarian crisis
anywhere apart from the areas that those terrorist
groups have entered. Adding insult to injury is the
fact that some States have imposed unilateral coercive
measures on the Syrian people, thereby aggravating
our suffering. In that regard, it is incomprehensible
that some insist on denying the role of the Syrian
Government, attempting to portray it as primarily
responsible for the humanitarian crisis, as we heard
just now in Mr. O'Brien's statement. The height of the
paradoxical nature of this scenario is reached when
some accuse the Syrian Government of besieging some
areas with the aim of starving its own people.

However, they are unable to stop the continued
outflow of armed terrorists and the financial support
provided to them in the regions that they claim are
being besieged by our Government. Those terrorist
groups launch rocket attacks indiscriminately at
civilian areas and carry out suicide bombings, as
happened in Horns, Rif Dimashq and Hasakah. Other
areas, such as Kafraya and Fu'ah, and, for the past
three and a half years Dayr ez-Zor and Zahra, are
besieged from the outside by terrorist groups, while
others, such as in Madimayet, Madaya and Duma, are
besieged internally by terrorists. The terrorists prevent
the entry of humanitarian assistance or seize it for their
own use or to resell it to civilians. We have not seen
any images of so-called moderate terrorists starving.
Have representatives ever seen in the media an image
of a hungry terrorist in Syria? No, only the civilians
are hungry. Terrorists are not hungry because they
receive dollars and weapons. They come from all over
the world and do not go hungry. However, civilians
inevitably go hungry.

It has become clear that, in order to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria comprehensively and in
a sustainable manner, the Government must abandon
that misguided and failed approach. How can we put an
end to the humanitarian crisis in Syria while the Erdogan
regime remains silent about the military attacks against
the Syrian territories, uses Turkish territory, including
the crossings used by the United Nations to provide
humanitarian assistance, as a passageway for the transit
of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters, supplies
and weapons, and even uses humanitarian assistance
convoys to hide them? That regime imprisons customs
officers, judges andjournalists who expose it. How can
the humanitarian crisis be brought to an end when the
Erdogan regime brazenly uses the plight of refugees
to blackmail European States to gain political and
financial support?

Regrettably, some States on the Security Council
provide cover for the Erdogan regime. A few days
ago those States refused a balanced draft resolution
emphasizing the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria and rejecting external interference in its affairs
and in the outflow ofrefugees. Those are all universally
agreed principles that nobody can deny. However,
after the adoption of 15 Security Council resolutions
on Syria, some are trying complicate matters. It is as
if Syria were seeking another five years to prudently
analyse what is happening in its territory.

The Syrian Government is eager to extend all types
of humanitarian assistance to all Syrians affected by
the crisis wherever they are in its territory. That is our
duty and we are committed to it. Therefore, the Syrian
Government is open to coordinating and cooperating
with all States, United Nations entities, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and other international organizations working in
Syria to carry out that process, without propaganda
or attempts to demonize the Syrian Government. It is
clear that our Government is doing its best to deliver
assistance to its citizens wherever they are.
As a demonstration of this, the Syrian Government
informed the United Nations on 16 February that it had
agreed to allow the entry of humanitarian assistance
convoys to Dayr ez-Zor, Kafraya, Fu'ah, Madaya,
Madimayet, Zabadani and Kafr Batna. Those convoys
are a continuation of other convoys that have already
reached those regions and other areas and illustrate
my Government's intention to facilitate the delivery of
assistance to all people in need wherever they are in
Syria. That was also emphasized by the Minister for
Foreign affairs to Mr. De Mistura at his latest meeting
with him in Damascus. The delay in providing consent
and the so-called administrative bureaucracy mentioned
by Mr. O'Brien is an indication of our eagerness to
ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
We care about their safety and security and do not want
any harm to befall them, such as, for example, a suicide
bomber exploding himself in front of a humanitarian
convoy vehicle. Yet, we are now back in the Council
and are hearing a different description about what
is happening.

Resolving the Syrian crisis requires two
simultaneous approaches: first, combating terrorism
and, secondly, a political approach. Based on that,
the Syrian Government is committed to combating
terrorism and is pressing ahead with a political approach.
The delegation of Syria participated in the Geneva talks
and demonstrated its seriousness and commitment to
the talks, as witnessed by the Special Envoy himself.
The problem there was that some States imposed the
so-called Riyadh delegation as the sole negotiator with
the single goal undermining those talks by means of
direct instructions from those actors, in addition to
considerable procedural gaps, in particular when it
came to the representation of all elements of Syrian
society outside and inside Syria. Those factors led to
the failure of the most recent round of Geneva talks.

We are now demonstrating our seriousness and
willingness to curb the bloodshed, restore security
and stability and implement the will of our people to
preserve our territorial integrity. We agreed to the
cessation of hostilities agreement on the basis of the
continuation of political efforts to combat the terrorism
perpetrated by Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations, in accordance with the Russian
and American announcement.

We are cooperating with the Russian side to
determine the groups and areas that will be covered by
the cessation of hostilities agreement. In that regard,
we underscore the need to establish control over the
borders, in particular the Syrian/Turkish border, and
to put an end to the support provided by some States
to the terrorist organizations, which enables them to
build their capacities, in order to avoid jeopardizing
that agreement. We emphasize the right of our armed
forces to deter any violation by those groups against
our Syrian citizens or our armed forces.

The ball is in the court of the other parties who still
support terrorism, a military escalation and external
interference and undermine the achievement of a political
solution by imposing unacceptable preconditions.

