Mr. Lucas (Angola): Like previous speakers, the
Angolan delegation regrets with great sadness the
death of President Yasser Arafat, historic leader of the
Palestinian people. We express our condolences and
solidarity to the Palestinian people in this hour of pain
and grief, in the expectation that they will overcome
this difficult moment and that, with renewed strength
and resolve, they will continue to strive for the
attainment of the ultimate goal for which President
Arafat fought so relentlessly: the establishment of a
democratic, viable and peaceful Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel.

I would like to express gratitude and appreciation
to the High Representative, Lord Ashdown, for his
comprehensive report (S/2004/807, enclosure) on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
particularly honoured by the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Mladen Ivanie, Deputy Chairman of
the Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we are grateful
for his enlightening briefing. We also take this
opportunity to say a word in recognition of the efforts
undertaken by the High Representative and his Office
aimed at the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and of the efforts by the European Union and NATO to
ensure the emergence of a peaceful, viable and modern
State in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Above all, we
express our full appreciation to the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, who are, in the last analysis, the
protagonists in the great transformations taking place
in the country.

After many years in which the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has been on the agenda of the
Security Council and at the centre of the international
community's concerns, we are very pleased to take
stock of the main trends described in the report we are
considering today. The notable progress made by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities in fulfilling the
legislative requirements set out in the European
Commission's Feasibility Study, the significant steps
towards firmly establishing the rule of law in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the significant progress made on the
agenda of economic reform, the ongoing reform of the
public administration, the commencement of the
restructuring of Bosnia and Herzegovina's police
forces under a single structure, the forging ahead with
the adoption of the first defence reform, the
establishment of the Intelligence and Security
Agency - all of that constitutes an impressive record.

We understand the impatience expressed by the
High Representative at the fact that the reform process
is taking longer than anticipated. However, in our view,
what is most important is that the reforms and the
transformation of society in Bosnia and Herzegovina
proceed with determination, but also cautiously and in
a sustained fashion. And, as always, much remains to
be done.

We have also taken note of the progress achieved
in creating domestic capacities for indicting,
investigating and prosecuting those accused of war
crimes. The War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important instrument for
achieving the objectives set by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
In that regard, my delegation recalls the clear message
set out in Security Council resolution 1503 (2003)
expressing the need for the countries of the region to
improve and intensify their cooperation with the ICTY.

We share the concern expressed by Lord
Ashdown at the failure of Republika Srpska to
cooperate with the Tribunal. From that perspective, we
believe that the Council should send a firm and
unambiguous message to the leaders of Republika
Srpska regarding their obligation to extend full
cooperation to the Tribunal and to hand over all those
indicted for war crimes.

A new dynamic has emerged within Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political bodies to embrace ownership
of the reform process. We welcome the signing by all
political parties represented in Parliament of a common
platform pledging to take the measures necessary for
further Euro-Atlantic integration - a positive
development towards the complete integration of
Bosnia and Herzegovina into the international
community and towards the consolidation of a
democratic State. We fully support that development,
taking into account that the sustainability of democracy
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is inextricably linked to
reconciliation and cooperation with its neighbouring
countries.

A key challenge with enormous symbolic
significance is the establishment of a unique statute for
the city of Mostar, as that city demonstrates that it is
possible for the various peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to live together in harmony and peace.

Finally, we commend the international
community for its commitment, which has been a
decisive factor in the remarkable progress described in
the report before us. We strongly encourage the High
Representative to maintain the consistent policies
outlined in the report and to continue to work to
achieve the goals set out in the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Dayton Agreement
with regard to implementing the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

