Mr. Hamid (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate Lithuania on its presidency of the
Council this month and to thank you, Mr. President,
for the initiative taken to hold today's meeting on the
follow-up to the implementation of resolution 2178
(2014) on foreign terrorist fighters. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and
the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism, as well as the
Secretary General of INTERPOL, for their statements.

The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters in areas
of conflict, particularly Iraq and Syria, has worsened
during the past few years. We are deeply concerned by
the threat's expansion to various neighbours of Chad,
especially Libya. In that regard, the report (S/2015/358, annex) of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) is
edifying. The adoption in September of resolution 2178
(2014) on the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
embodies the international community's commitment
and determination to conduct a merciless campaign
against the problem.

In that regard, Chad continues to affirm, at both
the national and regional levels, its determination
to prevent and combat the scourge of terrorism in all
its forms. At the national level, we have taken steps
designed to secure our borders and strengthen controls
within the country, while emphasizing prevention by
raising awareness of the dangers that violent extremism
and terrorism present. Despite Chad's enormous size
and modest means, we have strengthened our controls
on the movement of people and goods in various
key areas in our territory. Our border controls and
systematic collection of all information relating to
religious extremism have spared our country the effects
of violent extremism and enabled us to suppress the few
incidents that have occurred.
Similarly, we have taken steps to break up various
associations that have shown extremist tendencies
and to suspend the dealings of religious groups of that
nature. Community and religious leaders are taking part
in awareness-raising campaigns promoting a culture
of peace, peaceful co-existence and inter-religious
dialogue. We have decreed 21 November to be a
day of peace celebrated annually by every religion
and confession. We are currently drafting other
administrative and legislative measures related to the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) in order to
further strengthen ways of preventing and combating
terrorism in general and the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters in particular.

In 2006, we established the Chadian-Sudanesejoint
forces, which have shown themselves to be effective
in monitoring and controlling Chad's more than 1,300
kilometre-long eastern border with the Sudan. We have
also taken measures designed to strengthen our defence
and security forces' presence on the Libyan border,
where the terrorist threat, including that posed by
foreign fighters, is growing. The fact is that the fall of
the Muammar Al-Qadhafi regime, in 2011, has created
a situation of unprecedented chaos and institutional
instability in Libya. The southern part of the country,
which borders on Chad, is a genuine no-man's-land, in
the grip of every brand of terrorist and criminal group,
enabling the conduct of all kinds of illegal activities,
including trafficking in arms, drugs and human beings,
and representing a serious threat to peace in the
subregion.

Beyond its national borders, Chad continues to
intervene militarily in several theatres, particularly
in Mali and some neighbouring countries, in order
to prevent various terrorist groups associated with
Al-Qaida or the Islamic State from establishing
themselves and creating sanctuaries in the Sahel. In
January 2013, Chad intervened in Mali with more than
2,000 men in an effort to halt the worrying advance of
several terrorist groups towards the southern part of the
country. That intervention facilitated the neutralization
of notorious terrorists on the sanctions list maintained
by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), and enabled the arrest of a large
number of terrorists, including foreign fighters.

Since January, Chad has been taking military action
against the Boko Haram terrorist group, especially in
the north-east ofNigeria. Chad's intervention alongside
forces from Cameroon, the Niger and Nigeria made
it possible to retake ll localities under Boko Haram
control, including Fotocol, Gamboru, Dikwa, Malam
Fatori and Damasak. It also helped to significantly
undermine the disruptive capabilities of those terrorist
groups, which unfortunately continue to wage
asymmetrical warfare.

On 20 May, in line with the Constitution, the
National Assembly of Chad voted to extend the
mandate of our defence and security forces deployed
in the three aforementioned countries. Despite Chad's
limited resources and significant financial challenges
caused by falling oil prices, Chad has decided to pursue
its commitment against Boko Haram so long as that
group continues to operate.

At the same time, while welcoming the efforts
of the Economic Community of Central African
States to mobilize 100 billion Central African
Francs - equivalent to $80 million - to assist Chad
and Cameroon, it should be noted that the costs of the
participation of the 5,000 Chadian soldiers with all the
necessary materiel and equipment, including air support,
far outstrip the financial capacity of the countries
concerned. The same applies to relevant action to be
taken in addition to military operations, particularly
as regards the rehabilitation of affected communities
and areas, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
quick impact projects and peacebuilding initiatives.
Consequently, while hailing the invaluable support
in terms of equipment and expertise provided by our
partners, particularly France and the United States
of America, we call on all bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue to provide material and financial
support to affected countries, including in the areas of
training, equipment and technology.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate my
country's commitment to continuing its counter-
terrorism efforts. If we are to vanquish terrorism, we
need determination and multifaceted action, with the
participation and support of all States and regional,
subregional and international bodies. I thank the
United Nations entities - in particular the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) - as well as States for their efforts and
support. It dare to believe that international solidarity
will allow us to overcome the difficulties facing many
States, in particular with regard to capacity in terms of
equipment and technology, with a View to combating
terrorism effectively.

