Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, and the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al Bayati,
for their statements.

Like previous speakers, we are happy to see that
the security environment has made it possible to carry
out a successful electoral process, marked by an
encouraging level of voter participation and by the
absence - or by only a very small number - of
incidents. In this respect, my delegation commends the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), in particular the work it undertook jointly
with the Independent High Electoral Commission to
ensure the participation of Iraqi citizens. This
undoubtedly constitutes the best of its recent
achievements. My delegation trusts in the success of
subsequent processes to broaden the legitimacy of the
Government, further promote reconciliation and
strengthen the legitimacy of institutions.

My delegation welcomes the improvement in the
economic situation. In this context, we believe that the
financial support that Iraq is receiving should be
provided in a framework that enables supervision of
internal investment and promotes private enterprise at
the local level. In this respect, we see the
implementation of the private sector development
programme under the recently signed United Nations
Iraq Assistance Strategy as a positive development.

Of course, we support the proposal contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 102) that
the support of the international community be
systematically focused on those areas in which
humanitarian and development indicators register the
greatest disadvantage. In our view, one area of priority
should be combating food insecurity in the southern
part of the country.

All efforts at reconciliation must be accompanied
by efforts to strengthen democratic institutions, of
which the system of the administration of justice is
without doubt a component of fundamental importance.
Capacity-building in the judicial sector is a priority
area that requires the support of an institutional
framework of cooperation with other institutions
competent in this area.

My delegation is concerned about the persistence
of human rights violations. Independent of their
statistical significance, we urge that the necessary
action be taken to reduce the number of so-called
honour crimes. We recognize the positive steps taken in
the field of human rights, in particular the
establishment of the Independent Commission, which
we hope will serve as an instrument for the protection
and promotion of such rights.

In conclusion, I congratulate Iraq on its progress
not only towards reconciliation and institutional
capacity-building, but also in normalizing its relations
with its neighbours; on the growing international
recognition of its efforts to normalize its national
situation; and on its efforts to improve the well-being
of the Iraqi people.

