Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
highly appreciate the participation of the Secretary-
General in this meeting, and thank him for all his
work with respect to the situation in Rakhine state in
Myanmar and for his message conveyed to the Security
Council in his letter of2 September, which he included
in his opening statement of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.3), as well as for
the information he provided today.

We are very pleased that the presidency of the
Security Council organized this briefing and that this
organ, which is the guarantor of international peace and
security, is addressing the situation in Rakhine state
and of the Rohingya people in an open meeting.

Respect for the rule of law, equality before the law,
the defence and promotion of human rights, dialogue
and resort to peaceful means to settle disputes are
some of the principles Uruguay actively defends and
promotes in all of the forums in which it participates.
Situations such as that which has arisen in Myanmar
cannot be ignored by the Security Council.

Uruguay is deeply concerned by the escalation of
tensions in Rakhine state. The serious crisis caused
by the wave of sectarian violence against the Muslim
Rohingya people is alarming. The exodus ofpeople who
have had to abandon their homes and flee desperately to
Bangladesh is appalling. The humanitarian and security
conditions and human rights situation of the Rohingya
people have been very seriously affected. Violations
of human rights related to the conflict in various parts
of Myanmar, especially in Rakhine state, are not new.
Many such violations have been documented in reports
of the Secretary-General.

The resurgence of violence in the country clearly
shows that significant, pressing challenges remain.
Democratic reform and genuine change in Myanmar
can take place only if human rights are respected and
a true national reconciliation takes place. It is therefore
important for the Myanmar Government to step up its
efforts to stop the violations and adopt all the measures

necessary to ensure accountability and put an end to
impunity.

All complaints of violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
must be investigated in an exhaustive, transparent and
independent manner. In that regard, Uruguay welcomes
the adoption of Human Rights Council resolution 34/22
in March, when massive persecutions had already
begun. The resolution mandates the establishment of a
fact-finding mission and requests that the Government
of Myanmar provide all guarantees necessary to
the mission's ability to successfully conduct its
activities. It also urges the authorities to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan. The only way to overcome the crisis is by
approaching it from a human-rights perspective.

While we acknowledge that the situation in
Rakhine state is a complex intercommunal issue with
deep historical roots, as we have said on a number of
official statements recently, we are also aware of the
military activities of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army against the Myanmar security forces, which we
naturally condemn. But the responsibility for protecting
civilians always falls primarily on States. Nothing
exempts the Government of Myanmar from shouldering
its responsibility to provide the necessary security and
assistance to the Rohingya people and to allow the
United Nations and partners to offer humanitarian aid.

The authorities of Myanmar must put an end
to the military operations and allow unrestricted
humanitarian access. They must also pay due attention
to the Rohingya people, whose status has remained
unresolved for far too long. The question arises as to
whether a Government can feel proud of being home
to the largest population of stateless people in the
world. Protection of the civil population must always
be a priority, and the applicable norms of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
must be respected.
Uruguay is committed to preventing atrocious
crimes and urgently calls for the Government of
Myanmar to stop the violence, suspend military
operations, allow the return of those who have had
to flee, and facilitate safe and unfettered access to
humanitarian aid. Two hypotheses arise ftrom this
tragic crisis if we focus, as we should, on prevention.

First, the excessive and disproportionate repression
of the Rohingya minority under the pretext of
combating a terrorist group will have the least-desired
effect. It will sow the seeds of despair, hatred and
extremism. Secondly, and perhaps worse, it will run the
risk of allowing other global terrorist groups, such as
Da'esh or Al-Qaida, to infiltrate Myanmar territory and
start operating there, destabilizing the country and in
the region.

Uruguay congratulates and thanks Bangladesh for
its generosity of recent weeks by providing hundreds
of thousands of refugees - an estimated 70 per cent
of whom are children - with security, food and
shelter. We also thank the agencies and institutions
that are working intensively to provide humanitarian
assistance, and call on the international community
and neighbouring countries to provide the support and
resources necessary to address this sensitive situation.

I conclude with a remark made several years ago by
Nobel Peace laureate Archbishop Desmond Tutu:

"A country that is not at peace with itself, that
fails to acknowledge and protect the dignity and
worth of all its people, is not a free country."

Mr. Zambrana (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his briefing today on Rakhine
state of Myanmar, and we applaud the measures he has
taken personally to date.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia vigorously
condemns the violence impacting Rakhine state,
especially the Rohingya Muslim ethnic group. Based on
information provided by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and as noted by the Secretary-
General, between 25 August and 20 September the
events led to the escalation of violence caused some
half a million people to cross the border and seek
refuge in Bangladesh, with hundreds of thousands more
internally displaced.

We condemn all actions that aggravate
intercommunitary tension and incite violence, belicose
rhetoric, racial and religious hatred and any act of
sexual abuse or exploitation. All such acts must be duly
investigated and those responsible brought to justice
and prosecuted by the corresponding courts.

Having condemned the acts of violence,
discrimination and suffering that victimize not just the
Rohingya people but also other ethnic minority groups
such as the Daing-net, the Mro, the Thet, the Mramagyi
and Hindus, Bolivia once again reaffirms that any
conflict within a State must be resolved first and
foremost within its borders, respecting the principles
of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
If it cannot be so resolved, it should be supported
by regional and subregional organizations, while
upholding the principles of the Charter of the United

Nations, international humanitarian law, international
law and human rights law.

We believe that it is also important to respect the
principles of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of States and the non-use or threat of use of force to
settle conflicts, in accordance with the principle of
a peaceful settlement of conflicts. In this regard, we
believe that it is important to encourage and support
Myanmar in its quest for a peaceful solution to this
humanitarian situation through efforts on a number of
levels that include dialogue, consultations, mediation,
good offices, negotiations and crisis administration.

In this context, we highlight the welcome and
ready cooperation extended to refugees from Rakhine
state by the Government and the people of Bangladesh.
We encourage them to continue working with the
various United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross to lessen the humanitarian
impact on the region.

We call on the Government of Myanmar to engage in
a fruitful dialogue within and outside ofits borders. The
participation of its neighbours, regional organizations
and the international community will allow it to reach
agreements to stabilize the Rakhine state and to honour
its obligation to protect all its civilians, regardless of
their ethnicity or religious affiliation. In the context of
diplomacy, and with a view to the peace and stability of
the region, we call on them to work to draft an agreement
that contains a concrete plan for the repatriation and
safe, voluntary and dignified return of the refugees in
Bangladesh to Rakhine state.

We take note of the estabalishment in Myanmar
of the ministerial Implementation Committee on the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, headed by Kofi Annan, which provide a
clear road map for a peaceful solution to this situation,
and which we encourage them to fulfil. Similarly,
Bolivia encourages the Government of Myanmar to
allow humanitarian access so that assistance can be
provided to the victims of these tragic events.

In this context, we welcome the good offices of
the Secretary-General and call on the Government of
Myanmar to take his recommendations into account,
especially with regard to the urgent suspension of all
military action, an end to the violence, respect for the
rule of law, and the recognition of the right to return
of all those who had to abandon the country. This will
guarantee the provision of humanitarian assistance by
the United Nations, non-governmental organizations
and others, and the development of an effective plan
of action to address the root causes of the crisis, which
include providing nationality to the Muslims of Rakhine
state or, at least for now, a legal status that would
enable them to lead normal lives, including freedom
of movement and access to job markets, education and
health-care services.

We believe that it is inconceivable today to
deny a person the right to nationality, which carries
prerogatives that allow all human beings to fully enjoy
the benefits of a State.

