Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): We thank the Italian
presidency for convening this open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General and to the other briefers for their statements.

As highlighted during the deliberations, trafficking
in persons is both a cause and a consequence of conflict
and instability. In that regard, we note with concern the
nexus between trafficking in persons, terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The recruitment and
use of children for combat, the growing link between
human trafficking and the financing of terrorism also
cause deep concern. The large influx of refugees and
migrants further exacerbates the situation and exposes
civilians, especially women and children, to a greater
risk of being subjected to human trafficking. We also
express our concern that civilian populations are often
viewed by armed groups as objects to be trafficked.

Resolution 2388 (2017), adopted today, underscores
that certain acts or offences associated with trafficking
in persons in the context ofarmed conflict may constitute
war crimes. We fully agree with the provision in the
resolution that human trafficking, especially women
and girls, in the context of armed conflict, should not
be associated with any religion or civilization.

Azerbaijan strongly condemns all acts of trafficking in
persons, including in conflict situations. First and foremost,
every effort should be made to identify and to eliminate the
root causes and drivers that create a fertile ground for human
trafficking, to hold perpetrators accountable and to provide
the necessary legal, psychological, material and other
assistance to victims. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/939) clearly indicates that human trafficking
in conflict situations is facilitated by a weakness or
collapse of the rule of law. Therefore, strengthening
State authority and the rule of law is crucial to
effectively fighting, disrupting and dismantling the
networks involved in carrying out this evil.

Azerbaijan welcomes the increased attention to
combating trafficking in persons at the global level.
The specific reference to ending modern slavery and
human trafficking in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants and the political declaration on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/1), as well as the three open
debates ofthe Security Council on this theme in the past
year, testify to the growing international recognition of
the threat that human trafficking represents. We believe
that the issue will also be adequately addressed in the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration.

In his report, the Secretary-General encourages
Member States to take a number of steps to combat
the scourge of human trafficking that range from
acceding to relevant international instruments to
strengthening international cooperation to enhancing
cross-governmental coordination. Azerbaijan ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children in 2003. In the intervening 14 years, we have
adopted three national action plans and inserted four
articles that define liability for human trafficking into
our criminal code. A special policy unit has been set
up through the Ministry of Internal Affairs. A national
coordinating mechanism was established to coordinate
activities of line ministries, civil-society organizations
and foreign partners involved in combating human
trafficking. The exchange of information on combating
human trafficking is being carried out through
90 bilateral and multilateral agreements. Memorandums
and protocols have been signed with 40 countries.

Azerbaijan also continues with its consistent efforts
to raise awareness of the plight of thousands of women
and children taken hostage around the globe through
its co-sponsoring of the biennial draft resolution of the
Commission on the Status of Women on the release
of women and children who have been taken hostage
in armed conflict, including those who have been
subsequently imprisoned.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
Government's unwavering determination to combat
trafficking in persons and other similar practices.

