Mr. Sapin (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the United States presidency for having taken
the initiative of convening this meeting, which gives
Ministers of Finance the honour of taking part in a
meeting of the Security Council.

One month ago, France was struck by terrorist
attacks of an unprecedented scale on French soil. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the entire
world that reached out to us with words and gestures
of solidarity that touched us deeply. But France
was not the only country to be attacked. No country
has escaped, no continent has been spared, and with
each passing month the list of barbaric attacks grows
inexorably longer: Lebanon, Turkey, Tunisia, Egypt and
now, most recently, the United States. Since June 2014,
thousands of men and women around the world have
lost their lives in acts of terrorism perpetrated by Daesh
or groups that have sworn allegiance to Daesh. We are
therefore all - and we all know this - affected. In the
face of such blind savagery, we each have the duty to
act.

At such moments, we must each set aside our
national differences and join forces to advance our
common will. That common will must be expressed
here, in the Security Council of the United Nations,
because it is here that the story of all major crises has
been written, and the crisis we face today is of such
scope. This message was one that I shared last week in
Brussels with my European colleagues, at the heart of
this other collective and common endeavour that is the
European Union. The terrorist threat is a threat not only
to the whole world but also, more specifically, to the
European project, given its consequences. Europeans
must therefore be prepared to address it, and they have
decided to do so.

Tomorrow our colleagues from the ministries for
foreign affairs will meet here to seek a solution to the
Syrian crisis. They are more used to meeting in this
Chamber than we are, but the same motivation inspires
us and the same desire guides us: to ensure our common
security and our common responsibility. Our colleagues
contribute by finding solutions to armed conflicts, and
we contribute by drying up the sources of financing for
terrorism and thereby overcoming the terrorists whose
acts they fuel.

The singularity and power of this terrorist group
stems from the fact that it has collected vast spoils
of war from various sources. Smuggling, extortion,
trafficking - Daesh will do anything to finance itself.
We who are gathered here today - most of us are
ministers of finance - have the task of understanding
these financial flows and cutting them off. Everything
possible must be done to financially choke off terrorism.

Resolution 2253 (2015), which we have just
adopted, offers concrete responses. It recognizes Daesh
as the entity that must be combated. It identifies the
specific financing methods used by this terrorist group:
the trade in oil; trafficking in antiquities and artwork;
kidnapping for ransom; extortion; and trafficking in
human beings. The resolution provides us with the
legal means to stop them, through freezing the assets
of individuals or entities linked to such financing
throughout the world.

Now that the resolution has been adopted, we must
implement it as rapidly as possible. It will have no
impact unless it leads to new listings by the Security
Council. There is a list ofindividuals and entities subject
to sanctions because of their links with Al-Qaida. Now
we are targeting both Al-Qaida and Daesh, so the list
must grow. France attaches particular importance to the
effective and speedy implementation of the resolution.

Over and above Daesh, the other lesson to be drawn
from the recent attacks is that terrorists continuously
find new ways to finance themselves, including
through small amounts. Our responsibility is to ensure
that none of these goes unnoticed. In this respect, I see
three challenges facing ministers of finance.

First, we need to bolster the effectiveness of our
financial intelligence-gathering. We must acquire the
capabilities necessary to track suspect financial flows.
We must better integrate our financial intelligence
units with our intelligence and investigation services.
There is also a need to considerably improve the
exchange of information between the financial
information intelligence units of our various countries.
It is crucial that information be better shared in a more
comprehensive and more rapid manner. Sometimes all
that is needed is a few hours' warning to prevent an
attack.

There is a second challenge: that of anonymity.
Those who wish to transfer funds discreetly can resort
to archaic traditional methods such as cash, gold and
precious metals. These forms of payment need to be
better controlled, of course, but today those who want to
transfer funds discreetly can also do so using innovative,
very modern methods. Electronic and virtual currencies
pose new risks, and I speak from recent and very painful
experience. The attacks on 13 November in Paris were,
to a large extent, financed through prepaid cards, which
enabled anonymous transfers and payments to take
place between Belgium and France. We must therefore
tackle these shortcomings. It is certainly not a matter of
prohibiting such innovative forms of payment, but we
have to do away with their anonymous aspect.

Finally, because the financing of terrorism is
multifaceted and shape-shifting, all of society must
mobilize. Private actors must be just as vigilant as our
services. In France, we have since January called for
more vigilance to be shown by financial establishments,
to raise their awareness of the risk of financing terrorist
groups linked to Daesh. We have compiled a specific
manual for organizations, and I have written to art-
world professionals to point out to them the risks of
Daesh being financed by trafficking in archaeological
artefacts or artwork. I am gratified that the concept of
cause for vigilance has been included in the resolution.
We need to generalize this.

This programme of work is a very dense one, and
a great deal of effort lies before us. I wish to take the
opportunity afforded us by this meeting to thank the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which is at the
very heart of the mechanism to combat the financing
of terrorism. It has a clear vision of the shortcomings
of its members in terms of the criminalization of the
financing ofterrorism and of asset freezes. At the Group
of 20 Summit held in Antalya, following the attacks of
13 November, Heads of state and Government entrusted
a very clear mandate to us: the time for procrastination
is over, and we must exert pressure on these countries
to ensure that their mechanisms are made effective.
I should like to thank the President of the FATF for
having held in Paris this weekend a special meeting on
the financing of terrorism.

I hope that next February, during the next Group
of 20 finance meeting, under the Chinese presidency,
we will be able to take new, effective and strong
measures. An effective FATF is a guarantee of the
effective implementation of United Nations decisions.
Similarly, it is very important that the work of the FATF
nourish the process of reflection taking place in this
very building. Too often, our institutions function in
compartmentalized silos: diplomats speak to diplomats
and financiers speak to financiers. Today is opportunity
to do away with such compartmentalization.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to Jack Lew
for taking the initiative of organizing this very first
meeting of Security Council ministers of finance. I
hope that this will serve as a fruitful precedent, because
joint action is the key to effectiveness.
