Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank to the Secretary-General for his
report and his Special Representative, Mr. Klein, for
his eloquent and positive briefing.

As the Secretary-General has indicated in his
report, stable peace cannot exist without appropriate
mechanisms to promote the rule of law. Hence, the
progress in the police and judicial areas described in
the report is particularly important.

With respect to the police, we would stress, inter
alia, the following progress: the establishment of the
multi-ethnic police core in Brcko; the integration into
the Federation of the specialized police units of
Bosniacs and Croats; training in combating organized
crime, corruption and prostitution; and the institution
of a single chain of command by establishing a police
commissioner post in cantonal police services,
particularly in the canton of Sarajevo and to the
Federation Ministry of the Interior. I would also
highlight the decision taken by the Cantonal Assembly
of canton 7 to endorse an UNMIBH-brokered
agreement that enables Bosniacs to work with their
Croat counterparts in west Mostar for the first time
since the war.

Nevertheless, much remains to be done,
particularly in order to achieve adequate representation
of minorities in local police forces, both in the
Republika Srpska and in the Federation.

With respect to the judiciary, I wish to convey our
appreciation for all the efforts made by the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) to implement the judicial system
assessment programme. Since the programme will be
coming to an end in December 2000 and the judicial
system throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
inadequate, we must ensure that the assessment of the
judicial system by the Mission is transferred smoothly
to some other organization that will be equally efficient
and make use of the experience acquired and build on
the progress achieved by UNMIBH.

We feel that one achievement in particular
deserves to be noted: the recent establishment of the
State Border Service, which had long been pending.

We still need to give a lot of attention to the
return of refugees and displaced persons, particularly
minorities, to their homes. If adequate security is not
provided, it will be difficult to accelerate the process of
return.

As the report indicates, UNMIBH has begun the
preparation of a strategic and operational framework
for the fulfilment of its core mandate by December
2002. Since the Mission will not be staying in Bosnia
and Herzegovina indefinitely, it is essential that the
people and their leaders do their utmost to create and
consolidate impartial and democratic institutions
appropriate to a modern State.

