Mr. Ryan (Ireland): May I extend warmest
congratulations to you, Sir, on Tunisia's assumption of
the presidency ofthe Council.

In welcoming President Joseph Kabila to the
Council today, may I also extend our condolences to
him and to his family on the death of the late President
Laurent Kabila.
We commend the initiative of President Kabila to
engage with the international community at this
potential turning point. We have studied carefully and
welcomed his inaugural speech to the nation and we
have heard his comprehensive address to the Council
today. We welcome his clear commitment to bringing a
strong impulse to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement so
that it may lead not only to an effective ceasefire, but
also to a restoration of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region
generally.

The meetings of President Kabila with Presidents
Mbeki and Chirac, Secretary of State Powell, the
United Nations Secretary-General and now the Security
Council are evidence of his stated intention to
contribute to the relaunching of the Lusaka Agreement
and of his commitment to helping the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in carrying out its tasks.
Yesterday's meeting with President Kagame was of
particular importance and a most encouraging
indication of the intention of both parties to respect the
Agreement.

Out of the recent tragedy has come, we believe, a
widely perceived opportunity to reach a peaceful
settlement to this conflict. We have urged the parties to
the conflict to engage in direct contact together in
this regard. We reiterate that call today and we urge
each party to take steps to engender the confidence of
the other parties.

It is our absolute conviction that the Lusaka
Agreement provides the consensual basis for peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the wider
region. We urge all the parties to the conflict, and in
particular the new authorities in Kinshasa, to seize this
opportunity in a sustained process and to get together
behind the Lusaka Agreement and to commit
themselves to its full implementation in letter and in
spirit.

We welcome President Kabila's emphasis on this
essential point in his remarks earlier. The Lusaka
Agreement offers, by far, the best way forward. We
strongly believe that no party to the Agreement should
attempt to manipulate it in its own interest, but should
honour strictly its obligations under it. All parties must
move towards the national dialogue and reconciliation,
as foreseen in the Lusaka Agreement, in order to form
a freely elected, democratic Government that is
representative of all the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We welcome President Kabila's
stated commitment to solving political problems within
the framework ofthe inter-Congolese dialogue.

We urge the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to make early contact with the
facilitator with a view to making early progress on this
issue. In this regard, we have noted Foreign Minister
Okitundo's call for a co-Facilitator in the inter-
Congolese dialogue as further evidence of the
willingness to fully re-engage with the process. A
permanent cessation of hostilities, the full withdrawal
of foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the disarmament and demobilization of armed
groups and the securing of international borders in
accordance with the Lusaka Agreement and subsequent
disengagement plans is an absolute priority now to be
worked towards together by all involved parties.

We welcome the commitment ofthe authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to collaborate
closely with MONUC, as clearly stated by President
Kabila in his inaugural statement and again here today,
so as to enable it to discharge its mandate efficiently.
We call on all the parties to move immediately to bring
about the conditions in which the United Nations can
assist and in which MONUC can effectively operate.
We look forward to the next report of the Secretary-
General, in which he will address the future shape of
the United Nations presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this regard, we expect also
that the United Nations operation will enjoy the full
cooperation of all the parties involved. President
Kabila has expressed today his own commitment in this
regard.

The European Union has said, and we fully share
the conviction, that lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be possible only through a
negotiated peace settlement that is fair to all parties,
that respects the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
that upholds democratic principles and human rights
and that takes account of the security interests of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all other
countries ofthe region.

President Kabila has committed to bringing about
the normalization of democratic life, strengthening of
the rule of law, consolidation of democracy and good
governance and a guarantee of human rights and
justice. We welcome these clear commitments, and we
look forward to evidence of early progress. We also
look forward to building on this meeting today and on
this clear opportunity for peace at the meeting of the
Political Committee later this month. We see the
presence of President Kabila today as a signal of his
commitment to this process, and we welcome this
pragmatism.

We hope that President Kabila, having listened to
the views of Council members, will return to Kinshasa
with a clear understanding of the shared expectations
of the international community and with a strengthened
purpose to re-engage with the Lusaka process and to
comply fully with the resolutions of this Council. The
international community has repeatedly reaffirmed its
commitment to help the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Once again, on our part, we
reiterate our willingness to do so. Ireland and the Irish
people have shown solidarity with the people of the
Congo since long before that country won its
independence. As an active participant in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, Ireland shared the
pain that accompanied Congo's birth as a nation.
Ireland will now spare no effort within this Council in
support of the process that will bring to the Congolese
people the peace, development and tranquillity that
they surely deserve and that their leaders can bring
about.

