Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Cheikh Ahmed, Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien and World Food Programme Regional
Director Hadi for their briefings. I pay special thanks
to Mr. Hadi for bearing witness on behalf of Yemenis
whose voices, as we all know, are too rarely heard in
this conflict.

Recently, a father of four children in Sana'a
reportedly asked his daughters to post their feelings
about this war on Facebook. Fifteen-year-old Kholud
wrote:

"We, the children of Yemen, want to achieve our
hopes: to study and play and achieve our goals."

That is something one would expect almost any child
of Kholud's age to want. But she went on to say that in
this conflict:

"We sleep afraid, we wake up afraid and leave our
homes afraid."

Kholud's younger sister, 14-year-old Asma, wrote:

"We are afraid of catastrophe, as it is painful when a
person kills others; mothers, fathers and children."

And their youngest sister, 12-year-old Haneen, reported:

"Every day, the noises get louder and louder next
to us."

Although these voices are not with us enough,
whether here in the Council or in our regional or
international media, when we do hear from people on
the ground, people like Kholud, Asma and Haneen,
they are pretty consistent. They demand, or they plead,
for an end to their suffering. We, as members of the
Security Council, need to make the same demand, and
we need to be united in doing so. The parties must
stop escalating their attacks. They must, at long last,
commit to peace, and we need immediate progress
on three fronts: an immediate cessation of hostilities,
a humanitarian surge - the likes of which we have
not seen in Yemen for the life of the conflict - and a
prompt return to political talks.

First, the United States calls on the parties to
recommit immediately to the cessation of hostilities,
which means halting all military actions on the ground,
in the air and at sea. That includes an end to shelling
and an end to air strikes. A sustained cessation of
hostilities is necessary to give the Special Envoy the
space he needs to engage the parties on the terms of a
political solution to the conflict.

There is very little good news in Yemen, but one
small piece of good news is that we have seen that the
parties can reduce the violence in Yemen when they
show the will to do so. For all of the concerns that all
of us have about command and control, from April to
August this year, the cessation of hostilities led to a
significant decrease in air strikes and violence, and
therefore in suffering on the ground. I do not think
we can overstate the success; the cessation was far
from perfect, but it provided some respite for Yemen's
civilians and it provided a backdrop to help encourage
talks to continue. We need to get back to where we were
with the cessation, and it needs to be improved.

But since the Kuwait talks ended nearly three
months ago, the parties have intensified their attacks.
Last Friday, forces loyal to the Houthi and former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh reportedly launched a
missile from Yemen towards Mecca and Jeddah, one
among several recent missile launches. The United
States condemns those missile launches in the strongest
terms. Those attacks on Saudi territory are an obvious
attempt to derail the political process, and they must
cease. As we have emphasized, every country has a
right to defend itself, and the United States remains
fully committed to the security of Saudi Arabia.

It is also incumbent upon the Saudi-led coalition
and the forces of the Yemeni Government to refrain
from taking steps to escalate the violence and to
commit to the cessation of hostilities. After 19 months
of fighting, it should be clear that there is absolutely no
military solution to the conflict. Those who believe that
if one increases military pressure, it will strengthen
one's hand in political negotiations, has 19 months of
evidence not shown that it is not the case. Increasing
military pressure and initiating new operations, at
this point, is only going to prolong the unnecessary
suffering. The longer the conflict continues, the more
that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula will use this
vacuum to expand its presence and launch new attacks.

Air strikes that hit schools, hospitals and other
civilian objects have to stop. In many cases, these
strikes have damaged key infrastructure that is essential
to delivering humanitarian aid in Yemen. The United
States strongly condemns the air strike on mourners at
a reception hall in Sana'a earlier this month. The strike
left 140 mourners dead and more than 600 injured.
The coalition has accepted responsibility, and we look
forward to further reporting on their investigation of
the attack, including on concrete measures taken to
establish accountability, compensate victims and make
certain that such strikes are not repeated. The United
States will continue to underscore to the coalition, the
need to take all feasible measures to reduce civilian
casualties and target precisely, including verifying
targets against a no-strike list.

We also strongly condemn Houthi-Saleh forces
for all the cross-border attacks into Saudi Arabia and
the shelling of populated areas, especially in Taiz. On
4 October, the United Nations reported that artillery
fire in the centre of Taiz killed at least 10 civilians,
including 6 children, and injured 17 others. The civilian
death toll underscores again that the parties need to
commit to the cessation of hostilities.

That brings me to my second point, which is the
need for a humanitarian surge of a different order.
The statistics that Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
and Mr. Hadi have presented show that the problem
is getting worse. Let us take only one as an example.
The number of 370,000 children suffering from severe
acute malnutrition has increased from that of 320,000
reported last year. Severe acute malnutrition means
one thing - unless these kids get an immediate
course of medical treatment, they will likely die. Let
us consider that for a moment. Hundreds of thousands
of children - infants and babies in many cases - are
on the brink of dying not because of bombs or shells,
but just because they cannot get a simple course of
nutritional supplements. Millions more are at risk.

Let us therefore focus on how we can respond. All
Member States should demand here at the United Nations
and in our bilateral relationships and conversations that
the parties allow complete and unfettered humanitarian
access. That means that authorities on the ground need
to approve the United Nations plans to distribute aid
and let convoys through checkpoints. It also means that
roads, bridges and ports that are vital for delivering
aid need to be protected from the fighting. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM) has helped facilitate imports of basic food
and medicine into Yemen, and, as Mr. O'Brien has
noted, it deserves all of our continued support and full
cooperation from the parties.

But there are some additional steps that should be
taken. The parties need to reopen the airport in Sana'a
to civilian flights once again, allowing critically injured
Yemenis to leave and Yemenis, who are stranded
abroad and wish to return, to get back to their homes.
When fuel and medicine do enter Yemen, the parties
need to allow such goods to reach hospitals in all parts
of the country. The cranes at Al-Hudaydah port need to
be repaired and the parties should facilitate the United
Nations plans to repair them so as to restore capacity at
what had long been a vital port and source of influx of
many goods.

At the same time, one has to stress that no amount of
aid can make up for the void left by Yemen's collapsed
economy. That is why we are concerned about the
consequences of the Yemeni Government's decision to
move the central bank. We call on the Government to
continue paying salaries nationwide. Those salaries are
one of the few sources of income left for many Yemeni
families. I was struck by Mr. Hadi's account that often
just a small amount of money is what is needed for a
mother to be able move from one part of the country
to a place where a nutritional supplement is available.
When salaries are taken away, a critical sources of
income is taken away, and it becomes more likely that
infants and children will die of starvation.

My third and final point is on the urgent need for
a political solution. The Special Envoy has presented
both parties with a credible and balanced road map for
ending the conflict together with the security plan for
Sana'a. The road map addresses the concerns of the
Yemeni Government about sequenced withdrawals from
the key cities of Sana'a, Taiz and Al-Hudaydah, and it
addresses the concerns of the Houthi and the General
People's Congress about the transition of executive
authority. The road map is a basis for a negotiation. It
is not a take-it-or-leave-it proposition. Now is not the
time for any of the parties to hedge, stall or add new
conditions. The parties should engage with the Special
Envoy immediately to hammer out the details of a final
agreement. Of course, moving forward with this road
map will require the parties in Yemen to compromise,
which is not a strong suit. It is long past time for them
to do so. The people of Yemen cannot afford for the
parties to continue acting on the illusion that they will
achieve a total victory. It will not happen.

Let me conclude. Earlier, I mentioned the problem
of severe acute malnutrition, joining many voices
around this table. A recent BBC documentary entitled

Starving Yemen profiled one such case, that of a toddler
named Abdul Rachman who was born at the start of
the conflict. Abdul Rachman is an 18-month-old infant
now but weighs as much as a six-month-old baby. He is
also lactose intolerant, requiring a baby formula that
used to be widely available before the conflict, but now
his family cannot find the specific formula anywhere.
Looking at Abdul Rachman, his mother finally breaks
down in the documentary. She says, "I am losing my
son, and there is nothing that I can do about it. I have
seen children like him on television. They die".

At the eleventh hour, an especially determined
doctor just barely managed to find a three-month
supply of formula to keep Abdul Rachman alive. But
let us consider again that there are more than 370,000
kids suffering severe acute malnutrition like Abdul
Rachman, with just as many anguished mothers at their
bedsides who have seen kids like these on television
but never imagined that they would be holding one like
them. The Special Envoy is offering a way out of the
fighting. The plight of children like Abdul Rachman
should compel the parties to negotiate and cease
hostilities immediately. And we, as members of the
Council, should unite in demanding it.

