Mr. Oshima (Japan): Japan voted in favour of the
resolution on the Sudan. The resolution will expand the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
into Darfur to support the early and effective
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA)
and to provide for a transition from the African
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to a United Nations
operation.

Given the worsening security situation on the
ground and the resulting enormous humanitarian
disasters and atrocities affecting millions of people -
particularly women and children - in Darfur and in
neighbouring countries, as well as their implications
for peace and security in the entire subregion, we
believe that the time is long overdue for the
international community to take resolute action on the
matter in order to address the situation quickly and
effectively through adequate support for AMIS through
the United Nations and a transition to a United Nations
operation.

Having voted for the resolution, my delegation
would like to make a couple of points.

First, we regret that members did not have an
opportunity to consider the financial aspects of the
elements that make up the resolution fully and in a
timely manner prior to its adoption, given that a huge
financial contribution is demanded of Member States.
That is disappointing and needs to be improved in the
future.

Another point we wish to make pertains to the
fact that, for the resolution to be implemented, it is
extremely important that the consent and cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan be assured. To that
end, we would like to underline once again the critical
importance of continuing efforts to engage in dialogue
and consultations with the Sudanese authorities. The
position of the Government of the Sudan,
unfortunately, does not appear to be quite there yet,
although it does seem that the Government has
indicated its intention to move in the direction of
implementing the DPA. The plan for the restoration of
stability and the protection of civilians in Darfur
presented by the Government to the Security Council
is, in our view, a welcome start, and it should be
further explored and clarified in the ensuing dialogue.

Japan wishes to appeal to the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate with the United Nations in bringing
about peace and stability on the basis of the resolution.
We also appeal to the non-signatory parties to the
conflict to sign the DPA and to cooperate with the
international community to put an end to the conflict
and bring calm and prosperity to the people in the
region. It is essential that, in striving to persuade the
Sudanese Government to permit the transition to go

ahead, the approach must be firm but non-
confrontational. It must seek mutual understanding.
For those reasons, we strongly hope that the proposed
meeting between the Security Council and high-level
officials of the Government of the Sudan will
materialize as soon as possible, and produce
constructive results.

In conclusion, we wish to commend once again
the efforts of AMIS and of all the humanitarian
organizations - United Nations and non-United
Nations - and their staff, who have been working
courageously under very difficult conditions to save
people's lives and alleviate their suffering.

