Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame for his very informative briefing on
the recent developments in Libya. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Olof Skoog for his first observations
from his recent visit to Libya.

Poland reiterates its full support for the United
Nations action plan for Libya and encourages all
Libyans to work together in a spirit of compromise in
the inclusive political process under the leadership of
the Special Representative. In that regard, we welcome
the Presidency Council's establishment of the Women's
Empowerment and Support Unit and the appointment
of Chairperson Laila Lafi and her Deputy Hanan
Al-Fakhri. It is crucial to ensure the full and effective
participation of women in the democratic transition and
reconciliation effort, as well as in the security system
and national institutions. We also commend the Italian
initiative to organize an international conference on
Libya in Palermo next week. We look forward to the
outcome of the conference.

We condemn the recent attack by militias against
the Al-Jalaa Hospital for Women and Childbirth
in Tripoli. Persistent violence against medical
facilities - including the shelling and bombing of
hospitals; attacking and intimidating of medical staff;
looting of medicines, equipment and ambulances; and
clashes inside hospitals - must stop immediately.

We remain concerned about the illegal use of force
and intimidation against private and public institutions
in Tripoli, notably against the Al-Aman Bank Al-Siyahia
branch and the Libyan Arab Foreign Investment
Company. Any interference with the livelihood of
Libyans and Libya's national wealth is a grave matter
and must stop immediately. The perpetrators must face
criminal prosecution. Armed groups must withdraw
from State and sovereign institutions and civilian
facilities, not increase their grip.

In that regard, echoing the statement made last
week by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, (see S/PV.8388), we call
on the Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the
International Criminal Court to help bring about justice
and accountability for crimes under the international
law in Libya.

We welcome this week's renewal of the sanctions
regime imposed on Libya, including the new designation
criteria on planning, directing or committing acts
involving sexual and gender-based violence. We believe
that sanctions remain one of the key tools that support
stabilization and the restoration of peace in Libya.

In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to
Special Representative Salame and the staff of the
United Nations in Libya for their dedication and support
for a peaceful end to the transition in Libya.

