Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, which was signed by a
broad spectrum of political parties on 12 September in
Addis Ababa.
When I took up my present assignment, two years
ago, South Sudan was attempting to implement the
Agreement. As I prepare to leave, in two weeks' time,
South Sudan is preparing to implement a revitalized
version of that same Agreement, but only after an
intervening two years of civil war and devastating
conflict. The important question that faces us is how
the international community and, notably, the United
Nations should assess, support or otherwise respond to
this important development.

At the outset, we need to acknowledge the
achievement of the Republic of Sudan, supported by
Uganda, in mediating the Agreement. Through the
Agreement the gap has narrowed among the parties
on a number of governance and security issues
that had previously seemed unbridgeable. Their
combined leverage, the presence of a hitherto absent
protagonist - Mr. Riek Machar - and energetic
diplomacy resulted in a signed agreement that
contemplates a pre-transition period of eight months and
a comprehensive transitional road map of three years.
There are nonetheless a number of gaps, issues whose
finalization remains unfinished and other reasons to
assert that the process will need the continuing attention
of the region and the international community.

Before dealing with those, let me emphasize that
in our approach we recognize that we should not make
the perfect the enemy of the good. We recognize that,
even where the Agreement can be considered flawed,
it could still be an effective platform for peace if the
parties demonstrate the political will to implement
it, deal collaboratively with the need to face down its
challenges and avoid the impulse to seek political, tribal
or regional advantage. In that regard, I have advised the
parties that the support of the international community
for the Agreement will follow an assessment of its
sustainability, and not simply the signatures to the text.
That now raises the question as to what sustainability
might mean with regard to the newly finalized text.
Fundamentally, our concerns relate to the following
six issues.

First, notwithstanding the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
facilitation team, we note that there are still a few, but
potentially significant, parties that continue to express
reservations about the text. In addition, there are some
substantive governance issues that the text contemplates
will be resolved in due course. One such issue relates to
the number of sub-national states. That issue concerns
the very geography of the tribal authority and control.
The other issue concerns the way in which the South
Sudanese will make their national constitution - their
new, embracing social contract. Those issues are
indeed central, but not insurmountable if approached
in a spirit of inclusivity. That goes beyond a number
count of parties signing the Agreement, with a real
effort needed to ensure that no group or significant
community is left behind.

We have also alerted the parties of the need to
address the enforceability of the Agreement. We have
already noted the numerous cessation-of-hostility
agreements that have been violated within hours of the
parties recommitting to peace. No agreement can last
in the face of continuing violations for which there is
no penalty or consequence. That risks a response by the
South Sudanese as to what is different in this Agreement
from the previous failed agreements. In our view, the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism for investigating, monitoring
and reporting violations is not the problem. It is what
happens to those reports that constitutes 80 per cent
of the system of accountability. If nothing happens to
the reports, the system simply does not work. In that
regard, we believe that the region must demonstrate
a commitment to make the Agreement effective,
including by confronting spoilers, even if those spoilers
include the Government of South Sudan.

With regard to the parties' responsibilities, we
have pointed out that the first step is to demonstrate
their political intent by making the guns fall
silent - immediately and everywhere. Without such a
sign, the international community will be reluctant to
provide financial support.

That brings me to the third requirement for
sustainability, namely, financial resources, not least
to provide for the immediate cantonment of the
various forces. From my engagement with significant
potential donors, they have shown no or little appetite
to fund the process unless there is a clear provision
to ensure transparency and propriety in financial
transactions, including accountability for past
misappropriation of public funds.
The very low levels of trust among the parties
constitute one of the hurdles facing the implementation
of the Agreement. The prevalent spirit of rivalry will
be imported into the Government by virtue of the
fact that the parties and their leaders will likely be
competing candidates at the elections, which will be the
culmination of the transition. The Council should urge
the parties to undertake confidence-building measures
to build faith in the peace process and ameliorate the
bitterness and hostility, which is the legacy of the past
four years of horrible intercommunal violence. Such
measures do not require financial resources.

Finally, detailed security arrangements and a
mutual meeting of the minds on such arrangements are
critical. In that regard, the parties may have a different
understanding on how the unification of forces will
take place. With regard to cantonment sites, there is
no agreement on where such sites will be, how many
will be established, who will be eligible or who will
be responsible for sustaining them. That is despite
the fact that today marks D-day plus six; cantonment
is contemplated to be completed by D-day plus 30. In
addition, there is no treatment, as of yet, of the security
gap or who will fill it when the men under arms
are cantoned.

Until the very last moment there was little or no
mention of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), the fate of its mandate or changes to it in the
documents produced during the negotiations. Over the
past few days, a proposal to have the Sudan and Uganda
fill that gap transformed into a proposal for Uganda,
the Sudan, Djibouti and Somalia to be incorporated
into the UNMISS Regional Protection Force. What
arises from that is the need, referred to in the latest
IGAD summit communique and underscored by Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix, for IGAD to engage with
the Council. Only the Council can determine the size
and composition of United Nation peacekeeping forces.
Such engagement would allow the Council to engage
on the security architecture, including the provision
of specialist, very important person protection
personnel, as well as the geography of disengagement
and separation, which would provide a more conducive
environment for a peacekeeping intervention.

Those issues do not prevent the revitalized
Agreement from being welcomed as a real step forward.
They can be resolved ifthe parties share and show a real
commitment to bring peace to South Sudan. On that, the
jury is still out. What is clear is that the international

community, and the United Nations in particular, will
need to keep South Sudan and the implementation of its
latest peace Agreement under close watch.
