Mr. Bekkers: A large-scale chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear incident would not just affect the
physical infrastructure of the affected State, but would
also have widely catastrophic implications reaching
beyond national borders. Non-State actors do not act
under the lawful authority of any State, and therefore
do not abide by the same international commitments
that States do. Other delegations have also pointed that
out this morning.

Resolution 1540 (2004) addresses that critical gap
in the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
by specifically targeting non-State actors. Through
the years, the resolution has become an important
component of the global security architecture. In order
for Security Council resolutions to remain relevant,
their practical implementation at the national level is
crucial, and that is where regional organizations under
Chapter VIII ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations remain
extremely valuable. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is the largest regional
security organization, with 57 participating States.
Its comprehensive approach to security encompasses
political, military, economic, environmental and
human aspects. As such, it is ideally placed to address
the needs of its participating States in their national
implementation of the resolution.

As an example of the importance we attach
to resolution 1540 (2004), our quarterly magazine
includes a special section on the resolution - unrelated
to the fact that this high-level debate it being held.
Since 2011, the OSCE has been actively supporting its
participating member States with the implementation
ofthe resolution. Let me therefore highlight some ofthe
most important achievements in this field.

First, the OSCE created an informal group of
friends on resolution 1540 (2004), co-chaired by
Spain and Belarus, and appointed a coordinator on
non-proliferation issues.

Secondly, we established a directory of resolution
1540 (2004) points of contact within the OSCE.
Currently, 51 of the 57 participating States have
officially appointed their point of contact to the OSCE.
The directory has been shared with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).

Thirdly, annual meetings of the point of contacts
were held in 2014 and 2015. The first point-of-contact
training in the OSCE area, held in June in Kaliningrad,
was hosted by the Russian Federation, which the
Russian representative referred to this morning.

Fourthly, in order to directly support the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts, as well as to
effectively utilize the expertise and resources of
both organizations, in 2011 the OSCE and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA)
concluded a memorandum of understanding. This year
we signed a cost-sharing agreement with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific.

Fifthly, and most important, the OSCE, together
with the 1540 Committee and UNODA, directly assisted
15 OSCE participating States in the development of
their national implementation action plans on the
resolution. Those plans have proved to be a helpful
national coordination tool, as well as a transparent and
effective mechanism for obtaining donor support. We
will continue to do so in the OSCE.

In conclusion, the OSCE believes that strengthening
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and in
particular strengthening the role of the 1540 Committee
and its Group of Experts, could positively contribute to
preventing non-State actors from obtaining weapons
of mass destruction. Therefore, at the formal open
consultations here in New York, we have presented
our recommendations in order to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We very
much look forward to the final report from the 2016
comprehensive review.

