The Dominican Republic decided to abstain in the voting on the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/1054, presented by the Russian Federation on women and peace and security. At the outset, I would like to reiterate the strong commitment of the Dominican Republic to the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda. As the Russian Federation presented the initiative of adopting a resolution on the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and on further implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, the Dominican Republic expressed its support, notwithstanding our belief that full focus should be directed to closing existing gaps and accelerating implementation of past commitments contained in the 10 resolutions the Security Council has already adopted on this issue. We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Russian Federation on having organized this year's debate on women and peace and security (S/2020/1084), which served as an important platform to deliberate on key issues, and to look at concerted actions towards implementation, as expressed by the distinguished briefers invited for the occasion. We also salute the announcements made by the Russian Federation and China regarding their engagement in the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security. The Dominican Republic entered the negotiation process with a constructive spirit and good faith, which we maintained throughout. In the light of the short time frame available for the negotiation of this draft resolution, the Dominican Republic, along with the vast majority of delegations, proposed to work on the basis of a concise and short text, focusing our proposals on maintaining agreed language from previous resolutions that would yield consensus and the necessary balance on a text of this nature. However, the draft resolution still fails to address key aspects that are crucial, not meeting the minimum standard in the context of the normative framework of the women and peace and security agenda, such as the inclusion of a human rights approach, and omitting reference to general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which had been agreed in past resolutions, including the last two commemorative ones. The draft resolution presented does not address major challenges to implementation, such as the inadequate financing of the agenda, structural barriers to gender equality, and lack of accountability; nor does it respect other agreed considerations, recently adopted in resolution 2493 (2019), on the role and protection of civil society and women leaders. The adoption of this draft resolution, particularly on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), would have compromised progress made over the past 20 years. There is a long history, leading up to resolution 1325 (2000), of women and women's organizations being the ones making real change to the lives of women and girls in war-torn and post-conflict States. Any steps, decisions or initiatives that the Security Council takes forward in this regard must be directed to support them and their work and on closing the existing gaps on the implementation of the women, peace and security agenda.
