Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): A while ago, we
listened to the statement made by the Israeli
representative, which was indeed an absurd and
unfortunate one. The statement basically amounted to
an attack on President Yasser Arafat and contained
silly, stupid and unsubstantiated allegations that cannot
be believed.

Let me make it very clear that the Palestinian
people resent and utterly reject those attacks on our
President, not only because such an Israeli position
reflects the usual arrogance and condescending
attitude, and not only because of the fact that the
Palestinian leadership is Palestinian business, and not
only because of the fact that this is an attack on a
democratically elected President of ours and the
symbol of the Palestinian national struggle - a man
who, indeed, has greatly contributed to the cause of
peace and is being attacked by a man who is basically
associated with the massacres in Sabra and Shatilah.
We do so not because of all these things alone, but also
because the reality of the matter is that an attack on
President Arafat is in fact an attack on any serious
potential for reaching a political settlement. Mr. Sharon
wants to get rid of President Arafat precisely because
he does not want to reach a political settlement, and not
vice versa. Anyone can see that very easily.

We listened to the representative of Israel talk
about documents, intelligence, weapons, signatures,
salaries and Al-Aqsa - a James Bond story definitely
not befitting this Council. Let me just very briefly refer
to the fact that, at least from what I saw on television,
no rocket-propelled grenades were found; no katyushas
were found; and definitely no howitzers were found.
This is proof, actually, of Israeli lying all along about
Palestinian smuggling of weapons. Palestinian youth in
Nablus and in Jenin have only their flesh and the only
available weapons are their rifles. That is the only
thing we saw on television. By the way, if anyone can
buy the idea of a factory for heavy armaments that cost
$100,000, frankly, all of us could perhaps become rich
somehow in that industry.

Let me come to the important statement by Prime
Minister Sharon to which the representative of Israel
referred. Let me, ifI may, very quickly read out some
quotations, as they appear on Reuters:

"These missions have not yet been completed and
the army will continue to operate as fast as
possible until the mission is completed, until they
dismantle the terrorist infrastructure of Arafat and
until they catch the murderers who are holed up
in various places, including the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem."

This is the beginning of how positive and how
important this additional mad statement is.

"After the army finishes its mission, it will
withdraw on the order of the Government to
defined security areas."

"Defined security areas". This is, of course, a new
concept that Mr. Sharon is now telling the whole world
he will implement. Mr. Sharon went on to say that he
had promised Mr. Bush that:

"We are making every effort to accelerate our
military moves and to withdraw our forces from
the places where our operations have ended."

"Where our operations have ended". This will create a
whole new process of negotiating the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces from the Palestinian cities and towns. The
Prime Minister goes on to say:

"The gangs of murderers have a leader and an
aim. The aim is to force us out of here, to throw
us out of every place, from the home in Elon
Moreh or the supermarket in Jerusalem."

I wonder if there can be more incitement or a more
powerful call to hatred than that. Elon Moreh, by the
way, is a settlement. Definitely, this gentleman is not a
believer in any kind of political settlement, at least not
one which would require ending the Israeli occupation
and creating a Palestinian State.

Of the Saudi initiative, the Prime Minister says,

"Despite the extremist demands which were
included in the decisions of the Arab Summit in
Beirut, I welcome the fact that such an important
Arab leader as Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia has for the first time recognized the right
of Israel to live within secure and recognized
borders."

That is a lie, as usual, and an attempt to use
things to his advantage, while maintaining his basic
rejectionist position. To my knowledge, Crown Prince
Abdullah has not yet recognized the right of Israel to
live within secure and recognized borders. What he and
the Summit did was an expression of sincere readiness
to do so and to establish a normal relationship with
Israel, provided that Israel accepts a complete
withdrawal from the territories it occupied in 1967.
That definitely could not be described as an extremist
demand.

The Prime Minister goes on to speak about what
he is going to do when Secretary Powell arrives and
about his intention to advance "the initiative I am
presenting here today for a meeting of regional leaders
which will jumpstart the steps of dialogue for a
framework of peace in the Middle East": another
gimmick. The Palestinians are not the party now; they
are actually the problem, since Arafat is a man with
whom we cannot deal. So, now we have to deal directly
with the Arab leaders: another attempt to play further
games without any acceptance of the necessity of
"concessions" from the Israeli side. That is the
important and positive statement referred to by the
Israeli representative today.

Finally, I, of course, noted that a reference was
made to a draft resolution, and a comment on the
advisability of such a text. I definitely see the logic.
Nevertheless, the central aim of the draft resolution
which the Council will be considering is to deal with
the appalling humanitarian crisis which exists on the
ground and with the need for the Council to deal with
it, in addition to at least the initial acceptance of the
idea of an international presence, which, I think, many
members of the Council said would be of great help.
And in the meantime, of course, there is no escape
from dealing with the fact that Security Council
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) have not been
implemented.

Many speakers have made very important
proposals in the past. The representative of Mauritius,
for instance, made an important proposal today. The
representative of South Africa repeated proposals that
are also important. We hope that the Council will be in
a position to consider those proposals.

