Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Kovanda, for his effective leadership during the month of
April.

 

Canada strongly supports the Middle East peace
process. We greatly admire the vision, courage and sense
of initiative of those who, like Israeli Prime Minister Rabin,
Chairman Arafat and King Hussein, have taken such risks
for peace. Dramatic successes have been achieved in the
past three years.

Efforts to establish lasting peace are currently at a
difficult and delicate stage. It cannot be in the interest of
anyone, except those hostile to peace, to raise doubts about
the intentions or good faith of their partners in the
negotiations. Great care must be taken to maintain
confidence in the peace process to ensure that the
negotiations reach their full potential and that Middle East
peace becomes an irreversible reality.

(spoke in English)

Canada believes that the recent decision by the Israeli
Government to expropriate land in East Jerusalem is
extremely unhelpful to the peace process and is contrary to
the spirit and intent of the Declaration of Principles agreed
by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
It also contravenes the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which apply to the entire West Bank including
East Jerusalem, and which prohibit changing the
demographic balance of or otherwise modifying territories
under occupation.

We believe that unilateral acts of expropriation and
new construction in settlements undermine the trust that is
the very foundation of the peace process. Like many other
friends of Israel, Canada calls on the Government of Israel
to reconsider its decision to expropriate those lands.

We strongly encourage both Israelis and Palestinians
to intensify their efforts to complete the process initiated
with the Declaration of Principles, mindful, of course, of
each other's legitimate concerns and aspirations. Canada
continues to offer its full support for these negotiations,
which, we believe, remain the only way forward.
