Mr. Escalante Hasbun (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and Peru for convening this open debate.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth, as well as the special guests at this meeting, for
their briefings this morning.

My country, as everyone knows, has a historic
commitment to youth after having lived through a 12-
year armed conflict. Now, 26 years later, Salvadoran
youth have become important agents of change in the
post-conflict stage and in building a culture of peace.

One of the key features of the population of my country
is that it is mostly young, with 63.7 per cent under
30-years old.

In order to benefit from that demographic boom
and offer new prospects to our youth, El Salvador
must address violence and insecurity as two of the
main challenges facing them, and integrate all relevant
actors into the efforts undertaken to that end. We know
that challenges remain, but we are committed to the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) to bridge the
gaps left by the armed conflict in our country and to
build an inclusive society in which young people play a
fundamental role in decision-making and in building a
culture of peace. That is why our national youth policy
categorizes our youth in three groups: as an at-risk
group, as subjects of the law and as strategic actors
in development. That policy seeks to carry out three
main processes, namely, developing their identity and
autonomy; improving their social integration and civic
engagement; and promoting social cohesion and a sense
of belonging.

As we will also emphasize tomorrow at the General
Assembly high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustainable peace, for my delegation, peacebuilding is
not onlyatransitory stage,but also an ongoing endeavour,
since it implies not only the cessation of armed conflict,
but also the construction of public institutions and the
development of a civic consciousness that provides a
firm foundation. That task consists of prioritizing cases
of widespread violence in society. In that context, the
Peacebuilding Commission has the responsibility to
adopt a broader and more inclusive approach, while
preserving the most urgent cases as priority.

Likewise, we stress the need for the peaceful and
constructive engagement of youth, especially young
women, from the earliest stages of prevention, crisis
resolution and peacebuilding. In that regard, we take
note of the progress study on youth, peace and security
(see S/2018/86), and we agree with its findings regarding
the role of the media in forming stereotypes among
young people. Unfortunately, the negative actions that
certain young people take are always highlighted and
the coverage of positive actions is left aside.

Similarly, we stress that youth, peace and security
cannot be disassociated from the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. From today's perspective
relating to sustainable development and its link with
youth, peace and security agenda, I recall that, in 2016,
my country was selected by the United Nations system
for the accelerated implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), and we are one of seven
countries that participate in the pilot project for the
implementation of SDG 16 targets and indicators to
achieve peace, justice and strong institutions.

We also call attention to the fact that, at the national
level, we are currently sponsoring an initiative to move
forward our national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015). In September of 2017, youth
organizations, together with my country's Government
and in conjunction with the United Nations Population
Fund and Interpeace, established a focus group on
resolution 2250 (2015) and a working group on SDG
16 and that resolution, aimed at discussing the pillars
set out in the resolution and interpreting it within the
context of our national reality so as to advance towards
the development of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015).

In conclusion, my delegation affirms its
commitment to maintaining its support for the
achievements of the goals set forth in resolution 2250
(2015) and for the establishment ofmechanisms working
in complementarity with the national action plan
towards the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, which advocates
for strengthening the capacities and participation of
young women.

