Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, and let me also thank and congratulate
the United Kingdom for organizing this briefing. We
fully agree with the comments of Ambassador Power
of the United States that this is an important event and
that we should annualize it. It might seem slightly odd
for those operating in the field to see the Council in
this rather remote environment from the realities that
the Police Commissioners confront on the ground, so I
think that it is very important that we have a chance to
interact with them. I will ask some questions in relation
to the different perspectives that we bring to those
different issues.

I want to thank all of the briefers -Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous and the Police Commissioners. Their
frank briefings are very helpful and address the issues
of concern to them. I particularly highlight the call for
a clear political strategy that Mr. Ladsous made of us,
and the request for a clear and credible mandate, based
on the circumstances of the country, which is an issue
highlighted in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), as a number
of speakers have noted. We believe that the challenges
of resources and training and the relationships with
host countries are the questions that are particularly
challenging, and bear on the central task of the
protection of civilians, which we all recognize as a
fundamental part of United Nations police operations.

As others have noted, policing is an extremely
important, relatively new expanding tool for the United
Nations and the Security Council. In the past, there
were complaints that peacekeeping operations were the
only tool at our disposal. We discarded that notion by
the wayside when we needed to do something. We do
not want to risk police becoming another variety of that
problem, but the Police Commissioners do offer - I
would be interested if they disagreed with us - a more
flexible and community-oriented response to some of
the situations that we face on the ground.

Let me say that it is a given that New Zealand
is a very strong supporter of United Nations police
operations, and we see the value of the work that they do.
We know from our own experience in the Pacific how
important getting people out into the field and being
part of the community is to bringing some stability and
order to society. I have three questions that I want to
ask the Police Commissioners.

The first is the issue ofprescription. In the Council,
we love to have long discussions and negotiating sessions
on mandates, but it occurs to me that if one is operating
in the field having a very prescriptive mandate may be
rather unhelpful, so I would be interested in the Police
Commissioners' views about how prescriptive they
need our directions to be in terms of the job they are
doing.

Secondly - and without wanting to tread on
anyone's toes - how does it work for the Police
Commissioners when they are operating in a military
and police environment? How do the command-and-
control issues get resolved, especially when complex
criminal gangs are operating in the margins of those
internally displaced persons and guerilla groups?
I would be interested in how that works. Is there
something we can do to help in relation to that?

Last is the question of host country relationships.
We recognize that this is a particularly big deal for the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the moment,
and it is a big challenge for the Council. Are there
things that the Police Commissioners can do, or that
we can do for them, to help improve the host country
engagement, because in those sorts of environments,
even though the three situations that each of the Police
Commissioners have spoken about re so very different,
there is a commonality of challenges in the remarks
they made.

