Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank the delegation of Malaysia
for having convened this open debate, and Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, for her
valuable input to the annual report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/409).

The report underscores the increase in extreme
violence recorded in 2014 and its relation with the serious
violations of the rights of girls and boys. This fact alone
must serve to reaffirm our collective determination to
keep this issue at the core of the international agenda.

Our participation today reflects the commitment of
Mexico to continue to contribute to raising awareness
about this issue. We did so when we chaired the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in
2009 and 2010, which led to resolution 1882 (2009),
in which the Security Council firmly condemns the
abduction of children in situations of armed conflict.
We also underscore the practical progress achieved on
the ground, such as plans of action and the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on the six serious violations
committed against children.

Mexico has explicitly condemned acts carried out
by extremist groups, particularly during the violent
events of 2014, and it is with great concern that we note
that the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict highlights the increase in
abductions of children in conflict situations. Although
the records are insufficient, the Secretary-General
reports that more than 2,750 children have been
abducted in 12 conflict areas. Of those cases at least
1,730 were abducted by the self-proclaimed Islamic
State and 500 by Boko Haram.

The international community cannot ignore or
tolerate this situation. The abduction of children
may well constitute a crime against humanity and
a war crime. To meet this challenge we have an
extensive normative framework, such as the Geneva
Conventions, the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and international humanitarian law, which together
establish an obligation to ensure humane treatment for
civilians and attention to the specific vulnerabilities of
children, including prohibiting the taking of hostages,
among other things. A number of Security Council
resolutions explicitly condemn attacks on schools and
hospitals.

Mexico believes it is useful that in the Security
Council, the United Nations and States Members
reinforce our response to these serious violations,
including through existing mechanisms. We recognize
the usefulness of monitoring and of the inclusion
of a list of parties in conflict that are violating these
standards in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
reports. Recent successful cases of the release of
children associated with armed conflicts through
United Nations facilitation is proof of how effective
these measures can be.

We underscore the importance of penalizing this
crime in national legislation, as well as prosecuting
perpetrators in national tribunals or, if those tribunals
are unable or unwilling to do that, at the International
Criminal Court, as a preventative measure and in order
to combat impunity. Similarly, we consider it necessary
to strengthen actions to ensure effective protection of
places such as schools, hospitals and recreation centres
for children and adolescents in order to prevent acts of
Violence that not only take innocent victims but also
diminish the possibilities of providing safe places for
children and their development in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

We must not forget that violence and abductions
have devastating psychological effects on children
and that in order to correct that impact and care for
those children and their families we need greater
psychological, medical and legal assistance, and that
involves considerable cost for the countries involved in
conflict.

The extreme violence that we saw in 2014
committed by the actors referred to in the Secretary-
General's report will have a serious and lasting impact
on the children who have been their victims. Therefore
we, the international community, will face additional
long-term challenges in providing comprehensive
reintegration programmes. Those challenges pose
a potential additional risk for the resurgence of
Violent acts in some regions where the situation is not
improving.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2225
(2015) today, in which the Secretary-General is
requested to include cases involving the abduction of
children in the annexes to his reports on children and
armed conflict. We recognize that cases such as that
of Dominic Ongwen of the Lord's Resistance Army
show how contemptible such crimes against children
in armed conflict are. They are clear proof of how
violence in conflicts feeds upon itself and is repeated
when children are not protected. We therefore urge the
international community to take relevant measures
to halt the growing trend of child abductions and to
establish and strengthen the necessary mechanisms to
keep such crimes from happening.

