Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): I have the
honour to speak today on behalf of the member States
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for personally presiding
over it. I would also like to extend our condolences
and sympathy to the victims of the terrorist acts that
took place recently in Pakistan, Lebanon, Nigeria and
France.

Additionally, I would like to congratulate the newly
elected members of the Security Council - Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, and Venezuela - and
wish them well in fulfilling the important role expected
of them during this critical period in the work of
the Council, especially in conjunction with the
issue discussed today. I would also like to extend
our appreciation to Argentina, Australia, Korea,
Luxembourg and Rwanda for their hard work and
dedication on the Council during their membership.

I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, our gratitude
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and for
your country's commendable position in supporting the
just cause of the Palestinian people. I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for today's briefing.

The OIC reaffirms its commitment and unwavering
support for the Palestinian people's quest to realize their
legitimate and inalienable rights of self-determination,
freedom from occupation, recognition of their
independent State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif

as its capital, and the end of Israeli occupation over
Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan Heights and
Lebanese territories. The international community has
demonstrated overwhelming support towards ending
the grave injustices against the Palestinian people,
including in the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the recent Conference of High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention convened by
the Depositary in Switzerland.

The United Nations designation of 2014 as the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People is but one important example of such efforts.
However, in an ironic and most disappointing way, 2014,
the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, ended with the Security Council failing
to shoulder its responsibility towards the peaceful
resolution of this conflict and setting a deadline for
the end of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and
Arab lands. The OIC regrets that the Council missed a
vital opportunity to pursue a just resolution that would
have addressed the plight of the Palestinian people and
that it has retreated from implementing its own past
resolutions.

All the while, Israel, the occupying Power,
continued to sabotage all negotiation efforts, which
ended in a complete stalemate of the peace process.
Despite the intentional community's rallying behind
the negotiation process to end Israeli occupation and
achieve a lasting peace based on the two-State solution,
Israel has persisted in its oppressive, apartheid and
colonial policies towards the Palestinian people. Israel,
the occupying Power, continued to violate international
law. This includes the construction of the apartheid wall,
settlement expansion and implanting illegal settlers,
whose number has doubled from 250,000 to over
500,000. The use of excessive and lethal force against
the unarmed civilian population, forced evictions,
forcible transfer of civilians, demolition of homes
and confiscation of properties, coercive detention of
more than 6,000 Palestinians and refusal to prosecute
terrorist Israeli settlers are examples of Israeli brutality.
This is in addition to Israel's aggression waged against
the Gaza Strip, which resulted in killing more than
2,200 Palestinians and injuring and maiming more
than 11,000 people and destroying many homes. Israel,
the occupying Power, has yet to be held responsible for
its crimes and illegal practices. Rather, it continues to
enjoy impunity and lack of accountability.

The OIC holds Israel responsible for all its violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and will continue to
call upon the international community and the Security
Council to hold Israel accountable and to compel it to
cease its illegal acts and policies. We also hold Israel
responsible for the escalation in the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, and we warn against any move towards
changing the demographic make-up and identity of the
city.

Today, we are compelled to ask the Council: what
route to peace and justice is left for the Palestinians in
the face of Israeli practices that threaten to undermine
any prospects and viability of the two-State solution?
This is not a rhetorical question but one with serious
implications, not only for the lives of Palestinians living
under brutal occupation, but also for the maintenance
of peace and security in the world.

Despite all the recent setbacks, it is time for the
Security Council not to impede but rather serve as a
platform to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands and realize the Palestinian State with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital. It is only through courage,
leadership and owning up to moral responsibility that a
just and peaceful resolution to this conflict is possible.
It is time for the Council to show these qualities in this
regard.

The OIC expresses its deep concern over the
continued escalation of violence, destruction, killing
and heinous crimes committed against the Syrian
people, resulting in the rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. According to the United
Nations, Syria is now the worst humanitarian situation
in the world. We call upon all Member States to uphold
the pledges made and further respond to the funding
appeals by United Nations agencies. It is not only a
human tragedy, but a moral catastrophe when Syrian
children are dying because of extreme weather or are
brutally murdered under the world's eyes.

The OIC reiterates that the only way to end the
Syrian crisis is through a peaceful negotiated solution.
Accordingly, we call upon the Security Council to
exert its power to move the political process forward.
We call upon the relevant Member States to support
the work of the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
in his mission. with the aim of helping to establish a
transitional Government with complete executive
powers, in accordance with the Geneva Declaration.
Further deterioration, radicalization and spread of
violence can be eradicated only through holding
accountable all those responsible for the bloodshed,
violence, war crimes and crimes against humanity and
paving the way for democracy, freedom, security and
stability.

I would like to continue speaking in my national
capacity.

(spoke in Arabic)

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms that the
Palestinian question is its foremost concern and that
it will spare no effort in providing support to our
Palestinian brethren in their conflict with Israel, the
occupying Power, through political and legal efforts
and economic support. The Kingdom affirms that the
Security Council cannot recuse or dissociate itself from
any responsibility, under any pretext. Rather, it must
make courageous resolutions that lead to restoring the
Palestinian people's rights and must stand up against
Israeli practices of aggression that aim at eradicating
the Palestinian presence.
A little while ago, we listened to the Permanent
Representative of Israel lecture us on history in a rather
amusing and entertaining manner. His account of
history, however, has absolutely nothing to do with the
truth. Israel's representative has every right to conduct
a historical debate, but he will fail to divert attention
from the occupation of a military Power which has
lasted over 50 years and whose time to end has come.

If Israel and its supporters say that the solution
must be through negotiations, there have been all kinds
of negotiation in the past 20 years - direct talks,
indirect talks, international conferences, good offices,
understandings, goodwill initiatives - call it whatever
one wants, clearly we have made efforts with regard to
the Palestinian question. But the problem is always the
lack ofpolitical will on the part oflsrael to take steps to
respond to the Arab Peace Initiative, courageously put
forth by Arab countries in 2002. We ask the question:
would Israel have been able to carry out one act of
aggression after another had the Council adopted a
firm position vis-a-vis holding Israel accountable for
its crimes against the Palestinian people and had it
stood up to its policies of aggression, the building of
settlements, the confiscation of territory and attempts
to Judaize occupied Jerusalem, obliterate its identify
and falsify its Islamic and Christian history, as well as
the serious violations of international law?

Saudi Arabia will spare no effort until the
Palestinian people have their legitimate and inalienable
rights restored to them, establish their independent
State along the lines of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, and achieve a just solution to
the question of Palestinian refugees in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), as well as the
total Israeli withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and the
occupied Lebanese territory.

The situation in sisterly Syria over the past four
years is the greatest humanitarian tragedy of this
century. The Syrian authorities are still continuing their
genocidal campaign, using all sorts of conventional and
unconventional weapons, including chemical weapons,
chlorine gas, arbitrary bombing and explosive barrels,
in addition to undertaking sieges and resorting to
humiliation and torture, thereby claiming the lives
of over 200,000 people and creating over 10 million
refugees.

My delegation denounces the presence of foreign
armed groups in Syria. On many occasions, the Saudi
Government has emphasized the danger posed by
terrorist groups transcends borders and that we must
stand up to such groups and eliminate them completely.
That is the most significant way to guarantee the safety
and security of the whole world. Combating terrorism in
Syria means that we have to remove all foreign terrorist
fighters from that country, stop the brutal crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by the Syrian
regime over the past four years, hold all those involved
in shedding the blood of the Syrian people accountable
and ensure they do not enjoy impunity.

We value the major efforts made by United
Nations entities in delivering humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian people. Despite all those efforts, we
are extremely concerned about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We demand that
sanctions be imposed against all those who impede
the delivery of the humanitarian assistance. We also
call upon donor countries to live up to their pledges,
in addition to responding to the appeal of the United
Nations for voluntary contributions to provide
emergency assistance for more than 12 million people
in Syria.

Saudi Arabia also values the latest diplomatic
efforts aimed at finding a negotiated political solution.
Such initiatives must be based on the terms of reference
of the Geneva process. We also welcome the statement

by the representative of the Russian Federation that his
country's initiative is based on such terms of reference.
Those initiatives must lead to the implementation of an
agreement for a transition Government with complete
terms of reference that makes it possible for the Syrian
people to achieve their ambitions in freedom and
dignity, in a manner that would preserve the country's
territorial integrity and independence and the rights of
Syrians of all ideologies and sects.

