Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the briefers: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov and Mr. Yury Fedotov. We underscore our
appreciation for the efforts of UNAMA in supporting
the Afghan people in such difficult circumstances.
We have read the Secretary-General's quarterly
report (S/2018/539) on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
We noted the information provided and the realistic
assessment of the events in Afghanistan since the last
report (S/2018/l65). The current report, which covers
the events of the last three months, is an amalgamation
of positive and negative events. In that regard, I would
like to touch upon the following main points.

First, on the political situation, we welcome
the announcement by the Independent Election
Commission of the upcoming parliamentary elections
on 20 October. We commend the progress achieved in
the preparations for the parliamentary elections, despite
the destabilizing incidents that have occurred in certain
provinces in Afghanistan since the announcement. The
voter registration process began on 14 April, which
is the first time that the country has registered voters
since 2003.

My country's delegation noted that the voter-
registration process forms part of a national campaign
to organize electoral action in the country, which
coincides with the distribution of smart identification
cards and the naming of polling stations and the cities
where voters will be able to vote in the upcoming
elections. Moreover, the voter registry has been
prepared and linked to polling stations. All such efforts
prove that there is a true and genuine desire to achieve
tangible progress in Afghanistan. We hope that such
preparations will ensure that all Afghan people, men
and women alike, are able to participate in the elections.

It is very clear that Afghanistan is going through
a transitional critical period, and we would like to
commend the people of Afghanistan for their resilience
in the face of numerous challenges. We hope that the
preparations for the upcoming elections will contribute
to further action and consultation among the political
parties and leaders of the country with regard to
parliamentary coordination and the creation of political
coalitions that reduce political tension. Prioritizing
national interests over partisan ones is what we called
for in the last meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8199).
We reiterate that point once again, as national interests
must come first.

Secondly, on security, we follow with concern the
unstable security situation in Afghanistan, as the Afghan
Government still faces anti-Government forces, such as
Taliban and the so called Da'esh and other groups in
many parts of the country. Suicidal bombings continue
to claim the lives of innocent citizens, and we are also
concerned by the breaches of security that occurred in
Afghanistan from 15 February to 15 May, amounting
to 5,675 incidents. That underscores the staggering
task that the Afghan Government and international
community are facing, with continuous terrorist attacks
perpetrated by Taliban and Da'esh against innocent
Afghan citizens and foreigners living in Afghanistan.

We recognize that the increased acts and threats
of violence are simply desperate attempts from those
who do not believe in democracy or human rights and
are adverse to stability and security in the country.
With such acts, those groups are trying to delay the
upcoming October elections. We hope that the Afghan
authorities will continue to thwart such attacks for the
remaining period leading up to the elections.

Thirdly, on the humanitarian situation, despite the
fact that the number of displaced people has dropped to
65 per cent, we are still concerned about the remaining
75,000 displaced persons, due to armed conflicts this
year. The report of the Secretary-General maintains
that there are still many internally displaced persons,
due to factors such as violence and drought in many
provinces, forcing almost 500,000 people to leave their
homes and seek other accommodation. My colleague,
the representative of Afghanistan, touched upon
that matter.

We have repeatedly stressed to the Council the
important role of education in building nations. In that
regard, Afghanistan can benefit from the education
sector. We have followed with concern the findings of
the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on Children
and Armed Conflict, which verified 11 incidents of
attacks on schools. The unabating Taliban attacks on
educational facilities led to the closure of many schools
in Kunduz and Logar. Such terrorist threats and acts
undermine the future of the country by intimidating
children and scaring them away from schools. That is
one of the battles that have to be won, as children are
the future of Afghanistan and must be protected.

The Government of Afghanistan is making efforts
to amend a number of laws on violence against women.
We appreciate and commend such efforts. We believe
that the Government should continue its efforts in that
regard, as it will benefit the Afghan people.

In conclusion, we believe that lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region can be achieved
only through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
negotiated diplomatic settlement. We therefore urge
all parties to participate constructively in the efforts
to achieve peace through diplomacy in the interests
and well-being of the Afghan people. The political,
economic and security steps taken by the Government
of Afghanistan towards regional connectivity with its
neighbouring countries are extremely encouraging, and
we urge it to continue on that path. We welcome the
signing of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity, and we look forward to further
interregional cooperation.

Such diplomatic efforts should be accompanied
with significant and real investment in the education
sector. Investment in the education system, based on
gender parity, is the real investment that will help to
revive Afghanistan and build a brighter future by the
country's educated sons and daughters.

