Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me
to thank the Secretary-General for his passionate
plea against impunity. I should also like to thank
Director-General Daccord for his passionate plea for
international humanitarian law, and Ms. Edwar for her
passionate plea for humanitarian action. I also thank
the presidency for having organized this debate and for
having invited those excellent briefers. They spoke to
our hearts.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union, as well as with those to be made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and by
the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.

The Netherlands supports the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his latest report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462).
I will focus on three fundamental challenges the
Council needs to address urgently. The first is breaking
the vicious cycle between conflict and hunger, second
is protecting medical facilities and personnel, and the
third is to improve the performance of peacekeeping
operations. I will illustrate the three points with
examples from South Sudan, where we see one of
the most emblematic and dangerous situations in that
context, for civilians and humanitarian personnel alike.

My first point is breaking the cycle of conflict and
hunger. Starving the civilian population as a method
of war constitutes a grave violation of international
humanitarian law. It cannot remain unpunished. In
South Sudan more than 5 million people are suffering
from serious food insecurity caused by more than
four years of ongoing armed conflict. Crises in other
countries show similarly alarming figures. As the
Secretary-General also emphasized in his report, that
is a worrying threat to international peace and security.
The Council therefore has a clear responsibility to act.

In the short term, food insecurity and civilians'
suffering are exacerbated. In the longer term, entire
generations are raised in hunger, thereby hampering
sustainable development and peace. It is therefore
important that the Council condemn starvation
as a method of warfare. Rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access is essential in that context,
as well as accountability for perpetrators of such
crimes. Compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights law is necessary for protecting
civilians affected by conflict-induced hunger. In the
Netherlands, we are in the final stages of amending our
own international crimes act. We will include the war
crime of intentionally using starvation of civilians as
a method of warfare, including by wilfully impeding
relief supplies. We would be happy to share our
legislative experience with other States Members of the
United Nations.

My second point concerns the need for the
protection of medical facilities and personnel. A
despicable trend today involves attacks against medical
workers and health-care centres. It is deeply saddening
to see how their protected status under international
humanitarian law is being ignored by some parties to
armed conflict. We express our great appreciation for
all the international and national aid workers who risk
their lives to provide assistance for people in need. The
Council demonstrated its commitment by adopting
a breakthrough resolution in 2016 - resolution 2286
(2016). Yet, thus far, that has not led to any significant
changes on the ground. Let me cite as an example the
attacks on and looting of health centres in South Sudan.
According to the report (S/2017/821) of the Secretary-
General on children in armed conflict, in that country,
at least 28 attacks against medical facilities took place
in 2016. Parties to the conflict in South Sudan carried
out those attacks on hospitals in which malnourished
children and pregnant women were being helped. Such
incidents also take place in other countries, including
Syria and Yemen, to name just two.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
supports the World Health Organization in several pilot
countries to set up a global system for data collection
on attacks on health care. Based on that information,
the international community, including, in particular
the Council, should step up its coordinated efforts to
ensure accountability for such international crimes.

Where national jurisdictions fail, we call for using
the Council's competence to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court We agree with the plea
that the Secretary-General made to that effect just
moments ago. For the time being, mechanisms need to
be put in place that analyse information and prepare
case files that could be used for criminal prosecution,
such as the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria and the Investigative Team for
Iraq. As Ms. Edwar just said,

"[T]here must be accountability for all the harm
committed by all parties to the conflict".

We agree, and we need for those crimes to be referred
to a court.

My third point concerns the need to improve the
performance of peace operations. Current conflicts
require increased professional performance related
to the protection of civilians by peacekeepers. We
welcome the initiatives taken by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan to create a protective
enviornmnet following incidents that took place in Juba
in 2016. Detering sexual and gender-based violence is
of particular importance. As my colleague from Cote
d'Ivoire just said, we welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts to improve the performance of peacekeepers.
His Action for Peacekeeping initiative deserves the
support of all States Members of the United Nations
following last week's adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/10 to that effect. We support his renewed
focus on the accountability of senior leadership
for the protection mandate's implementation and
his commitment to address underperformance by
peacekeepers in that context.

Of course, training is key. That is why, together
with the United States, Rwanda and the United
Nations, we took the following initiatives this year. We
successfully organized two integrated courses on the
protection of civilians for peacekeeping personnel from
several countries, and we invested in the predeployment
training of other countries' peacekeepers. Moreover, as
an endorser of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians, we join the Secretary-General in his call
for additional signatures. If additional States endorse
the Principles, the professional performance of staff in
implementing the protection-of-civilians mandate in
peacekeeping operations will be improved.

In conclusion, more than 150 years have passed
since the founder ofthe Red Cross, Henry Dunant, wrote
A Memory of Solferino. Shocked by the suffering that
he saw on the ground, he proposed the establishment of
voluntary relief societies, and he laid the foundation for
international humanitarian law. The book was decisive
in the establishment of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and in concluding the Geneva
Conventions. His testimony of the horrors of war
continues to apply to many current conflicts. We pay
tribute to his legacy. Today's debate should strengthen
our resolve to ensure that international humanitarian
law is respected. The United Nations was established
to guarantee an international legal order that protects
civilians from the scourge ofwar. It is up to us to deliver
on that mandate, and up to the Council to ensure that
international humanitarian law is respected and that
impunity not prevail when it is violated.

