Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Alan
Doss, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing.

Deterioration of the security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has led to a grave humanitarian situation. The civilian
population has faced killings, rapes and child
recruitment into armed groups, all of which are crimes

that we condemn, and we call for the perpetrators to be
investigated and brought to justice. That should be
done impartially, whether the perpetrators are rebels,
security forces, national Congolese army or civilians.
In that regard, we commend the cooperation between
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
non-governmental organizations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We also note the increase in internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees to 1,350,000, owing to the
various conflicts between the Congolese army and the
Congres national pour la defense du peuple (CNDP) in
the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As is well known, the Security Council and the
international community have condemned the new
outbreaks of conflict, killings and atrocities committed
against civilians, as well as the obstruction of
humanitarian assistance trying to reach the IDPs in
their camps.

What is happening in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as we all know, is an ethnic conflict that
has become very complex and difficult, owing to its
long duration, with no solution or settlement in sight
and competing regional and international interests in an
area that is very rich in natural resources.

Against that background, the dispute between the
two brotherly States, Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the fact that each is
accusing the other of committing crimes have led,
unfortunately, to an escalation of the humanitarian and
security crisis in Eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region as a whole.
However, we commend the mutual and reciprocal visits
of ministers of those two countries, although we regret
that direct talks between President Kabila and
President Kagame did not take place during the recent
Nairobi summit, thereby losing an important
opportunity that would have inevitably contributed to
settling the issue in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We welcome the joint communique issued by the
Nairobi summit on 7 November 2008, concerning the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the call for an immediate ceasefire and the
establishment of a mechanism to achieve a political
settlement of the crisis and its root causes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend the

various leaders of the region and the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, President Obasanjo, who
discharged his duty and visited Goma on 15 November
and met with Mr. Nkunda, who agreed to commit to the
recommendations of the Nairobi communique and the
Goma statements of commitment.

We also welcome the ceasefire of 18 November
and the CNDP's withdrawal from some of the positions
it had occupied. We hope that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will be able to
make more progress in his efforts towards a lasting
peace. In that regard, we would like to welcome the
appointment of Mr. Obasanjo as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. We
support his efforts that, we hope, will lead to a meeting
of the points of view of the two brotherly countries, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, as one
of the main pillars towards solving the problem in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

A positive development is MONUC's support of
the Congolese national army, the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo, in places such as
Ituru and South Kivu, and we would like to register our
satisfaction and support for the Government forces
extending their control and administration over the
natural resources, protection of the civilian population
and provision of management, health and judicial
services within the humanitarian assistance plan for
2008, as well as preparation for the 2009 plan for those
services.

We also appreciate the efforts in implementing
the national priorities that have been declared by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have noted that MONUC has tried to implement
some of its objectives, particularly with regard to the
Goma statements of commitment and the Nairobi
communique, by supporting the capacities of the
security forces and the Congolese national army, as
well as by carrying out infrastructure projects and the
organization of the return of IDPs and refugees to their
homes. Regretfully, those efforts, part of the strategic
framework of the United Nations for providing
stability and security, have been halted, because of the
recent hostilities.

The current situation has made the mandate of
MONUC very difficult, particularly in the light of the
ongoing fighting and the lack of capacity of the
Government forces compared to the relative advantage
of the rebel forces. We hope that the plan to redeploy
and reconfigure MONUC is successful and that with its
additional force, recently agreed by the Council,
MONUC will be able to discharge its mission.
However, we must all realize that protection of
civilians is, in fact, the responsibility of the national
army forces and the national Government.

In conclusion, we call upon the leaders in the
region, particularly the Presidents of the two brotherly
countries, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, to put operational pressure on the parties to
solve the conflict, the cause of which is well known to
all. That would inevitably need the support of
neighbouring countries and international partners, as
well as those who have a stake in the Great Lakes
region. There will certainly not be a military solution,
because it is an ethnic and economic issue that goes
beyond the eastern region of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

We would like to voice our support for the
proposal of the Secretary-General to renew the
mandate of MONUC until 31 December 2009 and to
ensure that it should have all necessary means to
defend and protect civilians in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, because that is
where the rebel groups, not the State, have control. The
clear political intentions of all those who signed the
Goma Agreement and the Nairobi communique are the
basis for the success of the mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the peace
endeavours undertaken by African and non-African
personalities and bodies.

