Mr. Klein: At this time of wrenching anguish and
tragedy for the people and city of New York, the
empathy of the men and women of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for
them is real. Many of my staff come from this city; a
large part of the United States of America contingent of
the International Police Task Force (IPTF) is from the
New York City Police Department. They have lost
close friends and colleagues. Their ability to console
the survivors and their families is limited to the
telephone. This is one of the unwritten human
dimensions of the job of peacekeeping: the distance
from family and friends when tragedy strikes at home.

But our work must go on with new urgency and
determination. Weak and failed States are a target of
opportunity for extremism. War and conflict have
domestic and international consequences long after the
fighting has stopped. We have begun to understand a
new reality. Without reconciliation, tolerance and the
rule of law, we are all potential victims of violence and
terrorism.

We must respond on two fronts: to find and
punish those who committed these abominable acts and
to establish the social, political and economic
conditions in which democracy, peaceful resolution of
disputes and the rule of law can govern national and
international society.

This is precisely what the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is striving to achieve.
UNMIBH has, admittedly, a thin slice of the
international mandate, even less than that envisaged in
annex ll of the Dayton Accords. Specifically, our role
is to reform and restructure the local police forces, but,
as we look at the major domestic and international
problem areas - terrorism, corruption, discrimination
- the establishment of a professional, non-political
and honest police force is the key to resolving each of
them. And as we look at the future priorities -
economic reform to encourage investment, sustainable
minority returns and institution-building - none of
these will be achieved without rule of law based on
effective policing and an impartial judiciary.

Ambassador Petritsch has reported eloquently on
the overall progress of the peace implementation
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I wish to update
the Council simply on the major achievements of
UNMIBH since my last briefing in June and to seek its
engagement in and guidance on the process of
streamlining in the context of imminent decisions about
the future of UNMIBH and the United Nations role in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

With respect to the progress of UNMIBH, I must
admit to some frustration. Through our Mandate
Implementation Plan, UNMIBH is robustly undertaking
one of the largest police reform and restructuring
missions in history, but, as we have repeatedly noted,
the judicial system remains largely dysfunctional. Two
weeks ago, a policeman in Trebinje chose not to carry
out a potentially dangerous arrest of a known smuggler.
His reason was simple: twice before he had put his life
at risk arresting this man, but both times the perpetrator
had been immediately released by local courts. In such
circumstances, police forces cannot be effective. Police
reform and judicial reform must proceed hand in hand.

Equally important to the goal of establishing
professional police forces is the unresolved salary
issue. As long as police do not regularly receive wages
sufficient to feed their families, their performance will
always be open to compromise and corruption. No
amount of restructuring and retraining can overcome
economic necessity.

I am prepared to aggressively weed out corrupt
and non-performing police officers, but this is
ultimately an impossible task if honest policemen
cannot make an honest living. For this reason, we have
constantly advocated that priority should be given to
police salaries and housing allocation. Judges' salaries
were substantially raised a year ago, but police in the
Republika Srpska entity have received only nine
inadequate salaries in the past 12 months.
Consequently, even some of our minority police
recruitment projects are suffering. Despite the most
intensive efforts, the pool of displaced police officers
willing to return to an uncertain and inadequate income
is ever diminishing.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, which are
beyond the authority of UNMIBH to address, we are
making good progress on our core mandate. Our latest
review showed that 30 of our 64 projects are
completed; 28 are ongoing; and eight are in the
planning stage.

The State Border Service (SBS), which
Ambassador Petritsch mentioned, now covers about 75
per cent of the border and is already proving its worth.
Illegal migration through the Sarajevo airport has
decreased from 25,000 last year to about 9,000 as of 15
September this year. Attempts to bypass the Sarajevo
airport controls by using the Tuzla airport have been
thwarted, and the director of the offending airline
company, Air Bosna, has resigned.

We are delighted to have concluded a
memorandum of understanding this week with the
United Kingdom for the co-location of migration
experts with our Border Service Department as part of
the European Union Illegal Migration Initiative. There
is no alternative to a regional approach to this growing
problem.

The State Border Service has also confiscated 1.2
million convertible marka of contraband goods, thus
demonstrating that it will contribute to increased
customs and excise revenues. It should be borne in
mind that effective border controls are a major weapon
in the fight against international terrorism. However, to
complete this vital project by November 2002,
additional funds are urgently required. Assuming that
the 2001 State budget is implemented, and a similar
allocation is made for 2002, the remaining shortfall is
approximately $12 million.

UNMIBH has taken stringent measures against
human trafficking. Under the UNMIBH Special
Trafficking Operational Programme (STOP),
conceptualized by Mme. Celhia de Lavarene, special
teams of international and local police are aggressively
pursuing traffickers. In the past six months, all 290
known brothels have been raided, some several times.
With the assistance of the International Organization
for Migration, over 150 women have been repatriated
this year alone. We are now focusing on prosecuting
traffickers and brothel owners, and on assisting
international efforts to identify the gangs behind
trafficking. In this regard, more protection needs to be
given in their home countries for trafficked women
who agree to testify in court.

Through the regular ministerial-level meeting on
police and the trilateral Regional Law Enforcement
Agreement, we are building patterns and institutions
for regional cooperation against organized crime and
illegal migration. The State Information and Protection
Agency (SIPA) that we are creating will be an essential
complement to our efforts to improve the efficiency of
police cooperation between the 23 different police
administrations in the fight against organized crime.
However, we are concerned about possible competing
and uncoordinated initiatives. Next week we will chair
the first coordination meeting between major regional
and bilateral parties working on these issues.

The Police Commissioner Project is fundamental
to ensuring an independent and apolitical police force.
It is also the first step in the formation of a professional
non-partisan civil service. In the Republika Srpska
entity and in 6 out of 10 cantons, interim police
commissioners have been appointed, pending the
amendment of legislation to enable the posts to be
formally established and filled permanently through
open competition.

But, particularly in the Sarajevo canton and in
areas dominated by Croat hardliners, we are meeting
political obstruction. In the Croat areas, suitable
candidates have been identified, but local authorities
are attempting to put conditions on their appointment.
In Sarajevo, the Ministry of the Interior, apparently
under instructions from members of the Alliance
parties, has completely failed to nominate even one
candidate, out of 1,800 local police, who meets the
simple criteria we have set out - namely, eight years
of police experience, not a political office holder and a
clean wartime criminal and housing record. I find this
to be extraordinary and unacceptable behaviour from
political parties who claim to be serious partners with
us and the rest of the international community.

UNMIBH is also engaged in constructive
dialogue with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) on how
to bridge the public order security gap through
advanced training of local police riot control support
units by the IPTF and the SFOR Multinational Support
Units. From recent discussions in Brussels and in
Sarajevo, I believe that the will is there, but additional
funding is required for accommodation and equipment
to enable these units to operate in company-size
formations.

This week, UNMIBH began training the second
group of 26 military observers for deployment to
Ethiopia and Eritrea. The second contingent of civilian
police has been deployed to East Timor. By the end of
this year, I expect that a multi-ethnic composite
logistics unit of over 120 military personnel will be
ready for deployment to other United Nations peace
operations.

Turning now to streamlining, I have consistently
maintained that as long as the international community
continues to pursue a piecemeal approach to the
Balkans, in which loose coordination among a
multitude of actors is an unsatisfactory substitute for
purposeful planning, the real opportunities to close a
tragic decade of war and instability will go begging.
Streamlining presents a unique and long-overdue
opportunity to correct the deficiencies in the structure
and activities of the current international presence. But
this opportunity can be realized only if streamlining
moves beyond mere ad hoc downsizing of existing
international operations and organizations and is
instead based on an agreed international strategic
vision and plan that has the authority and support of
the Security Council.

Also, decisions must be made in the coming
months about the future of United Nations peace
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Next month,
UNMIBH must present its budget for the period July
2002 to June 2003. Bearing in mind that the UNMIBH
core mandate is scheduled for completion in December
2002, I seek your guidance on what should remain in
2003, other than an administrative liquidation presence.

Last week, at Ambassador Petritsch's invitation, I
addressed the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board in Brussels. I noted that any decision regarding a
continued United Nations peacekeeping presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina after 2002 is the sole
prerogative of the Security Council. With respect to the
specific goals and directions of streamlining, I
emphasized that the establishment of the rule of law
has to be a core task of the international peace
implementation effort and that without it the other
three core goals - refugee return, institution building
and economic development - cannot be achieved.

Council members may ask what is the optimum
manner in which to carry out the core tasks. On the
basis of extensive United Nations and personal
experience in the region, I believe that streamlining
should be based on the following key elements.

One element is a comprehensive 2002-2005
Dayton Implementation Plan, with benchmarks and
timelines, endorsed by key international bodies - the
United Nations, the Peace Implementation Council, the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization a and including guaranteed multi-
year funding of the agreed programmes.

The implementation of the agreed plan should
prepare the country for the commencement of
European integration, which ultimately is the only
long-term basis for stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the wider region.

In the medium term, activities for each of the core
tasks - rule of law, refugee return, institution building
and economic development 4 should be functionally
consolidated so that one organization will have primary
responsibility over each core programme and be held
accountable for carrying out its part of the Dayton
Implementation Plan according to realistic but strict
deadlines.

SF OR should be included in this process. Without
the implementation of some key tasks in the military
sector, civilian implementation will be incomplete.
Moreover, a continued robust SFOR presence is an
absolutely essential component of civilian peace
implementation.

Turning now to the question of implementation of
the core programme of the rule of law after 2002, I
raise the following considerations.
Subject to the necessary financial and political
support, UNMIBH is on track to complete its technical
mandate of police reform and restructuring by
December of next year. At that time, there will be
approximately 20,000 vetted local police plus the SBS,
trained according to European standards and organized
in accountable and transparent civilian police
structures, with a basic level of police equipment.
Local riot control units will be fully established. The
institutions and mechanisms for internal and regional
police cooperation and mechanisms for progressively
increasing the multi-ethnic composition of police will
be ongoing.

In sum, the police forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will know how to do their work
professionally, but their willingness and ability to do so
will continue to be severely constrained by political
interference in policing, inadequate and irregular
salaries and the lack of effective and impartial judicial
institutions.

In these circumstances, a follow-on intrusive
police-monitoring mission post-2002 will be essential
to ensure that the achievements of UNMIBH are not
lost and that the ongoing work of the international
community is not compromised.

Irrespective of which organization should take on
the task, two options merit consideration: a stand-alone
police-monitoring mission or a comprehensive rule-of-
law mission, as originally envisaged in annex 11 of the
Dayton Accords. With the Council's engagement,
involvement and guidance, streamlining offers a unique
and timely opportunity to make the optimum decision.

Option one is a stand-alone police-monitoring
mission. The role of the mission would be to ensure
that local police planning and performance in the key
areas of returnee security, public order and human
rights are monitored intensively; internal and regional
coordination and cooperation is maintained; minority
recruitment continues; and police structures are not
politically compromised. This suggests a mission of
between 450 and 500 international police personnel,
plus interpreters and administrative support staff.

Option two is a comprehensive rule-of-law
mission that would bring together under one roof the
police, the judiciary and the penal system. This would
implement the lessons learned from United Nations
experiences in Kosovo and East Timor, which
demonstrated that there is a triangle in which the
police, the judiciary and the penal system are
inseparable. It would be consistent with the principle of
one organization - one responsibility, which is a
desired outcome of the streamlining process. And it
would facilitate the introduction of a more efficient
"pillar" structure for the organization of the
international effort in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

If option two is preferred, the United Nations has
extensive expertise and capacity to take on such a
mission. In this way, peace implementation would
continue to be a collective endeavour between five
principal organizations, but with clearer mandates and
responsibilities. For example, the High Representative
would be responsible for the core programme of
institution-building, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) would
manage refugee return, the OSCE would do
democratization and human rights, SFOR would be
responsible for security and the United Nations would
manage the rule oflaw.

I raise these possibilities for the Council's
consideration and guidance. Even though the current
UNMIBH mandate runs until June 2002, if UNMIBH is
to be terminated in December 2002, urgent decisions
are required to plan the downsizing and liquidation of
the Mission and to enable the successor organizations
to plan its future mission.

(spoke in French)

The terrorist attacks carried out in New York and
Washington DC. last week were attacks on us all.
Those who reject peaceful conflict resolution, and turn
instead to indiscriminate terror against innocents, reject
the very basis of civilization. The role of the United
Nations in seeking to rid the world of the scourge of
war is more important than ever. Only an international
structure and consensus can successfully take on this
global challenge. We say it so often that we sometimes
overlook that the United Nations was formed
specifically because nations were united in their
commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes and
the rule of law. That commitment needs to be
reinvigorated now.

Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be seen as some
distant venture, isolated from global developments.
The international community has real and abiding
interests. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a test case
for the ability of three ethnic and religious groups -
Bosniacs, Serbs and Croats - to live in tolerance in
one State under the rule of law.

If the multi-ethnic society of Bosnia and
Herzegovina fails this test, after six years of efforts and
$6 billion of international investment, I fear there will
be no hope for multi-ethnic States anywhere in the
Balkans or in any other area of the world where there is
historical, religious and cultural dissent. In such
circumstances, further State fragmentation and
violence are likely, and the international community
will yet again have to deploy a massive long-term
military presence to prevent non-viable mono-ethnic
mini-States from going to war with each other, with
their own minorities or with the international order at
large.

I urge the Council to remain engaged and to resist
fatigue, be it political, donor or compassion fatigue.
Give the world the leadership and the vision necessary
to make the ideals of this great institution a global
reality.

