Mr. Yap (Singapore): We would first like to
welcome Ms. Catherine Bertini, Executive Director of
the World Food Programme (WFP), to the Security
Council and thank her for her comprehensive briefing.
We would like to pay our tribute to her for the
outstanding achievements that she has made, as so
eloquently described by Ambassador Levitte.
WFP operates in most, if not all, the conflict
areas dealt with by the Security Council. In many
briefings to the Council, we often hear of innovative
methods of delivery of food aid by WFP in extremely
harsh circumstances. Often, WFP launches emergency
operations before the international community is able
to grapple with the situation and toils to sustain fragile
peace and to support the road to recovery long after the
media's short attention span has shifted away. We are
pleased to have the opportunity today to convey our
gratitude to WFP for keeping the United Nations flag
flying.

As one of the few high-level women's
appointments in the United Nations system, Ms. Bertini
will not only be remembered for the exceptional work
she has done in WFP for a decade; she is also an
inspiration to women all over the world. She will be
sorely missed after her departure. Indeed, WFP is an
outstanding example of how such cross-cutting issues
as gender can be effectively mainstreamed into
operations. By targeting women for distribution of food
relief and putting women at the top of its priority lists
for its operations, WFP recognizes both the special
vulnerability of women and girls and the unique and
valuable role that women can play - a dual quality to
which the Security Council itself has attached great
importance in its discussions on women and peace and
security.

In the case of Afghanistan, WFP continued to
operate there even in the darkest days of that country's
recent history. Our worst fears of a widespread famine
in Afghanistan this winter were averted thanks to the
efforts of WFP. This has helped significantly in how
the international community's role is perceived in
Afghanistan. Although developments in that country
have generally been on an upward trend, many
daunting challenges remain ahead.

We have two specific questions to pose to
Ms. Bertini in this regard. First, the Security Council
recently adopted resolution 1401 (2002) to establish
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The integrated and unified structure of
UNAMA is very much an innovation. Could
Ms. Bertini let us have her views on how WFP fits into
such an integrated structure and whether there is
anything the Security Council could do to better help
such an integration?

Secondly, an important element of resolution
1401 (2002) is its paragraph 4, which notes that
recovery and reconstruction assistance will be most
effective "where local authorities contribute to the
maintenance of a secure environment and demonstrate
respect for human rights" and, as such, should be
directed to those areas. How does the WFP implement
that provision in practice?

Finally, we would like to welcome the
appointment of Mr. James Morris as the next Executive
Director of WFP. We wish him the best of luck, as he
clearly has big shoes to fill.

