Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to join others in thanking Special Coordinator
Serry for his detailed briefing on the situation in the
Middle East today.
I would like to make two main points regarding
our discussions. First, we welcome the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1850 (2008). It is a
positive and forward-looking document that has put the
Security Council and the international community on
record as confirming the irreversibility of the bilateral
negotiations and endorsing the parties' efforts to
achieve an agreement. As the Quartet stated on
15 December, a lasting peace will results from the
parties' mutually reinforcing efforts on the political
track in building the institutions of the Palestinian
State, improving conditions on the ground and in
implementing their Road Map obligations. The
resolution reiterates the importance of fulfilling those
obligations and stresses that neither party should
undertake any activity that contravenes those Road
Map obligations or prejudices the final status
negotiation. The United States has made very clear its
View on settlement activity and on the Palestinian
Authority's obligation to dismantle the infrastructure of
terror in its territories, reform security services and end
incitement.

On 15 December, the Quartet called for
negotiations to be intensified in order to put an end to
the conflict and to establish as soon as possible the
State of Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. In parallel, the resolution
underlines that a solution to the conflict should be
aligned with efforts to achieve a broader regional peace
and notes the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.
As Secretary of State Rice told the Council on
16 December, "as Arab States should reach out to
Israel, so should Israel reach out to Arab States"
(S/PV.6045).

The second point I would like to underscore
today is our continuing concern for the welfare of the
innocent people of Gaza and in the towns and cities of
southern Israel. As the Quartet made clear at its
meeting this week, a lasting solution to the situation in
Gaza can only be achieved through peaceful means.
Restoring Palestinian unity based on the commitments
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, the
legitimate and internationally recognized representative
of the Palestinian people, to non-violence, recognition
of Israel and acceptance of previous commitments and
obligations are central to this process.

The Quartet, again in its 15 December statement,
expressed its concern that the Egyptian-brokered calm
in Gaza has been challenged, condemned the

indiscriminate attacks against Israel and called for a
cessation of violence, including attacks against
commercial crossings that prevent the import of
humanitarian supplies and basic commodities without
which the people of Gaza will continue to suffer.

As the largest single-State contributor of aid to
the Palestinian people, the United States is deeply
committed to seeing through the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The United States calls for the
continuous provision of humanitarian supplies to the
people of Gaza.

Nonetheless, the Council should not lose sight of
the root cause of the current situation. While the vast
majority of the people of Gaza simply want to get on
with their lives, Hamas, which usurped control from
the legitimate Palestinian Authority, and other groups,
continue to instigate violence, launching more than 200
rocket and mortar attacks in the past two months
against Israel and humanitarian aid crossing points into
Gaza, as we heard earlier this morning from Mr. Serry.

The United States calls for an immediate and
permanent end to these attacks, which present an
ongoing threat to international peace and security. We
also call for the full dismantlement of the infrastructure
of terrorism, according to the agreed Road Map
obligations. The United States also calls for the
immediate release of Corporal Gilad Shalit.

Continuing progress in Jenin, and the successful
deployment of the Palestinian security services to
Hebron are strong counter-examples to the violence in
Gaza. These developments demonstrate that Israelis
and Palestinians can work together to advance the
cause of peace.

Finally, I would like to say just a short word on
Lebanon. Full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) is vital to a
peaceful and secure Lebanon. As with the
establishment of the Special Tribunal, under Security
Council resolution 1757 (2007), to try those
responsible for the assassination of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and others, the United
States strongly supports the full implementation of
these resolutions. We also urge that additional funds be
pledged by Member States for years two and three of
the Special Tribunal which should become fully
functioning on 1 March 2009.
The Secretary-General's latest report on
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) clearly
expressed the importance of Hizbollah disarmament
and of ending arms smuggling across the Lebanese-
Syrian border. As the national dialogue in Lebanon
progresses, we look forward to continuing efforts to
implement these core elements of the resolutions.

