Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation
associates itself with the statement made to the
Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Botswana attaches great importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and, in this
connection, welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
hold this open debate. Let me also commend you for
inviting representatives of international humanitarian
organizations and other players who have assisted in
enriching today's debate.

Botswana appreciates the thorough and
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, dated
11 November 2010 (S/2010/579). We note the chilling
message contained therein, to the effect that "Whether
as the intended targets of attack or the incidental
victims of the use of force, civilians continue to
account for the majority of casualties in conflict"
(ibid., para. 3).

Given this account, my delegation believes that
Member States of the United Nations, and particularly
members of the Security Council, should ensure that
the issue of protection of civilians in armed conflict
remain high on the agenda of the United Nations,
because attacks on civilians in theatres of armed
conflict are in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

My delegation also agrees that while significant
advances have been made in the past decade to develop
a comprehensive policy and an institutional framework
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and
that while such discussions continue, urgent measures
should be taken to stem the tide of human rights
violations on the ground.

My delegation calls for an end to actions that
harm innocent civilians in conflict situations, including
the use of civilians as human shields, the obstruction of
humanitarian operations, the theft of humanitarian
supplies and plundering of other resources, the use of
murder and maiming as instruments to terrify civilian
populations, and the use of rape as a weapon of war.

Botswana notes with appreciation the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and finds them to be a useful
framework for guiding the actions of concerned parties
in addressing the core challenges, which are:
compliance with international law by parties to a
conflict, the protection role of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, humanitarian access, and
accountability for violations of international law.
Botswana believes that those recommendations should
be assessed with a view to arriving at improved
practical solutions for the work of the Council as well
as peacekeeping and humanitarian operations.

We are pleased, Mr. President, that you have
convened this open debate on a subject which, due to
the protracted nature of many conflicts, may very
easily receive reduced attention over time. It is very
important that the ideas generated during today's
debate be allowed to feed into the reassessment of
practices in the areas stipulated, and I wish to assure
you of my delegation's continued interest and full
support in that regard.

Finally, Botswana welcomes the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/25) adopted today.

