Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Mr. President, to today's
meeting, and we are grateful to the delegation of
Singapore for choosing this item for our discussion
today. This will certainly help us improve United
Nations peacekeeping potential.

We agree with the general View that strengthening
various forms of cooperation with the troop-
contributing countries is an important way of
enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping. This should be the main objective of our
common endeavour.

A series of steps has recently been taken in this
direction, which include, most notably, the report of the
Panel of experts under Ambassador Brahimi and,
subsequently, Security Council resolutions 1318 (2000)
and 1327 (2000), as well as General Assembly
resolution 55/135. It is significant that these documents
confirm the Security Council's primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
From that perspective, they have defined specific ways
of improving our interaction with troop contributors.

In preparing for today's meeting, we analysed the
criticism often voiced against the Security Council in
this connection. It seems to us that we could define the
criticism as follows: first, complaints that meetings
with troop contributors are not held in a timely manner,
particularly in cases of deteriorating situations on the
ground for peacekeeping operations; secondly,
complaints about inadequate information provided by
the United Nations Secretariat; and thirdly, complaints
about the absence of assurances that the views of
contributors will be taken into account by the Security
Council when it prepares the relevant decisions.

We believe that the specific measures agreed in
the past half year are in fact geared towards resolving
these matters. It is not important what words are used
to describe the efforts we are making to improve
interaction with the troop-contributing countries. It can
be called institutionalization or formalization, but the
main point is how useful the impact of our activities
will be.

It is primarily a question of the Security
Council's willingness to strengthen significantly the
existing system of consultation by holding closed or
private meetings with troop-contributing countries,
including at their request, without detriment to the
Security Council's established rules of procedures. We
believe that this will help resolve this issue of having
timely meetings.

As for inadequate information, we believe that
the Secretariat, through the statement made by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Guehenno, in November 2000, in the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly, expressed its
willingness to deal with this complaint. We hope that
carrying out that obligation that he voiced will meet the
legitimate concerns of the troop-contributing countries.

As for assurances that Member States' Views will
be taken into account in decision-making on deploying
peacekeeping operations, we must realize that no one
has any such assurances, including the Council
members, for decisions taken in the Security Council
are, as a rule, the result of a compromise that is
reached, and everybody must concede a little in order
to achieve the main objective.

This problem requires serious reflection. In this
connection, we thought that the following possible
action might be considered.

National contingents of troop contributors in a
peacekeeping operation might make use of the
experience they have acquired on the ground and report
their views about any particular aspect of the conduct
of the operation to the force commander and to the
Secretary-General's special representative, who would
then take this information into account in preparing the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council. It is no secret that it is those reports,
as experience has shown, that are the real catalyst for
introducing any changes in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We believe that this would be
an effective approach. It would work, and we further
believe it would not involve additional
bureaucratization of decision-making in the Council.
We could thus have a new mechanism for interaction
with troop contributing countries, namely, meetings of
the members of the Council, the troop contributors and
the Secretariat in a new format, more in-depth briefings
from the Secretariat and feedback from the national
contingents in a peacekeeping operation.

Of course, these are just preliminary points, and
they may be supplemented, for example, within the
context of discussions in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

We have listened carefully to the statements made
by troop-contributing countries, and we note that a
number of their proposals as to how to enhance United
Nations peacekeeping are in keeping with our
approach. Inter alia, we would regard India's proposal
on making more use of the Military Staff Committee,
in line with resolution 1327 (2000), as an obligation to
study ways of exploiting the potential of the Military
Staff Committee in the interests of strengthening the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations.

Furthermore, we think that these ideas might be
useful in developing interaction with troop
contributors. We also think that this proposal and many
others that were made could be carefully studied in a
working group of the Security Council on
peacekeeping issues.

For our part, we wish to confirm our intention to
cooperate constructively with all other countries with a
view to improving United Nations peacekeeping.

