Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to join previous speakers in extending our
congratulations to you, Sir, on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council. Our thanks also go
to your predecessor for his excellent work. I wish also
to thank you, Sir, for holding this open debate on such
an important issue on the agenda of the Security
Council, which is at the same time of great importance
to the general membership of the United Nations.

The adoption and enactment of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was a major leap
forward in the progressive development of
international law. Not only is the Court a judicial
institution designed to investigate and prosecute acts of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes; its
establishment is also a strong political statement in the
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of
concern to the entire international community. It is an
essential contribution to the preservation of peace and
the strengthening of international security and, as such,
the international community should not allow it to be
undermined.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has signed the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which is
now under consideration by the relevant Iranian
authorities with a View to being presented to
Parliament for ratification. We believe that the
principles and values laid down in the Statute will
enable the Court to become an effective organ for the
international community to combat the most serious
crimes and render justice to their victims.

This meeting gives us another opportunity to
register our concern over a dangerous tendency to
undermine international law and erode the credibility
of this Council. What the Council is being asked to do
needs to be approached with extreme care and scrutiny,
especially in the wake of the unlawful military
operations in Iraq, which followed the circumvention
of the Security Council.

My delegation is concerned because resolution
1422 (2002), the renewal of which is being sought now,
is legally disputed and considered to question the
authority of a treaty-based international body, the
International Criminal Court. The resolution unduly
interfered with the Statute of the ICC, which is
concluded among States in accordance with the law of
treaties - a law that recognizes only parties to a treaty
competent to interpret or amend it.

Moreover, the international community is
cognizant of the fact that resolution 1422 (2002) could
be adopted only after the extension of the United
Nations mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina was
threatened with a veto, as were other peacekeeping
mandates that were to come up for renewal, thus
jeopardizing the whole United Nations peacekeeping
system. We understand that the members of the Council
should act responsibly and in such a way as to not
place in jeopardy the peacekeeping missions that have
been and continue to be indispensable for maintaining
peace and security in the areas of their operation.
However, given the existing safeguards in the ICC
Statute, as well as the very responsible statements that
have been made by various officers of the Court, the
insistence on extending the provisions of the resolution
indefinitely would amount to seeking impunity for
more serious crimes, including genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the indefinite extension of this
process undermines not only the ICC, but in fact the
credibility of this Council and of the peacekeeping
operations.

My delegation regrets that a unilateral approach,
founded on a misplaced notion of placing one country
above the law, has created an untenable and unsound
situation in the Security Council and in international
relations in general. Undoubtedly, such an approach
runs counter to the spirit and letter of the United
Nations Charter, especially Article 24, which maintains
that the Council acts on behalf of the membership of
the United Nations.

