The Secretary-General: I thank those present for
their participation in spite of their very busy schedules.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Jiirgen Stock,
Secretary General of INTERPOL, and to thank him
for his participation. I also recognize the leadership
and contributions of the Chairs of the Securty Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), and resolution 1373 (2001),
the Ambassadors of and Lithuania and New Zealand,
respectively.

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters that have joined the
ranks of Daesh and other terrorist groups continues to
grow. There has been an estimated 70 per cent increase
in foreign terrorist fighters worldwide between the
middle of 2014 and March 2015. This trend means more
foreign terrorist fighters on the front lines, a bigger pool
of expertise available to terrorists and a menace to their
countries of origin once they return. The Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004) estimates that over
25,000 foreign terrorist fighters from over 100 Member
States have travelled to Syria and Iraq, as well as
Afghanistan, Yemen and Libya.

No country can tackle this challenge alone. Member
States must enhance their cooperation and exchange
information, develop effective border controls and
strengthen their criminal justice systems, in accordance
with the rule of law and human rights standards. Full
compliance with international law is central to success.
That includes, in particular, international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. When counter-terrorism efforts
ignore the rule of law and violate fundamental rights,
they not only betray the values they seek to uphold,
but can also end up further fuelling violent extremism.
To ensure consistency with human rights principles,
measures to implement resolution 2178 (2014) must
be clear and precise, as required by the principle of
legality.
Exceptional and lawful restrictions imposed on
rights must be specific, necessary and proportionate.
The United Nations stands ready to assist Member
States in implementing those standards. Ultimately,
we have to address the conditions conducive to young
men and women being lured by violent extremism.
Radicalization is the essential precursor to individuals
becoming foreign terrorist fighters.

Building effective, accountable and inclusive
governance and institutions is an important element of
preventive efforts. Youth today are the group most prone
to radicalization, Violent extremism and recruitment
as foreign terrorist fighters. Most foreign terrorist
fighters are young males between 15 and 35 years of
age motivated by extremist ideologies. However, we
should also address the conditions and factors leading
women and girls to join the ranks of Daesh and other
terrorist groups.

I welcome this growing emphasis on addressing
the underlying drivers of Violent extremism at the
global, regional, national and local levels to prevent
radicalization. I intend to present a plan of action to
prevent violent extremism to the General Assembly
at its seventieth session later this year. I also welcome
other Council initiatives, including the upcoming
special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
which will be held in Madrid on 27 and 28 July.

In support of the implementation of resolution
2178 (2014), I have instructed the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in the Department of
Political Affairs to establish an inter-agency working
group on foreign terrorist fighters to coordinate the
work of all relevant United Nations entities.

The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre's
project on enhancing the understanding of the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria,
which I announced at the Security Council high-level
meeting held in September 2014 (see S/PV.7272), is
aimed at understanding the underlying drivers of the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters with a view
to assisting Member States in crafting a better policy
response. I welcome the recent interest that many
affected countries have expressed in that project.

I remain concerned that recent events, particularly
in Iraq and Syria, which have seen the advance of Daesh
and other groups with the growing support of foreign
terrorist fighters, demonstrate that this is an increasing
threat to international peace and security that requires
even more concerted action by the international
community.

The United Nations will continue to work actively
with Member States to forge more comprehensive and
creative approaches to address this multidimensional
threat, emphasizing the importance that we should
attach to ensuring that they are fully anchored in the
rule of law and human rights.

