Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): I hope you
will be equally generous, Mr. President, with the
57 countries ofthe Organization ofIslamic Cooperation
that I represent here today.

(spoke in Arabic)

Allow me, at the outset, to express my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Allow me also to thank you, Sir, for
your wise leadership of the Council, which is reflected
first and foremost in three meetings recently held by
the Security Council to consider the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people in Gaza (see S/PV.7220, S/PV.7216 and S/PV.7204). It is also my pleasure to
speak to the Security Council on behalf of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

We heard from the Permanent Representative of
Israel a long series of unfounded claims and flimsy
pretexts, as well as dramatic expressions intended to
give the impression that Israel was the aggrieved party
in the current battles, or indeed in years past. Do not be
fooled, Sir.

We should not be fooled when Israel says that it
defends itself against missile attacks launched by
Palestinians against it. The fact of the matter is that
Israel has a defence system against missiles that has so
far effectively destroyed most of the rockets launched
against the country. What Israel is doing is not self-
defence, it is a widespread attack replete with war
crimes. Do not be fooled, Sir.

We must not be fooled when Israel says that
Palestinian attacks threaten its security and that of its
citizens. The fact of the matter is that the number of
victims of those rockets in Israel throughout the years
of occupation does not rise to the level of the number
of those killed in traffic accidents in Israel in just one
year - indeed, even in one month or in a single city.
Israel is using those attacks as a pretext for a genocidal
war against the Palestinian people. Do not be fooled,
Mr. President.

We should not be fooled when Israel says that no
Government in the world would stand idly by as its
cities, villages and citizens were threatened. The fact
of the matter is that no other Government in the world
practices what Israel practices, namely, the occupation
of the land of another State, the repression of that State's
people, laying siege to those people and starving them
in an attempt to make them bend to its will. Do not be
fooled, Mr. President.

We should not be fooled when Israel says that it
accepts peace initiatives and ceasefires, while the other
party rejects them. The fact of the matter is that Israel
is the party that withdrew from peace negotiations. It
was Israel that reneged on its commitments by refusing
to release the last tranche of Palestinian detainees.
It was Israel that re-arrested and re-detained those
already released in prisoner-exchange agreements,
in flagrant violation of those agreements. It is Israel
that has unrelentingly persisted in building occupation
settlements on Palestinian land.

It is Israel that desecrates Islamic and Christian
holy sites, day in and day out. It is Israel that prevents
and denies the faithful access to such sites during the
holy month of Ramadan. It is Israel that continues to
besiege the Palestinian people in Gaza by land, sea and
air.

Mr. President, did you not hear Prime Minister
Netanyahu fully reject any Palestinian sovereignty
under any agreement? Did you not hear, Mr. President,
a member of Mr. Netanyahu's ruling Likud
party - Knesset Vice-President Moshe Feiglin - call
for ethnic cleansing in Gaza and for the expulsion of
all Palestinians therefrom, or indeed Knesset member
Ayelet Shaked, of the HaBayit HaYehudi party, call for
the massacre of all Palestinian mothers because they
only gave birth to snakes?

Finally, Mr. President, do not be fooled ifIsrael says
that the starting point of the events we are witnessing
today is the kidnapping of three Israeli settlers from
the West Bank. The fact is that the starting point is
the very presence of settlers on occupied Palestinian
land. The starting point is the occupation itself and its
perpetuation. The starting point is the unjust siege of
Gaza and the fact that it has been transformed into a
large open-air prison for Palestinians. That led to the
major deterioration in humanitarian conditions, in
violation of resolution 1860 (2009).

The end point can be reached only by putting an
end to the occupation an to the settlements, by lifting
the siege on Gaza, by guaranteeing the protection of the
Palestinian people and by giving them an opportunity
to determine their own future and live in peace and
security in accordance with international law and the
initiative put forward by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and adopted by Arab States, which became the Arab
Peace Initiative supported by the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

The Palestinian people have appealed to the
Security Council three times this month to seek its
protection and to call on it to assume its responsibility
to end the aggression and the killing. The first time
was before the martyrdom of the four Bakr children
on the beach of Gaza. They were killed in cold
blood as they exercised their right to childhood and
soccer. The second time was before their 80-year-old
grandmother and a 5-month-old infant were killed
under the rubble caused by an Israeli raid. The third
time was following the Israeli massacre in Shujaiya,
where dozens of Palestinian civilians were martyred.
This is now the fourth time that the Palestinian people
appeal to the Security Council since the Israeli war
machine promised to intensify its aggression and
expand its criminal operations in Gaza - after the
killing of 25 people under the rubble of their homes in
Khan Younis, including 24 members of one family; the
killing of 10 members of the Siyam family in Rafah,
including four children and a nine-month old; as well as
the killing of a mother and her four children.

How many tragedies must this aggrieved people
bear as it seeks the Council's protection and an end to
the aggression? The death toll has reached and exceeded
600 martyrs. There are more than 4,000 wounded, most
of whom are children, civilians and women. More than
100 Palestinians have been made homeless. The Israeli
aggression has gone beyond destroying the homes of the
inhabitants of Gaza and attacking hospitals - indeed,
even centres for the handicapped - let alone the barbaric
aggression against mosques. When will the Security
Council intervene? Where and when will the Council
exercise its role in protecting international peace and
security? Has it decided to shirk that responsibility?
Will its role now merely be to document and provide
testimonials and statements to the press in support of
whatever agreement the different parties reach? As has
been said, what is the point of the Security Council if it
does not take action?

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation renews
its appeal to the international community, in particular
to the Security Council, given the urgent need, in
accordance with itsvresponsibilities, to swiftly take
a firm position to put an immediate end to the Israeli
aggression and violence and an end to the occupation and
the violations of international law. The Security Council
must ensure accountability for all the perpetrators of
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The Security
Council must enable the Palestinian people to enjoy
their legitimate rights and aspirations, as provided for
in United Nations resolutions.

The tragedy of the Syrian people continues as
they struggle to achieve their aspirations of freedom
and dignity in the face of a stubborn authority that
refuses to face the facts and is living in illusions. In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of the new
international envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and his
deputy, Mr. Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. We wish them
success and express the hope that they will begin
where their predecessors left off, namely, with the
need to work to implement the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), based on the establishment of a
transitional authority with broad executive powers to
undertake a transition to a new dawn in Syria and on
the establishment of a modern State built onjustice and
equality.

