Mr. Otunnu: Madam President, thank you for
being here today and for presiding personally over this
meeting of the Security Council. We appreciate
enormously your personal commitment and the
leadership of the delegation of Chile, which has been
demonstrated within the United Nations and within the
Organization of American States, and by you
personally in the context of the Human Security
Network. I thank you for being here today.

The struggle to ensure the protection, rights and
well-being of children exposed to armed conflict has
reached a watershed moment. A few years ago, the
Security Council placed this issue on its agenda. We
have come a long way since then. The developments,
most of them in the realms of advocacy, development
of standards and innovative initiatives, represent
significant and concrete progress.

Sadly, in spite of these advances, I have to report
that on the ground the general situation for children
remains grave and unacceptable. Parties to conflicts
continue to violate with impunity the rights of children.
This is a cruel dichotomy, and herein lies the
imperative for the era of application: a purposeful and
concerted response.

Today the international community possesses, as
never before, the means and collective influence to
ensure compliance and protection. The challenge is that
of will and choice. The Security Council must lead the
way in taking measures that will create a critical mass,
measures that are capable of making the era of
application a reality for children exposed to war.

I should like to use this occasion to highlight
several preoccupations for your consideration and
action. Of particular importance is the need to establish
a systematic and coordinated monitoring and reporting
mechanism. This is indispensable. The Secretary-
General's report before you (S/2003/1053) puts forth a
set of proposals designed to serve as a basis for broad
consultations on this issue among all stakeholders.

The impact of armed conflict on children takes
grave and multiple forms. Children are killed, maimed,
raped, abducted, denied humanitarian access, robbed of
their birthright through the plunder of natural resources
and used as child soldiers. All these children are
victims of armed conflict. All these children look to the
Security Council for protection.

A monitoring and reporting mechanism is of little
value unless it leads to action, unless the information
compiled can serve as triggers for action. In this
regard, the Security Council must lead the way. It is the
most important destination for action because of its
primary responsibility for peace and security.

After careful monitoring, compilation and
vetting, the Secretary-General has presented to the
Council comprehensive and universal lists of parties to
conflicts that continue to recruit and exploit children as
child soldiers. Annex I of the Secretary-General's
report names some 32 parties in six situations on the
agenda of the Council, while annex II lists 22 parties in
nine situations that are not on the Council's agenda.
You now have before you, Madam President, the
information necessary for action. At this watershed
moment, I urge you to respond to the lists with
concrete action, action commensurate with the gravity
and scope of the violations in question.

Much effort is being deployed to develop United
Nations response and innovations on the ground. I have
to emphasize that effective response also requires
increased political and material support for field
programmes. I should like to pay special tribute to
United Nations field teams and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) for their indispensable
contribution. In this connection, the leadership of my
good colleague Carol Bellamy and United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and that of Jean-Marie
Guehenno and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) have been especially invaluable.

United Nations agencies must assume particular
responsibility for mainstreaming this issue. The time
has come for United Nations agencies and their
governing bodies, where appropriate, to translate their
commitment to this agenda into concrete and
systematic mainstreaming projects within their
respective institutions. This should be measured in
terms of priority setting, resource allocation and
programming for the benefit of children affected by
armed conflict. We must ensure, after the progress that
has been made, that from now on the protection and
rehabilitation of children are systematically
incorporated into all stages of peace processes.

Regional and subregional organizations have a
significant contribution to make to the realization of an
era of application. The United Nations should
encourage and cooperate with those organizations in
their efforts to strengthen their advocacy and
programme activities. In this connection, I particularly
welcome the recent adoption of guidelines on children
in armed conflict by the European Union and the
adoption by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) of a peer review framework on the
protection of children.

In order to build a viable regime of protection on
the ground, international actors need to support and
reinforce local efforts. In particular, we need to do
much more to strengthen the capacities of defenders of
children who are labouring at the very front line of this
struggle: national institutions and local and subregional
civil society networks for advocacy, protection and
rehabilitation. In the same spirit, I believe that we
should support local communities in their efforts to
reclaim and strengthen indigenous cultural norms that
have traditionally provided for the protection of
children and women in times of war.

The ending of armed conflicts is the beginning of
salvation for war-affected children everywhere. That is
why greater and more concerted efforts should be
deployed to end ongoing conflicts and address the key
factors that facilitate the occurrence and recurrence of
conflicts. That is also why we should, on this occasion,
particularly rejoice with the children of Burundi,
Liberia, Sri Lanka and Sudan, for whom the prospects
of peace at last - definitive peace - bring unbelievable
relief.

Since I will be circulating the full text of my
remarks, I wish to conclude by saying that I know that
the Security Council must always take into account and
balance various important factors before taking any
action, but I hope that, at this watershed moment, the
best interests of children - our children - will trump
all other considerations. On them, after all, depend the
prospects for future peace and progress in all our
societies.

