The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of Chile.

Repeatedly and with justified alarm, the
specialized reports on small arms and light weapons
published by various sources in recent years agree in
warning that in various regions of the world there is a
marked trend towards the excessive accumulation of
and illicit trafficking in this type of arms, which are
statistically demonstrated to be the principal scourge
and cause of civilian deaths - in particular of children
and women - of social misery and of internal and
international conflicts, which gravely hinder the
development of peoples.
Small arms in the streets of our cities often kill
more people than open warfare. That is why we
reaffirm today that the fight against the uncontrolled
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
prevention and elimination of that proliferation are a
key task within the primary responsibility of the
Council. That is why it is important for the Security
Council to carry out in a comprehensive and effective
manner programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration in post-conflict situations.

Moreover, the weapons-exporting countries need
to assume a greater degree of responsibility in their
operations relative to small arms and light weapons.
Similarly, we need to strengthen international
cooperation on information on the origin and transfer
of these types of weapons in order to prevent them
from falling into the hands of terrorists. The important
advances that have been made in this area should be
complemented by greater international and regional
cooperation on exports and effective compliance with
embargo and other sanction measures and regulations
imposed by the Security Council, including the
obligation of Member States to inform the Sanctions
Committee about violations of arms embargoes, in
accordance with the recommendations contained in the
respective reports.

Finally, the delegation of Chile welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/1217)
presented by Under-Secretary-General Abe and
supports the need for the Security Council to continue
to consider this important issue in the future.

I now reassume my functions as President of the
Security Council. In accordance with rule 37, the next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Ireland.

