The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, on the eve of the planned
visit to Baghdad by the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission, strongly reaffirms its full support
for the Special Commission in the conduct of its
inspections and the other tasks entrusted to it by the
Council. The Security Council reiterates the
importance it attaches to full compliance by Iraq with
the relevant resolutions of the Council. It underlines
the important role of the Special Commission's
inspection teams and demands once again that they be
given immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access
to any and all areas, facilities, equipment, records and
means of transportation which they wish to inspect,
and Iraqi officials whom they wish to interview, so
that the Special Commission may fully discharge its
mandate.

"In this context, the Security Council remains

gravely concerned at the failure by Iraq to comply
fully with its resolution 1060 (1996) of 12 June 1996 and
with other resolutions of the Council dealing with the
Special Commission. The denial by Iraq, on repeated
occasions, of immediate, unconditional and unrestricted
access to sites which they wished to inspect and the
attempts made by the Government of Iraq to impose
conditions on the conduct of interviews with Iraqi
officials by the Special Commission constitute a gross
violation of its obligations under resolutions 687 (1991),
707 (1991) and 715 (1991). The Council notes that these
actions also contradict commitments made by the
Government of Iraq in its Joint Statement of 22 June
1996 with the Special Commission, and urges the
Government of Iraq to respect these commitments. The
Council reminds the Government of Iraq that only full
compliance with its obligations under the relevant
resolutions will enable the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission to present his report in accordance
with Section C of Resolution 687 (1991). The Council
will continue to consider how best to ensure Iraq's full
compliance.

"The Security Council requests the Executive
Chairman to report to it on the results of his visit."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
