Mr. Li (Democratic People's Republic of Korea):
The delegation of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is of the view that the issuance of the Judgments
of 27 February 1998 by the International Court of Justice
concerning the dispute between Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the United States and the United Kingdom over the
Lockerbie incident should be seized as an important
occasion to further highlight the principle of impartiality
in the activities of the United Nations.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
consistently opposed to terrorism in all its manifestations
and, at the same time, to every act of infringement of the
sovereignty of Member States that imposes unjust
pressure against them under the pretext of "anti-
terrorism".

It is on this basis that my delegation wishes to
underline its position on the Libyan issue.

Through the Security Council's adoption of the
resolutions against Libya following the crash of Pan Am
flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988, the Libyan
issue has continuously been the source of controversy in
the international arena for the last several years.

The imposition of sanctions under the Security
Council resolutions has resulted in immeasurable suffering
by the Libyan population and in threats to their lives.
Furthermore, it has had serious negative impacts on
neighbouring third countries. With the passage of time,
the imposition of sanctions, which may be characterized
as collective punishment, gives rise to doubts as to
whether such an act can be legally justified or morally
condoned.

In this connection, my delegation deems it necessary
to reflect upon the process by which resolutions 748
(1992) and 883 (1993)- resolutions in which the
Security Council condemned Libya for its terrorist acts
and called for the imposition of sanctions - were
adopted.

Both the United States and the United Kingdom
allegedly referred to two Libyans as criminals responsible
for the Lockerbie incident and demanded that Libya
surrender them for trial in either of those countries. But
Libya rejected such a demand, citing international laws
and practices. Nevertheless, the Security Council has gone
so far as to hastily adopt the resolution calling for Libya
to surrender its two nationals and deciding upon the
imposition of sanctions.

 

The process of handling the Lockerbie incident so far
reminds me of the European proverb that "might is right",
and it furthermore casts a doubt about the responsibility and
credibility of the Security Council, whose primary mission
is to maintain international peace and security.

Claims of Libyan involvement in the Lockerbie
incident are no more than allegations, and Libya has
strongly rejected these allegations. Then how could anti-
Libyan resolutions be adopted?

Were there really no ways and means of settling the
dispute peacefully? Were sanctions the only choice of the
Security Council - a choice which led to eventual
confrontation and the sufferings of innocent people?

The current dispute over the Lockerbie incident is a
vivid example showing that as long as the principles of
justice and impartiality are disregarded in dealing with
international issues, disputes will remain unresolved
indefinitely and only result in the sufferings of innocent
people.

The United Nations was born with the noble ideal of
resolving international issues not by recourse to strength,
but on the principles of justice, objectivity and impartiality.
These principles are the lifeline of the United Nations. My
delegation believes that it is all the more important to
resolve the present Libyan issue through dialogue and
negotiations based on the principles of justice and
impartiality, in view of the fact that the super-Powers are
directly involved in this issue.

So far, Libya, the Organization of African Unity and
others have put forward a series of proposals aimed at
resolving the issue peacefully. My delegation undoubtedly
believes that they could best serve the purpose of fairly
resolving the Libyan issue. For a fair resolution of the
issue, the parties concerned should have the political will to
sit down face to face to resolve the issue peacefully and
explore reasonable solutions in a sincere manner.
Experience has proved that dialogue is more effective than
confrontation and that reason always prevails over strength
and coercion. My delegation takes this opportunity to
reiterate its principled position that all disputes can and
should be resolved on the principles of international justice,
objectivity and impartiality.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
sincere expectation that the Judgment of the International
Court will serve as momentum for a fair and peaceful
solution to the Libyan issue through dialogue, and that the
parties concerned will avail themselves of the Judgment
to the fullest possible extent.

