Mr. Bessho (Japan): I appreciate the opportunity to
speak about this pressing matter. I would like to thank
Ms. Ellen Laj, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, for their detailed briefings.
I listened to both briefings carefully and with great
concern. Japan recognizes that, while Juba is relatively
calm at this moment, the security situation in South
Sudan as a whole is very tense, with frequent armed
clashes and killings ofcivilians. We cannot be optimistic
about how things will unfold and should continue to
closely monitor the security situation in the country.

As many speakers before me have noted, the
question now is how the Security Council can
improve the situation. Our credibility is on the line.
Whatever action is taken, our ultimate goal should be
to advance the political process. While the will of the
parties is of paramount importance, the engagement
of neighbouring countries is the key factor. The
decision by Kenya to withdraw its contingent only
further highlights the importance of the role of South
Sudan's neighbours. Many points from the special
report (S/2016/951) on the review of the mandate of
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) are
useful in that regard. It is indispensable that the United
Nations coordinate with the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the key players supporting the political process, so as
to more effectively facilitate the development of the
political process. We highly commend the Secretariat
for its efforts, in consultation with the AU and IGAD,
to devise a comprehensive political strategy aimed at
achieving a cessation of hostilities and at bringing the
parties back to an inclusive political process. In that
regard, we recognize the importance of the engagement
of AU High Representative Konare.

We welcome the suggestion to expand UNMISS
patrols around the protection of civilians sites and
to enhance cooperation with humanitarian actors.
Increasing UNMISS interaction with communities and
local authorities is also important.

Having carefully listened to the remarks by
Mr. Dieng, we are deeply concerned about rising ethnic
tensions in the country. In that vein, the proposal by
the AU Commission to establish an over-the-horizon
force to respond to possible mass atrocities caught
our attention. We hope to see further consultations on
the matter between the United Nations and the AU,
including clarification as to how the proposed force's
mandate would be differentiated from that of the
UNMISS Regional Protection Force.

Japan, as an UNMISS troop-contributing country,
attaches great importance to creating an environment
in which effective activities can be safely undertaken.
In that regard, we call on the Transitional Government
of National Unity to cooperate further and more
seriously with the United Nations. It is Japan's sincere
hope that South Sudan will achieve peace and stability
and make strides on the path to development. Japan, as
a friend of South Sudan, has supported the country and
has dispatched an engineering unit to UNMISS since
the independence of the country. Japan will continue
to contribute to South Sudan's peace and security
going forward.

Finally, on behalf of the Government of Japan, I
would like to express special thanks to Ms. Ellen Laj
for her very hard and dedicated work on the ground in
an extremely difficult environment.

