The President (spoke in Spanish): Pursuant to
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, I invite the representative of the Sudan and the
representative of South Sudan to participate in today's
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses its continued
support for the efforts of the African Union
(AU) to facilitate the Sudan's and South Sudan's
implementation of their bilateral agreements
and compliance with the requirements of the
African Union road map and resolution 2046
(2012). The Council recalls in this regard the
communique adopted by the ministerial meeting
of the AU Peace and Security Council held on
29 July, the communique adopted by the AU and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) on 22 July and the mechanisms outlined
by the Chair of the AU High-level Implementation
Panel, President Thabo Mbeki, in his 9 June
letter to President Omar Hassan A. Al-Bashir and
President Salva Kiir. It also welcomes the extension
of the mandate of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel.

"The Security Council expresses grave concern
about continued challenges to the implementation
of the 27 September 2012 cooperation agreements,
and calls on all parties to urgently: implement fully
and immediately the 27 September cooperation
agreements and all other relevant agreements; make
effective use of the joint and other mechanisms
that have been established to do so; cooperate with
the High-level Implementation Panel, the African
Union and IGAD; and refrain from pursuing any
actions that run counter to these objectives.

"The Security Council recalls that resolution

2046 (2012), inter alia, prohibits both States from
supporting any rebel groups operating against the
other State and further recalls relevant agreements
between the Sudan and South Sudan to that end.
The Council welcomes the establishment and the
commencement of work of the ad hoc investigative
mechanism to look into allegations of such support
and the commitment by both Governments to
accept the mechanism's findings.

"The Security Council welcomes the creation
of the AU border programme technical team to
determine conclusively the safe demilitarized
border zone centre line on the ground, and
reiterates that the centre line in no way prejudices
the current or future legal status of the border,
ongoing negotiations on the disputed and claimed
areas and demarcation of the border. The Council
welcomes both Governments' commitments to
accept the technical team's findings.

"The Security Council urges the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan to maintain dialogue
to ensure continued transportation of oil from
South Sudan, and the Government of the Sudan to
suspend any actions to halt the transportation of oil
from South Sudan to allow these mechanisms to
complete their work.

"The Security Council supports the African
Union Peace and Security Council's calls for full
cooperation with the Abyei Area Joint Investigation
and Inquiry Committee's investigation into the
killing of a United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei peacekeeper and the Ngok Dinka
paramount chief.

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern about the highly volatile situation in the
Abyei Area, and stresses that the parties must
immediately implement pending aspects of the
20 June 2011 Agreement on Temporary Security and
Administrative Arrangements for the Abyei Area,
in particular to resolve the dispute over the Abyei
Area Council and immediately establish the Abyei
Area administration and Abyei police service. The
Council recalls their decision in resolution 2046
(2012) that the parties must resume immediately
negotiations to reach agreement on the Abyei
final status under the auspices of the High-level
Implementation Panel. In this regard, the Council
calls for swift action to disarm communities in
Abyei in accordance with the decision of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee to turn Abyei into a
weapons-free zone, which it welcomed in resolution
2104 (2013).

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of the Sudan and Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North to cease hostilities
and engage in direct talks to end the conflict in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. The Council
also calls on all parties to refrain from any acts
of violence against civilians, to expedite safe and
unhindered humanitarian access for the timely and
full delivery of humanitarian aid to all civilians
in urgent need of assistance in accordance with
relevant provisions of international law, including
international humanitarian law and the United
Nations guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance, and to fully respect international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. In
this regard, it emphasizes that those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of international human rights
law must be held accountable."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/14.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

