Mr. Eitel (Germany): On behalf of my delegation, I
too would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We have full confidence in your leadership,
and are convinced that your great skill will serve you well
in conducting our business and will serve us well; we will
profit from it.

We also wish to commend your predecessor, Sir John
Weston, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for the way in which he effectively and
resourcefully led the Council's business last month.

My Government is extremely pleased that we again
have the occasion to deal with a matter before the Security
Council in this open forum and to hear the point of view of
all interested Member States. This discussion on the
situation in Angola and on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) should enhance the
transparency of our work and provide valuable input. In this
context, Germany fully supports the statement Italy has just
made on behalf of the European Union. Let me also thank
the Secretary-General for his valuable report, which is the
basis of our deliberations.

At the outset, both parties in Angola have to be
reminded that the inconsistent pace of the peace process in
recent months has given rise to some doubts as to the will
for peace on both sides. The parties must know that the
international community expects them to do their utmost in
order to consolidate peace in Angola. I am sure there will
be no United Nations peace-keeping operation in Angola
after February 1997.

At the same time, we recognize that the Angolan
Government has in recent months made greater efforts to
fulfil its obligations arising from the Lusaka Protocol. We
welcome, in particular, the withdrawal of government
forces from advanced positions, the beginning of the
quartering of its rapid reaction police and the release of
all registered prisoners. We call on the Angolan
Government to continue in this vein, and we appeal to
UNITA to renew its efforts to meet its obligations as
well.

Following recent setbacks and the deterioration of
mutual trust, we support any confidence-building
measures that may restore the climate of confidence. A
further meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi in the near future may be a first step towards
renewed trust.

Germany calls on the Angolan Government and
UNITA to adhere to the Lusaka Protocol and to the
timetable agreed upon on 12 January 1996 by both parties
regarding the implementation of their obligations. These
include, in particular, strict adherence to the cease-fire
agreement; ending all hostile actions and human rights
violations; beginning coordinated demining activities; and
refraining from obstructing or endangering UNAVEM. III
troops or humanitarian deliveries. In this context, it is
very important that UNAVEM. III radio be given access
to the air waves.

Also, further efforts must be made to integrate
UNITA contingents into the national army. UNITA
personnel must also participate in the country's
administration. At this point in the peace process,
however, it is important for UNITA to understand that
any further progress will depend on its willingness to
keep step with the Government and to make the
appropriate efforts to implement the Lusaka Protocol. The
international community will not understand any further
delay in the quartering process. UNITA promised to
quarter 16,500 troops by 8 February 1996. Mr. Savimbi
repeated this pledge on the occasion of your visit, Madam
President, to Angola. Fulfilment of this pledge by the
promised date will be proof of UNITA's political will to
move towards peace: this is a cornerstone of the peace
process. In addition, UNITA must release all prisoners.

Angola will be dependent on international assistance
for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of its national
economy. It must be made clear, however, that such
assistance will be forthcoming only if both parties provide
concrete proof of their will for peace: they must meet

 

their obligations under the Lusaka agreement and respect
the agreed timetable for its implementation.

Finally, I should like to express my country's concern
about UNAVEM's financial situation. In his report, the
Secretary-General points out that $26.4 million in assessed
contributions to UNAVEM. remained outstanding at the end
of last year. This situation constitutes a serious threat to
UNAVEM's ability to carry out its mandate; I shall not
dwell on peace-keeping operations in general, which are
being severely compromised by the lack of funds resulting
from unpaid contributions. It is of the utmost importance
that all Member States pay their assessed contributions in
full and on time.

