Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes the comprehensive briefing made by Mr.
Doss, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We also welcome the participation of the
Foreign Minister of Belgium and the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda in this debate.

We continue to be concerned that, despite all
attempts to restore peace and security, efforts to
stabilize the eastern region of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have experienced significant setbacks
recently. Of particular concern was the resumption of
fighting on 26 August between the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congres
national pour la defense du peuple, which has
exacerbated the overall humanitarian situation by
displacing hundreds of thousands of civilians,
hampering humanitarian assistance and threatening
United Nations staff.

The gravity of the human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - including
arbitrary executions, rape, torture and degrading
treatment - calls for an urgent response. It is in that
context that my delegation supported the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the enhancement of its capabilities. We
would therefore support the overall review of
MONUC's mandate and the strengthening of its rules
of engagement.

However, we must point out that, in the long run,
even additional peacekeepers will not resolve the
political causes of the conflict. It is imperative that the
international community synergize and consolidate its
diplomatic and political efforts to address the
underlying causes of a conflict of this nature. The only
way out of this crisis is a coherent political strategy
implemented through consistent and concerted help
from the Security Council and influential Member
States of the region.

It is in that context that my delegation welcomed
the appointment of the former President of Nigeria,
Chief Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, as the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Indeed, his focus on building
confidence between and among all stakeholders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
and on addressing the challenges to peace and security
posed by the continued presence and activities of
illegal armed groups in the eastern part of that country
will contribute to resolving some of the root causes of
the conflict there.

We wish to highlight some of the important and
urgent tasks in the immediate period ahead. All efforts
must be deployed to sustain and deepen the
implementation of the current ceasefire agreement. The
protection of the civilian population is of paramount
importance, as are immediate access to humanitarian
assistance, the effective implementation of MONUC's
mandate and, in particular, laying the groundwork for
meaningful dialogue and peace negotiations among all
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My delegation stands ready to assist in any way
possible towards the successful implementation of
those tasks.

