Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I wish to start by
conveying my delegation's sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of Bangladesh on the
tragic death of Bangladeshi peacekeepers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As this is the last day of the Republic of Benin's
presidency of the Security Council this month, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on the very able stewardship that
you have shown during this busy period for the
Security Council.

I am also happy to warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste, in our midst.

Before I continue, let me thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa for his comprehensive briefing on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Given the current phase of the mission,
my delegation is of the view that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/99) is very significant for
the Council to consider.

Three months have elapsed since the Council last
discussed this agenda item. Throughout the period
under consideration, UNMISET has contributed
significantly to the efforts to guide Timor-Leste to
reach the stage of self-reliance and self-sufficiency.
Nearly two years after UNMISET first started its work
in Timor-Leste, we are glad to observe that the core
administrative structures critical to the viability and
political stability of Timor-Leste have been functioning
well, as was originally envisioned by the Security
Council. As the work of the mission begins to wind
down, my delegation reiterates its consistent support
for the mandate of the mission.

As a country that shares history with Timor-
Leste, Indonesia regards the young nation as one of the
priorities of its foreign policy. Furthermore, as we have
always stated, both nations decided to embrace
forward-looking and reconciliatory policies in the
interest of their peoples and of their development. That
decision has been manifested in strengthened bilateral
relations and the intensive meetings of the highest
political officials of both countries.

Rigorous efforts have been made in the past three
years to promote reconciliation between the two
countries. That reconciliation by the two Governments
and peoples has reached a satisfactory level and has
shown significant results. Operation Solidarity,
launched by President Xanana Gusmao following the
Tsunami which on 26 December 2004 hit the
Indonesian provinces of Aceh and North Sumatra, and
the strong solidarity shown by individual citizens from
across Timor-Leste through their donations to the
victims of that natural disaster in Indonesia also attest
to the tangible progress made in reconciliation between
the peoples and the Governments of the two countries.
We are deeply touched by that expression of the
solidarity and support of the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste.

In addition, Indonesia has been helping
reconciliation among East Timorese, for example, by
facilitating visits by leaders of Timor-Leste for
dialogue with their compatriots in West Timor and by
facilitating family reunifications among East Timorese.
However, in order to maintain and further promote
bilateral relations, both countries have underscored the
importance of resolving the existing residual issues,
while at the same time deepening and expanding
bilateral cooperation.

Indeed, President Yudhoyono and President
Xanana Gusmao have met several times since
Mr. Yudhoyono's inauguration as President of the
Republic of Indonesia in October 2004. The
14 December 2004 meeting in Bali between leaders of
the two countries constituted a historic moment in our
bilateral relations. The leaders reiterated their desire
and determination to further enhance a stable, friendly
and mutually beneficial relationship between their two
countries. They also noted with satisfaction the steady
and positive growth of their relations in the past three
years, as reflected, for example, by the significant
progress made in addressing residual issues such as
land-border delineation, refugees, traditional border-
crossing access and regulated market arrangements.
Beyond politics and security, shared optimism was
noted concerning economic relations, which, during
this period, have witnessed a steadily growing and
mutually beneficial flow of trade and investment.

Now, let me turn to something that was referred
to by Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta. With a view to
addressing decisively the matters pertaining to the
events of 1999, leaders of Indonesia and Timor-Leste
made an important decision by agreeing upon the
establishment of a Truth and Friendship Commission.
In that regard, I should like to support the statement of
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta on this matter and I will
limit myself to highlighting only certain important
aspects about the Commission.

The Commission, as an alternative to the
commission of experts will provide an additional
unique avenue for both countries to jointly address
reported human rights violations that took place in the
period leading up to and immediately after the popular
consultation in 1999; its focus will be on revealing the
truth and promoting friendship. This agreement is
unprecedented in history. By its terms, these two
nations that were severely affected by a common
experience have agreed jointly to embark on finding
out the truth about the allegations of human rights
violations that occurred. On the basis of those findings,
intracommunal and intercommunal reconciliation
among the peoples of the two countries will be further
promoted.

The agreement of the heads of the two
Governments clearly reflects maturity and the spirit to
seek an acceptable solution that will heal the wounds
and unload the burden of the past in order to continue
to foster bilateral relations and friendship among both
peoples.

Different countries with their respective
experiences have chosen different means to come to
terms with their past. In some countries, their leaders
and their peoples might seek truth and reconciliation
rather than engage in a prosecutorial process. Indonesia
and Timor-Leste have opted to seek truth and promote
friendship as a new and unique mechanism. True
justice can be served through truth and
acknowledgement of responsibility, while a
prosecutorial process might only achieve justice but
not necessarily establish truth or promote
reconciliation. Therefore, Indonesia and Timor-Leste
are determined to pursue the conclusion of the process
in addressing the issue through the framework of the
Commission. The Commission will be open to the
assistance of the international community based on
joint requests from both countries.

We envision that the establishment of the
Commission will be formally announced soon. That
will enable both nations to embark on a path that will
permit us to lay down the burdens of the past. In that
endeavour, it is the hope of the Indonesian Government
that the international community, and particularly the
Security Council, will lend its support to that unique
and unprecedented initiative.

On the question of the land boundary between the
two nations, let me assure the Council that the
Government of Indonesia is ready at any time to sign
the provisional agreement on the land boundary. We
were pleased to hear the indication of a possible
signing by both countries of the provisional agreement
soon. The draft of that agreement was discussed and
agreed on by both countries at their bilateral meeting in
June 2004. As the Council is aware, there has been
remarkable progress in the land-boundary delineation
process, on which both countries have agreed on the
coordinates of the border points along almost 95 per
cent of the border. Some of the lines connecting those
points have been agreed on as the boundary lines, and
some are being considered as the approximate
boundary lines.

The remaining tasks for the joint technical team,
therefore, are the densification of the border points and
the delineation survey in order to upgrade the
approximate boundary lines into agreed boundary
lines. Indonesia and Timor-Leste also have to discuss
the remaining three unsolved segments. Another
important work that has to be accomplished is the
demarcation of the boundary lines. The joint technical
team will resume further surveys of the border in June
2005 to register further progress. While looking
forward to making further progress in the land
boundary demarcation, we are cautious about the target
for the completion of the process within a certain time
frame.

In that regard, Indonesia would like to stress that
border management is a continuous cooperative
endeavour that will not stop once the two sides have
come to an agreement on the land boundaries. In
addition, border management is also deemed necessary
in order to better respond to the possible incidence of
criminal acts along the border areas. The continued
strengthening of cooperation between the Indonesian
police and military and the border patrol units of
Timor-Leste on the border has resulted in a notable
improvement of security and stability, not only in areas
around the border, but also in Timor-Leste in general.
Indonesia is committed to enhancing security
cooperation with Timor-Leste, particularly in the field
of border management. In that regard, the Joint Border
Committee, as a subsidiary of the annual meeting of
the Indonesia-Timor-Leste Joint Ministerial
Commission, remains an important mechanism in
which the two sides can, in a direct manner, discuss
and enhance coordination in addressing issues relating
to border demarcation and border management.

While land border demarcation is important,
member States might also be interested to learn of
developments in the delimitation of Timor-Leste's
maritime boundary, on which the report is rather silent.

Now that the termination of the mandate of
UNMISET is in view, it is also time to take a hard look
at the need for Timor-Leste to strengthen its national
capacity-building. In that regard, Indonesia
understands that Timor-Leste, as reflected in the letter
of its Prime Minister, Mr. Mari Alkatiri, to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan of 20 January 2005, is seeking
additional United Nations assistance for a further year,
following the progress made so far by UNMISET.

My delegation is of the view that the overall
achievement of UNMISET does not preclude the
possibility that some continued assistance from the
international community to Timor-Leste is still needed.
Given the particular need for Timor-Leste to strengthen
its capacity-building in various sectors of public
administration, as well as to maintain public order, the
additional United Nations assistance requested by
Timor-Leste deserves positive consideration.

