Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/656). I also
thank Special Representative Kubis for his briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks this morning.
As this is likely to be the Special Representative's last
Council meeting, let me pay particularly warm tribute
to Special Representative Jan Kubis, who, for the past
three years, has worked tirelessly to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan. We wish him extremely well
in his future endeavours.

I will focus my remarks on four issues: the recent
NATO Summit, the electoral process, the next steps for
Afghanistan and the role of the United Nations and the
international community.

The NATO Summit in Wales, earlier this month,
was an important opportunity to mark the achievements
and sacrifices made by the International Security
Assistance Force mission. Afghan forces are now
leading 99 per cent of the combat operations across
Afghanistan and are proving increasingly effective.
The Summit also demonstrated the international
community's enduring commitment to Afghanistan.
We reaffirmed commitments made at Chicago in
2012 to sustain the Afghan security forces throughout
the transformation decade. The United Kingdom
announced that it will continue to provide more than
$100 million per year to support the Afghan National
Security Forces for the next three years, and we will
work with international partners to train future leaders
through the Officer Academy.

Turning to the electoral process, let me acknowledge
the superb efforts of Special Representative Kubis and
his team and their work over the past few months in
support of the independent election institutions in
Afghanistan. Together, after a challenging period,
they worked effectively to conclude the audit of
Afghanistan's presidential election. But as the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan has made
clear, the situation remains fluid and uncertain. As we
near the end of what has been a protracted process, the
Council must send a firm message to both candidates,
urging them to engage constructively over the coming
days as they seek to calmly resolve their differences
and to work towards an agreement that establishes a
new unity Government. They must continue to act in
the best interests of the Afghan people.

The United Kingdom remains firmly committed to
a lasting partnership with Afghanistan. Together, we
must set out a constructive approach and press ahead
quickly on key reforms and priorities. We look forward
to the signing of the bilateral security agreement
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
United States and the signing of the NATO status-of-
forces agreement as important steps to secure future
international support.

Afghanistan also faces significant domestic
challenges. Urgent work is needed to stabilize the
economy and to protect the important gains made
in human rights, in particular those of women and
children. An inclusive peace process remains essential.
A new Afghan Government must also continue to
engage with key regional partners through initiatives
such as the Heart of Asia process, in order to sustain the
important progress made to date.

The United Kingdom looks forward to co-chairing
the London Conference on Afghanistan later this year.
The Conference will provide a further platform for the
international community to demonstrate its solidarity
with Afghanistan and for a new Government to set
out its vision of the form and delivery of our shared
priorities. The support of the Council and the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will be essential in that effort, both in signalling our
expectations and in delivering key assistance on the
ground.

It is an extraordinary time for Afghanistan. On the
verge ofa truly historic moment in their history, we urge
all parties in Afghanistan to work in the interests of the
Afghan people. We urge the international community
to offer its full support.

