Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me at the outset to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Heller for their briefings today and to
commend their commitment, contributions and tireless
work in chairing the respective Committees. We find
these regular briefings to be not only highly important,
as the Committees are among the crucial tools in
countering terrorism, but also an opportunity for
sharing and exchanging information with the wider
membership.

The events of recent weeks - waves of devices
sent to numerous Governments, embassies and
religious institutions - and the ever-present threat of
suicide bombs and violent extremism that take the lives
of innocent people are a grim reminder of the
challenges we need to address. Therefore, we have to
continuously rethink our current approaches and
engagement with the aim of providing effective
international legal cooperation and to properly address
existing deficiencies in the capacities of States
Members to fully implement the United Nations
counterterrorism framework.

Through the years, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has evolved into
one of the most critical United Nations monitoring
bodies in the fight against the threat of Al-Qaida and
the Taliban. We welcome the tangible results and
progress achieved in the work of the Committee since
our last briefing (see S/PV.6310), in particular the
completion of a demanding task - the comprehensive
review in accordance with resolution 1822 (2008) in
July this year.

We stand ready to actively work with the
Chairman and the Committee members, taking into
account the contributions of the Monitoring Team and
designated Member States to conducting the review of
pending issues and deceased persons. The completion
of the review process of the consolidated list and the
full implementation of resolution 1904 (2009) will
further improve the credibility and transparency of the
Committee's work.

At the heart of all the criticism regarding the
fairness and transparency of the work not only of the
1267 Committee, but of other relevant counter-
terrorism bodies as well, lies concern for respect for
human rights. Undertaking difficult steps in countering
terrorism at the national and international levels, we
pledged that the promotion and protection of human
rights and the rule of law should remain a priority, as
they constitute the fundamental values enshrined in the
United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Ms. Kimberly Prost on her
appointment and to present our sincere wishes for her
future work as Ombudsperson of the 1267 Committee.
Although the institution of Ombudsperson still needs to
develop its full potential in the days to come, we are
confident that Ms. Prost will successfully address all
concerns expressed in the past, to the great benefit of
the Committee and the Security Council.

With regard to the issue of monitoring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), several aspects of the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) have contributed
cumulatively to its efficiency. The continuous
assessment and stocktaking of revised Preliminary
Implementation Assessments, in accordance with the
previous practice, and visibility-raising through more
frequent open briefings are beneficial both to Member
States, which now have the opportunity to exchange
views and offer their experiences, and to the
Committee, which is in a position to have better insight
into country implementation of the recommendations
and consequently extend further technical support.

Since the briefing in May this year, Committee
has carried on its active engagement in a series of
thematic and regional debates that have brought into
perspective all the challenges and difficulties we all
face in our common fight against terrorism and efforts
to implement our obligations under relevant Security
Council resolutions. To that extent, it is necessary to
underline the importance of reaching out to partner
organizations, and we commend the practice of the
CTC of arranging meetings with relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations.

Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue fully to
support the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We remain strongly committed to the effective
prevention of and fight against this global threat, and
stand ready to provide every assistance and support to
international efforts to that end.

The importance and role of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as one
of the focal points of the United Nations counter-
terrorism and non-proliferation activities has already
been well highlighted. We fully recognize the crucial
role of the 1540 Committee as a clearinghouse for
channelling assistance to Member States in establishing
and further developing their capacity to face the threat
of non-State actors acquiring weapons of mass
destruction. We also believe that the growing
acceptance of resolution 1540 (2004) in recent years is
a result of increased understanding on the part of
Member States of its importance and the Committee's
cooperative approach in assisting States in
implementation of its provisions.

In that regard, we support the extension of the
1540 Committee's mandate and call for it to be
strengthened in material and human resources so as to
enable it to provide assistance where and when needed.
It is also important that Member States extend their
additional support to the Committee's efforts by
securing more voluntary contributions for financing its
activities, thus enabling the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to give its fullest support and contribute to the
overall international efforts to counter terrorism
through its actions at both the national and the
international levels.

