Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
at the outset to extend a warm welcome and our
appreciation to Judges Patrick L. Robinson and Dennis
Byron, Presidents of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
respectively, as well as to the Prosecutors of the
Tribunals, Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow. Their
extensive briefings today, together with the reports
before us (see S/2010/588 and S/2010/574), reflect the
tireless work of the Tribunals and their efforts to
contribute to the overall fight against impunity.

Being the country most affected by the crimes
under the jurisdiction of one of the Tribunals, we
would like to emphasize how important it is to bring
justice to the Victims and their families and hold
accountable those who committed the heinous crimes
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. In that context,
we reiterate the strong support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the Tribunals and our commitment to
full cooperation.

After careful consideration of the reports, it is
evident that the Tribunals have undertaken every effort
to bring their work to an end in an efficient and
reasonable manner, especially bearing in mind that
they faced many obstacles beyond their reach and out
of their control. We should not allow the Tribunals'
groundbreaking contributions to international
jurisprudence to succumb to the pressure to end their
mandate with partial results and without adequate
resolution.

Thus the support and encouragement of the
Council is both crucial and necessary at this sensitive
and important period in the Tribunals' existence. A
timely, efficient and complete transition to a residual
mechanism requires that the mechanism be very
carefully constructed as a credible and proper
continuation of the Tribunals' functions.

In that regard, allow me to extend our
appreciation to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for his
strong leadership in chairing the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals and to commend the
entire Austrian delegation for its dedication and tireless
work. As a result of their efforts, the Group's
deliberations are successfully moving toward the
creation of a residual mechanism that will adequately
reflect the Tribunals' legacy.

Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina has, with
each new report, demonstrated a commitment to its
obligations and unwavering support for and dedication
to strengthening international criminal justice. That is
reflected in a record of continued and positive
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
ICTY. As stated, the authorities of my country have
effectively responded to all requests of the Office of the
Prosecutor, providing documents, enabling unobstructed
access to government archives and facilitating the
appearance of witnesses before the Tribunal.
Cooperation has been particularly constructive in regard
to the Rule 11 bis cases transferred by the Office of the
Prosecutor to the War Crimes Chamber of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Five of the six cases
transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina have been
concluded with final decisions.

Bearing all that in mind, it is disappointing and
frustrating that the Tribunals still account for 12
fugitives and especially that Felicien Kabuga, Ratko
Mladic and Goran Hadzie are still at large,
undermining and ridiculing the very notion of justice
that we are all dedicated to. Therefore, the Tribunals'
efforts to comply with the completion strategy and our
tireless work in developing a residual mechanism are
useless until we take firm steps and serious measures to
bring those criminals to justice. Additionally, the
unconditional cooperation of relevant international and
regional organizations and States is essential for the
fulfilment of the Tribunals' mandates.

Finally, I would like once again to voice Bosnia
and Herzegovina's support for the work of both
Tribunals, which we regard as highly important. At the
regional level, it has brought justice to those who

suffered the most, contributed greatly to the
advancement of the rule of law and paved a path
towards reconciliation. At the global level, it is
considered a milestone in the existing system of
international criminal justice. As such, it needs to be
respected and preserved.

