Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the Special Representative and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office in Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, and to express our
appreciation for his staff's excellent work in supporting
and coordinating the Organization's initiatives and
the regional efforts aimed at preventing conflicts and
building peace in Central Africa and at promoting
preventive diplomacy and mediation in the subregion.

We hope that Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily and UNOCA
will be able to count on the support needed for the
continued implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy designed to address the threat and
consequences of the activities of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), and to support the Regional Task Force of
the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
for the Elimination of the LRA, working with the
countries affected to that end.

Chile supports the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/319), so we will
mention just a few aspects that deserve particular
attention.

While the report notes a decrease in the activities
of the LRA in the subregion, the crises in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, and the withdrawal
of troops provided by Uganda and South Sudan from the
Regional Task Force, has created security vulnerabilities
that the LRA could exploit. We therefore recommend
redoubling the efforts to eliminate the LRA and prevent
its association with members of other armed groups,
such as the ex-Se'leka. Moreover, the threat of that
group has led many humanitarian non-governmental
organizations to restrict their activities. We should
therefore urge donors to support recuperative activities
without delay in order to restore basic livelihoods and
essential services in the affected communities.

We should step up efforts to implement the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
against Joseph Kony and other LRA commanders on
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including murder, rape and child recruitment through
kidnapping. The news of the capture by the African
Union's Task Force of LRA commander Charles Okello
and rescue of three women and seven children on
21 April is a positive sign.

The international community should continue to
actively support the countries of Central Africa in their
efforts to achieve peace and stability and to promote
the normalization of the humanitarian and human
rights situations, the protection of civilians, dialogue,
reconciliation, transitional justice, national capacity-
building and integration. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General's recent visits to the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. We cannot remain
indifferent to the deepening humanitarian crisis and
its growing impact on those countries' neighbours, the
inter-and intra-community violence, including sexual
violence - which has reached alarming proportions in
the Central African Republic - the threat of terrorism,
the continuing maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea, the illegal trade in Wildlife and transnational
organized crime.

One of the significant challenges to peacebuilding
and sustainable development in Central Africa is
widespread unemployment among young people,
which leaves them vulnerable to recruitment and
re-recruitment. Young refugees and internally displaced
persons deserve special attention, due to their double
vulnerability to recruitment by terrorists and armed
groups. While we are aware of the limitations on the
staff of UNOCA, which has had to resort to financing
outside the regular budget, we urge it to focus its
initiatives in this area in partnership with the Economic
Community of Central African States, the African
Development Bank, the World Bank, the International
Labour Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Peacebuilding Commission and other
key regional and international stakeholders.

We commend the leadership and coordinating
role played by relevant regional organizations. We
urge UNOCA to support their initiatives, such as
the subregional commitments to implementing the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and combatting the
illegal trade in forest flora and fauna that finances
armed groups; the agreement of the six member States
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to establish the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat the threats
posed by the militants of Boko Haram; the African
Union's 2050 Integrated Maritime Strategy; and the
implementation of a road map and action plan for
working towards the establishment of an inter-regional
centre for coordination. In that regard , we hope
UNOCA will continue to support the work of the expert
groups of the related Sanctions Committees.

We also hope that the establishment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
will contribute to peace and stability in the subregion.
We encourage coordination between the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and the Regional Task Force
until the transfer of responsibility from MISCA to
MINUSCA on 15 September, and we support the efforts
of the AU Commission's technical assessment mission
to that end. Similarly, we should promote coordination
and the exchange of information between the Task
Force, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the recently
created MINUSCA.

