Mr. Baja (Philippines): I congratulate the Slovak
presidency on the convening of this open debate on
Timor-Leste. We thank Prime Minister Jose Ramos-
Horta for honouring the Council with his presence
today, and we thank him for his comprehensive
briefing. We also thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

The improvement in the overall situation in
Timor-Leste since the crisis in May last year is a
welcome development. We laud the national leadership
and other actors for the steps that they have taken to
rebuild cooperative relations among stakeholders. The
establishment of UNMIT and the continued presence of
international forces have also contributed positively to
the restoration and maintenance of peace and security
in Timor-Leste. The general positive outlook of the
international community provides the necessary
momentum to enable the country to recover from what
we see as a momentary bump on the road towards
stable nationhood.

Institutionalization of the political process is
necessary to achieve national reconciliation and
political stability. We support the efforts to ensure that
the first post-independence general election, to be held
in April this year, will be peaceful and orderly. We
believe that effort should also be made to establish a
sustainable socio-economic development framework
for Timor-Leste. We are glad to note the assistance
being provided by bilateral and multilateral partners to
build the capacities of the Government of Timor-Leste.

At the Twelfth Summit of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, held in Cebu early this year,
Prime Minister Ramos-Horta was able to have a
meaningful exchange of views with the leaders of the
region on possible assistance to Timor-Leste. The
Philippines is assisting the country, particularly in the
area of human resources development. The Philippines,
through the Japan International Cooperation Agency, is
currently working on several projects for Timor-Leste
involving training courses in the fields of education
and food processing. The transfer of human resources
development expertise in the areas of local governance,
rural development, community development and
national budgeting is also being explored.

In addition, the Philippines is working with
Timor-Leste in facilitating the admission of Timorese
students to Philippine colleges and universities, as well
as in providing vocational training. We hope that those
efforts will aid in strengthening Timor-Leste's human
resources to meet the growing requirements and
challenges of regionalism, globalization and
technological progress.

The Philippine commitment to Timor-Leste's
nation-building is also shown through our deployment
of police personnel to UNMIT. We have successively
participated in the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET), the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL). To date, the Philippines is the fourth
largest contingent of UNMIT, composed largely of
police. Almost half of the Philippines' contribution of
police personnel to United Nations missions is in
UNMIT. We are also pleased to note that the United
Nations Police Commissioner is Rodolfo Tor, Director
of the Philippine National Police.

To ensure that the momentum is maintained in
bringing Timor-Leste back, continued engagement by
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, is required. UNMIT has thus far made
substantial progress in implementing its mandate,
particularly in the areas of transitional law
enforcement, police reform, elections, good offices and
cooperation with bilateral and multilateral partners. We
should continue to give full support to UNMIT.

It is in that regard that the Philippines supports
the Secretary-General's recommendation that UNMIT's
mandate be extended for a period of 12 months as an
important signal of the sustained commitment of the
United Nations to Timor-Leste. Given the security
requirements for the elections, we also support the
request by the Government of Timor-Leste for the
deployment of an additional formed police unit to
UNMIT.

Timor-Leste is a good example of a successful
international enterprise in nation-building, engineered
through the combined cooperative efforts of the United
Nations, regional players and partners. When the
success story of Timor-Leste is written, it will be a tale
of the courage of the country's people and its leaders,
the generosity of the United Nations and the
international community, and the triumph of their
coordinated efforts to assist a country in distress.
Timor-Leste could very well be a model of best
practices and lessons for countries in conflict, and we
should support it.

