Mr. Nina (Albania): Allow me first to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and for the interesting concept note prepared
for it (S/2016/103, annex).

Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
make the following remarks in my national capacity.

As rightly provided pointed out in the concept
note, the United Nations emerged from the ashes of
the Second World War with a firm promise. Nothing
indeed could have been nobler in 1945, as they are
today, than the common ideals enshrined in the
Charter of the Organization, including, notably, "to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow
to mankind". We further concur with your assessment,
Sir, that throughout its history the United Nations has
registered significant achievements as regards peace,
security and international cooperation. Indeed, there
has been immense progress during the seven decades
of the United Nations existence - progress that has
brought real change.

Undeniably, the United Nations has worked for and
greatly contributed to the transformed, better world we
live in today. It has brought to life, inter alia, the vast
issue of human rights, enshrined in the Preamble to the
Charter -

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small"

- which was almost inexistent before the founding of
the United Nations. It represents the basis of the very
important core treaties whose fiftieth anniversary we
mark this year: the International Covenants on Civil
and Political Rights and Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights.

The failure to fulfil the so-called firm promise of
the United Nations to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war has also been constant. The solemn
pledge of "never again" has been repeated too often, and
man-made tragedies keep recurring, challenging the
belief in humankind's capacity to learn from its failures.
Over the past 70 years, the Charter has not always been
implemented in the manner that a literal reading of the
text might suggest, even though, since the end of the
Cold War, we have seen its reinvigoration. Millions of
people across the world have had no other choice than
to water down their illusions faced with wars, atrocities
and massive human rights violations from which the
United Nations has solemnly pledged to save succeeding
generations. Important recommendations on several
situations from the General Assembly and other United
Nations mechanisms have, most regrettably, not been
referred to the International Criminal Court.

We have entered an era in which armed conflicts
are greater in complexity and numbers of actors,
broader in tactics and weapons used and, above all,
more atrocious in the human suffering they cause. The
response of the international community should also be
adapted to the new reality and the challenges we face.
Increasingly, the international system is beginning
to reach the more remote areas of social and political
change, but the United Nations mechanisms were not
originally designed to focus on them. It is therefore
imperative to adapt the United Nations to allow a more
active response to political and humanitarian abuses.

In 2005, 60 years after its founding, the United
Nations World Summit provided an opportunity to
reform the United Nations to meet the challenges of the
twenty-first century. The responsibility to protect, in
particular, has catalysed important developments during
the past 10 years. Progress has been made in building a
global political consensus around the responsibility to
protect as a very practical and effective framework for
preventing mass atrocity crimes.

Developing the norm alone does not provide
for prevention or protection. The growing support
for the normative framework should be matched by
the necessary political will and, most importantly,
resources to prevent atrocity crimes. The rise of violent
extremism and non-State armed groups perpetrating
atrocities, particularly against ethnic and religious
minorities, continues to be one of the most pressing
challenges, and it must be defeated.

Only recently, on the occasion of attaining 60 years
of United Nations membership, Albania reaffirmed
once again its full commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its
firm belief in effective multilateralism and international
cooperation as the best means to respond to old and
new threats and the challenges of our time. The
Charter has tasked the Security Council, as the organ
responsible for maintaining peace and security, to act
swiftly and resolutely when countries are confronted
with situations of mass atrocity and grave human rights
violations, and when States are at risk of experiencing
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
ethnic cleansing.

We, unfortunately, know only too well what happens
when the Council fails to live up to its responsibilities.
The use of the veto in such cases betrays the trust of
millions of people for whom the United Nations is
the only hope. It openly disregards the victims, it
empowers dictators and other human rights violators,
and undermines international efforts to end impunity.
In this respect, Albania wishes to reiterate its strong
supports for the French proposal and the efforts of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group to
draft a code of conduct regarding the non-use of the
veto in situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing.

In concluding, allow me to go back to where it
all began - to the noble idea of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war - in order to recall
that the authority and legitimacy vested in the Security
Council to maintain or restore international peace and
security has no precedent in international relations,
and that the Council must be up to its responsibility
and justify world confidence in fully upholding the
principles enshrined in the Charter. Discussions this
year on the draft text on the responsibility to protect will
offer us yet again an opportunity to renew and further
the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

