Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank Chile for putting this important topic on the
Council's agenda, and for organizing this debate so
appropriately on Martin Luther King, Jr., Day.

I align my statement with that made earlier today
on behalf of the European Union. In view of the time
constraints, 1 will read out a shortened version of my
statement, the full text of which will be available via
my Twitter account.
The Netherlands commends Ms. Leymah
Gbowee on her introduction this morning and on the
outstanding work she has done in Liberia, where
she focused on including women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. Including women in such
efforts is crucially important to attaining sustainable
peace and is a key priority of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. To underscore that, on 18 February
we will host a conference in the Netherlands on
resolution 1325 (2000), and tomorrow, at 3 p.m., we
will host a side event on the subject here at the United
Nations, which my Minister will attend.

The prevention of conflict is a crucial aspect of the
Council's mandate to address threats to international
peace and security, and for prevention we need early
warning. The "Human Rights Up Front" approach,
initiated by the United Nations, therefore deserves our
full support. In that context, I would like to highlight
one specific aspect: the prevention of mass atrocity
crimes. We commend the excellent new Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, prepared by the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect. It is also an extremely useful
tool for conflict prevention. The Security Council has
the important task of sending out this type of early-
warning signals, assessing whether they constitute
a risk to international peace and security and taking
political or other action if that is necessary. But more
structural prevention of conflicts remains our biggest
challenge, and that brings me to the connection between
development and the prevention of conflict.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
ensuring stable societies is the best way to guarantee the
prevention of internal conflict. That means that inclusion
and social cohesion should be guiding principles for
development strategies. For economic growth to benefit
the poor, it must be inclusive, and therefore together
we must make the post-2015 development agenda as
inclusive as possible. We believe it can contribute to
inclusive development by incorporating the following
concepts.

First, it should be universal, for all people in all
countries, including my own. Secondly, it should be
multidimensional and address the social, environmental,
economic and peace- and governance-related aspects
of development and inequality. Thirdly, it should be
a multi-actor agenda that includes all the relevant
stakeholders. And, fourthly, it should be based on our
common values, such as inclusiveness, human rights
and equality. If we can achieve that, it will be the
best basis for structurally addressing and preventing
conflicts.

We can also see specific responsibilities for United
Nations States members. They can actively contribute
to inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security while working closely
with the United Nations and taking practical steps in
their national policies. For example, they could work
more intensively with the Department of Political
Affairs on mediation, conflict prevention and inclusive
political processes. My country has done so in Yemen,
for instance. They could also work more intensively with
the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Reconstruction of
the United Nations Development Programme in support
of efforts in Tunisia and Iraq. Member States can also
take initiatives on a national basis. In the Netherlands
we have put significant effort into creating processes for
including all the relevant actors in countries affected by
conflict. We have tried to do so, for instance, in Syria
and Mali.

A final thought is that when preventing or
addressing conflicts, Member States should combine
diplomacy with defence and development. It should
be a comprehensive approach, which we call the 3-D
approach.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
a partner for peace, justice and development. We are
therefore committed to promoting inclusive stable
societies. We support the efforts of the United Nations
and work bilaterally to prevent conflicts and as a
partner for countries affected by conflicts. Without the
inclusion of all ofthe groups comprising a society, there
can be no real peace, justice or sustainable development.

