Ms. Rice (United States of America): Thank you,
Foreign Minister Fabius, for convening this important
meeting.

We gather at a sombre hour, less than a week after
some of the bloodiest days since the Syrian regime
began its crackdown almost 18 months ago. The United
States is outraged by the summary executions and
shelling that killed hundreds of Syrians in Darayya late
last week. The reports of aerial attacks on hospitals,
bakeries and breadlines in Aleppo recall some of the
worst atrocities of prior conflicts. The international
community has long pledged to never again allow such
crimes. Yet, for a year and a half, the Syrian regime
has waged a vicious, unrelenting campaign of terror
and bloodshed against its own suffering people. Bashar
Al-Assad and those who still stand by him are now
responsible for the deaths of more than 20,000 Syrians
and the wounding of tens of thousands more. They have
forced hundreds of thousands of civilians to flee for
their lives.

Despite the appalling environment on the ground
and the clear obstruction by the Syrian Government,
we are working with others to counter the cruelty of
Bashar Al-Assad and his clique. The United Nations,
international organizations, the United States, many
countries around the world and Syrian and other
humanitarian organizations are rushing vital aid to the
hundreds of thousands of civilians in urgent need. The
United Nations reports that up to 2.5 million Syrians
now need assistance. We commend the humanitarian
workers, who are risking their lives to save others, and
we grieve for those who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
All parties, especially the Syrian Government, must
allow safe, full and unfettered access for humanitarian
workers so they can save lives that today hang in the
balance.

The United States strongly supports the full and
immediate implementation of the Syria humanitarian
response plan, which was agreed by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Government of Syria. Only half of the $180 million
needed to address prior humanitarian needs in Syria
has been provided. The revised United Nations Syria
regional response plan, which assists neighbouring
countries hosting refugees, is underfunded as well.

My Government is pursuing every avenue to provide
humanitarian relief to those affected by the violence in
Syria. This year, the United States has already provided
nearly $82 million to the United Nations and other relief
agencies for the Syrian humanitarian crisis. Our aid has
fed the hungry and bound up the wounds of as many
of Al-Assad's victims as we can reach. We are helping
protect internally displaced people and refugees,
working to save children from malnutrition and disease
and helping to ensure adequate water, sanitation and
hygiene. Our assistance is also enabling humanitarian
coordination and logistics support to relief agencies.

We are deeply grateful to fellow Member States
that also have made important donations. We urge all
Members to increase their contributions to meet the
shortfalls and to coordinate closely with the United
Nations to avoid creating parallel humanitarian response
systems. We appreciate especially the generosity of
Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and other countries that
have opened their borders to civilians fleeing violence
and persecution. We stand ready to continue to provide
support as needed. We call on all concerned to facilitate
safe passage for those seeking to flee. The United States
is deeply troubled by the spillover of Syria's violence
into neighbouring countries, especially Lebanon,
where the Lebanese Government and security forces
are working to manage outbreaks of violence.

But this is not, at its root, a humanitarian crisis. It is
a political crisis caused by the cruelty and callousness
of the Al-Assad regime. No amount of humanitarian
assistance will end the bloodshed and suffering. That
day will come only once Al-Assad has departed and
a peaceful, Syrian-led transition to democracy has
begun. This remains our goal and should be the goal of
all nations of goodwill. We welcome the appointment
of Joint Special Envoy Brahimi and fully support his
efforts to end the violence and pave the way for a
political transition.

In parallel, the United States and our partners will
continue to work with the Syrian opposition and to
engage all elements of society to help the Syrian people
achieve a Government that represents all of its citizens,
promotes their human rights, respects the rule of law
and responds to its people's aspirations. We are proud to
help train civil society activists and to provide Syrians
with equipment that lets them communicate securely
with one another, reach out to the outside world and
document the regime's atrocities. We encourage the
opposition's efforts to unite the population behind a
common transition plan that offers a viable and safe
future for all Syrians. We will continue to expand and
intensify those efforts, and we will not rest until the
Syrian people are free to realize their aspirations to
govern themselves and live without fear.

Even as the conflict rages, we condemn in the
strongest terms unlawful killings by any side. We
cannot and will not turn away from atrocities and
systematic violations of international law. Those
responsible for massacres of civilians will be held
accountable. We welcome pledges by Free Syrian
Army leaders that forbid their soldiers from harming
civilians, mistreating prisoners or killing captured
combatants. We will watch to see that those promises
are implemented. We also reiterate our demand that the
Syrian Government refrain from using or transferring
any chemical or biological weapons. It is incumbent
upon the Syrian Government to ensure the safety and
security of all such weapons and stockpiles.

We have heard volumes today about the suffering of
the innocent and the cruelty of the guilty. My country
was founded on the belief that Governments derive
their just powers from the consent of the governed. The
Al-Assad regime has manifestly lost whatever consent,
if any, it ever had. The question is not whether it will
fall; the question is when, and at what price.

The primary responsibility for ending the carnage
rests with Al-Assad and the clique around him. But the
rest of the international community, especially our fellow
Council members, has responsibilities of their own.
Unfortunately, a few members of the Council continue
to prevent this body from responding effectively. That
is reprehensible. Yet even at this tragically late hour,
things do not have to remain as they are. The Syrian
people fully understand which countries have rallied
to their legitimate cause and which countries have
protected a doomed and desperate regime. The United
States will remain committed to pursuing a wiser
course, one that limits the harm to regional security,
staves off the risk of full-scale civil strife and produces
a new, responsible Syrian Government that will defend
and respect all of its citizens. Indeed, one day not far
away, Al-Assad will lose his bloody grip on the Syrian
people. Then the Council will have to step up to help
the Syrian people heal the wounds of war and rebuild
their battered country. When that day comes, the Syrian
people i and the world - will remember who was on
the wrong side of history and who was on the side of the
Syrian people.

