Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to express
my delegation's congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency for the month of May. I
am also grateful for your kind words addressed to the
Japanese presidency for the month of April. I would
like to join my colleagues in thanking the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU), Baroness Catherine
Ashton, for her briefing.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations constitutes an integral and
increasingly important part of the United Nations
architecture for international peace and security. As
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter envisages,
the Security Council should be kept informed of the
activities of regional organizations. It is in this spirit
that Japan welcomes today's briefing and the presence
of Baroness Ashton in the Council.

Japan congratulates the European Union on its
significant achievements, in cooperation with the
United Nations, in maintaining international peace and
security. The complementary and mutually reinforcing
role of the European Union has been most noteworthy
in its peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities all
over the world, from the West Balkans, Somalia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Afghanistan.
The cooperation between United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the
transition from the European Union Force to United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad are but a few examples of the close and
meaningful collaboration between the EU and the
United Nations. Operation Atalanta is another
important contribution the EU is making.

With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty,
Japan hopes that the foreign policy of the European
Union will show even greater coherency and
effectiveness under the leadership of the High
Representative.

A summit meeting between Japan and the
European Union was held in Tokyo last month with the
personal participation of the High Representative.
Japan will continue to cooperate closely with the EU in
such concrete areas as building capacity in the Afghan
police force and supporting the Djibouti regional
training centre for anti-piracy. Japan also values
coordination with the EU in the areas of peacebuilding,
human security, nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament.
In closing, we hope that the role of the EU in
international peace and security will be further
enhanced, as will its partnership with the United
Nations.

