Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as today's adoption of
resolution 2247 (2015).

Bosnia and Herzegovina is not only a next-door
neighbour, but also one of the key partners of my country
in the region. At a time when Europe faces numerous
challenges, dialogue, understanding and cooperation
in the Western Balkans and South-East Europe are
perhaps more important than ever before. It is therefore
only natural that the promotion of comprehensive
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of Serbia's
priorities. The potential for cooperation between our
two countries is enormous, all the more so as we remain
committed wholeheartedly to achieving our common
goals and set our sights on a positive vision of the future.

Serbia is a guarantor of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, the twentieth anniversary of which we are
currently marking. Twenty years ago, the Agreement
was instrumental in ending the tragic conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and established the basis for
a peaceful and stable future and, just as important, for
reconciliation. It was followed by economic and social
recovery, development and progress in the process
of European Union integration, as well as by the
strengthening of neighbourly cooperation in the region.
A good neighbour, my country was and remains open
to close relations and joint activities with Bosnia and
Herzegovina that bring us ever closer to membership of
the European Union.

Serbia has always respected, fully and consistently,
the principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, an international standard of paramount
importance. In that context, my country has been a
staunch and steadfast supporter of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as provided for by the Dayton Peace Agreement. For
the stability and development of that country, also the
homeland of 1.5 million Serbs, and its regional and
European integration have no alternative.

Over the past 20 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has demonstrated that dialogue and agreement between
its entities best address the issues that are important
for its future. Active dialogue is needed today, too, just
as is intensive communication, if differences are to be
overcome. We firmly believe that all political leaders
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are also aware of that need.
We also believe that all the crucial decisions important
for the future of the country should be arrived at as
a result of dialogue and agreement among its entities
and its three constituent peoples, as they reflect the
interests of, and benefit, them all.

In that context, it should be pointed out that the
holding of the referendum in the Republika Srpska on
the judiciary of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an internal
question to be resolved by dialogue among political
actors, within the existing legal system of that country.
After all, the creation of ever-greater trust among
Serbs, Bosniacs and Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is exceedingly important for joint activities and reforms
conducive to the country's full membership of the
European Union.

As a neighbour and an important partner, Bosnia
and Herzegovina occupies an important place in the
activities of the current Government of Serbia. It was,
I recall, the first country that Serbian Prime Minister
Aleksandar Vucic' visited after his election, and the
political dialogue between Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which my country invested significant
efforts, culminated this year. Last week, ajoint session
of the Governments of the two countries took place
in Sarajevo - indicative of the importance attached
to the development of mutual relations. The session
also focused on furthering good-neighbourliness and
reconciliation and the quest for ways and means to
promote cooperation and meet the expectations of the
peoples of the two countries to live a better life.

Last July, the victims were commemorated in
Srebrenica 20 years after the crime. Serbian Prime
Minister Vueic' also went to pay respects. Regrettably,
he was brutally attacked at the Potocari Memorial
Centre. Yet, well aware that senseless acts of violence
must not be taken as points of reference for relations
among States, and guided by the spirit of Serbia's
avowed policy of friendship and cooperation, the Prime
Minister invited the members of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to visit Serbia only 10 days
after that incident. The occasion was used to reconfirm
the resolve of my country to work just as hard and as
undeterred as before on the promotion of good relations
and cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to conduct dialogue on all issues, including those
in respect of which differences exist. In addition to
sending a strong message that the leaders of Serbia and
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are responsible people who
look optimistically to the future and have the well-being
oftheir children at heart, the visit was used to sign three
practical agreements in the field of telecommunication,
the environment and cultural heritage, and a protocol
on cooperation in the search for missing persons.

Also last May, Prime Minister Vucie participated
in the Sarajevo Business Forum, alongside political
and economic leaders from all over the world. He
will also participate in the International Investment
and Development Conference, scheduled to begin
in Srebrenica tomorrow. In the spirit of a genuine
collective commitment to the future, especially
lasting reconciliation and a better life for all - and
for young people in particular, which that conference
symbolizes - Serbia is ready to help the local self-
Government of Srebrenica by constructing a necessary
public facility in the town.

Avowals of support for a cause or a policy may
ring hollow and sound phony unless substantiated
by evidence that they help the cause and the policy
succeed. Here, therefore, are some basic statistics.

In 2014, the overall trade exchange between Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to €1.4 billion.
In the period from January to July 2015, it reached
€822 million. This year, Serbia's exports increased by
9.2 per cent and its imports by 9.6 per cent, as compared
with the same period last year. The possibilities for
increasing those amounts even further are manifold,
especially with regard to investment in infrastructure
development, energy, tourism, joint ventures and the
defence industry. A joint approach to pre-accession
assistance would help in that regard, too.

Serbia welcomes the decision of the European
Union last June to de-freeze the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A staunch advocate of European integration for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbia views the possible submission
by that country of its candidature for membership in
the European Union in a positive sign. We are willing
to strengthen mutual cooperation in that regard,
especially through the work of the commission on the
implementation of the action plan of the memorandum
of understanding on cooperation in the field of European
integration, the next meeting of which is to be held in
Serbia in the first quarter of 2016. On a note of special
satisfaction, let me point out that the Serbian presidency
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe was delighted to see Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the chair of the Council of Europe. As a very important
forum in which to cooperate on addressing many
important issues on the agenda of the two organizations
jointly, it was also a sign of recognition of the level of
stabilization and cooperation achieved in our region.

By way of conclusion, let me reiterate what my
country has said many times over: we are committed
to promoting ever-closer and the best possible relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We treasure its stability
and prosperity. For us, the policy of dialogue, good-
neighbourliness and cooperation has no alternative.

