Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
would like to commend you personally, Sir, and the
Romanian presidency for convening this timely and
very important meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in stabilization processes. I welcome
with appreciation the opening remarks of the Secretary-
General this morning. I also express appreciation for
the presence of the high-level dignitaries who have
graced our meeting and the ranking officials present in
representation of various regional and subregional
organizations.
As mentioned in the excellent concept paper
(S/2004/546, annex) prepared to guide the work of this
meeting, regional organizations are increasingly
recognized as instrumental mechanisms for collective
security and play a central role in the prevention of
conflicts and the management of stabilization
processes. While conferring upon the Security Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the United Nations
Charter, as is appropriate, provides a role for regional
arrangements and agencies in the maintenance of peace
and security.

My delegation would like to focus on the African
continent, where regional and subregional
organizations have established peace and security
mechanisms to deal with conflicts. The African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Inter-governmental Authority of
Development, the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community and the Southern African
Development Community are playing an ever-
increasing role in the promotion of peace and the
stabilization processes in the continent.

To complement those efforts and enhance their
role, fruitful cooperation is actively being developed
between the Security Council and African
organizations. In September 1997, the Security Council
met at the level of Foreign Ministers to consider the
need for concerted international action to promote
peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.3819). The
report of the Secretary-General of April 1998 to the
Security Council and the General Assembly
(S/1998/318) contains relevant recommendations on
support for regional and subregional peace initiatives,
reconstruction and long-term national reconciliation,
and on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

The lessons we can draw from that report confirm
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in stabilization processes, aside
from enhancing the efficiency of the Security Council,
may contribute to a comprehensive approach that
necessarily integrates the economic and social
perspectives. At the political level, such cooperation
has led to a process of broader consultations and to a
better understanding of the problems faced by the
countries and regions in conflict. It has significantly
contributed to the strengthening of institutional
capacities and early warning capabilities in conflict
prevention. It has increased the coordination and the
better deployment of peacekeeping operations. It has
contributed to greater equity in mobilizing and
allocating the financial resources needed to meet
internationally agreed development targets. Last but
not least, cooperation between the United Nations
system and regional organizations has proven to have
enormous potential for contributing to the
consolidation of peace and post-conflict long-term
stabilization. In that connection, useful lessons can be
learned from the cases of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and
Burundi, where ECOWAS and African Union forces
were replaced in a timely fashion by United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including through the
integration of their contingents.

The decision to create the African Union and,
more recently, its Peace and Security Council reflect
the Union's commitment to build a better future for the
African peoples. The clear stands taken in addressing
fundamental issues such as political and social stability
in Africa, governance, democracy, the partnership for
development, the fight against terrorism, mercenaries,
the proliferation of and trafficking in small arms, and
the illegal exploitation of natural resources are a
further demonstration of such a commitment.

There is a basic awareness of the fact that
Africans and African regional and subregional
organizations cannot attain much by themselves, and
that international cooperation - in particular with the
United Nations - is a key factor in the attainment of
those objectives. The efforts under way to deal with the
crisis in the Sudanese region of Darfur is not only a
clear demonstration of the commitment of the newly
established Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, but also a model of cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and other important
players, such as the European Union. They show how
efficient regional organizations can be if they are duly
supported in a timely manner by the international
community. In that context, we welcome the support
and particular attention that has recently been given to
the training of African forces in the framework of
capacity building with a View to establishing an
African standby force.

We believe in the need to ensure that the
international community's collective efforts to build a
more peaceful world are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. Taking into account comparative
advantages, we would like to underscore the
importance of cooperation among regional
organizations. Cooperation among the European Union,
the African Union and the Southern Africa
Development Community in support of national
initiatives aimed at enhancing peace-building
capacities at the subregional and national levels is a
good illustration of cooperation among regional
organizations. We commend the cooperation and
collaboration among regional and subregional
organizations, including through the exchange of
information, the sharing of experiences and a greater
acknowledgement of best practices in support of
national endeavours aimed at promoting self-reliance.

In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing practice
of holding regular meetings between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations.
We commend the consensus reached on the modalities
of cooperation for conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peace-building. It is our hope that the outcome of
those meetings will contribute to strengthening mutual
understanding and cooperation.

