Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me thank the
Permanent Mission of France for convening this open
debate on the urgent issue of children and armed
conflict. I would like to extend my gratitude to the
invited speakers for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and to commend her work on ending the
suffering that children face globally due to conflict.

Children suffer tremendously worldwide due to
war, violence and armed conflict. That is especially true
in the case of Afghanistan, where so many childhoods
have been compromised and impacted by imposed
violence and conflict for almost four decades. But the
question remains: Why are our children suffering on a
daily basis, and for how long will we avoid addressing
the fundamental factors that threaten the lives and
well-being of children in armed conflict? Just a few
hours ago, before coming here, we learned that another
terrorist attack took place in Kabul 4 taking the lives
of many and leaving many victims in its wake. We have
yet to hear the details, but I have no doubt that among
its victims are children or children's family members.

Child protection can best be ensured by addressing
the root causes of conflicts. Regardless of what we do,
as long as insecurity and violence persist, the physical
and psychological well-being of children will always be
in danger - as we are experiencing in Afghanistan.
Terror, violence and insecurity in our country are
rooted in factors that lie outside Afghanistan, with
regional and global dimensions. Hence, the goal should
be to overcome the structural drivers of conflict and
violence worldwide. The Security Council has a
fundamental role to play in that regard, as the main
United Nations body entrusted to maintain international
peace and security. We expect the Council to respond
appropriately to ensure the protection and well-being
of Afghan children and children in the world at large.

The Government of Afghanistan, for its part, is
fully committed to working closely with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict to improve the lives
of Afghan children. We also seek to build upon that
relationship, as reflected by the constructive and positive
meeting between the new Special Representative,
Ms. Gamba, and our national security adviser on the
sidelines of the General Assembly, whereby both sides
agreed to facilitate increased engagement on the issue.

The protection of children and promotion of
their rights are among the top priorities of the
Afghan Government. To that end, our efforts towards
their empowerment continue unabated, within the
framework of various international instruments,
including the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. We are implementing various measures and
programmes in line with our national and international
commitments, aimed at ensuring that our children live
in peace, security and dignity.

In that connection, we have adopted a number
of policies to ensure that no child is recruited into
our national defence and security forces. In 2010, we
established an interministerial steering committee on
children and armed conflict. In 2011, that committee
developed a national action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment of children into our defence and security
forces. Among other reforms, we established 21 child
protection units with the Afghan national and local
police recruitment centres, which have prevented more
than 100 underage voluntary enlistments.

We have appointed high-level focal points in
our national army to promote child protection. The
prevention law to combat underage recruitment into
Afghan national security forces, based on article 79 of
the Constitution, was signed by the former President of
Afghanistan and ratified by the Parliament in November
2014. Afghan national defence and security forces have
endorsed a 15-point road map towards compliance,
with the support of the United Nations. Among those
measures, the Government has agreed to screen all
national and local police units to release all underage
recruits and establish a system to investigate, prosecute
and take disciplinary action against those responsible
for the recruitment of children. On 21 December 2014,
age-assessment guidelines to prevent and respond
to child recruitment into the Afghanistan national
security and defence forces was adopted by the steering
committee in Kabul, which are used for volunteers
who want to join the national to prevent underage
recruitment into the security forces.

Since those new reforms, 35 underage children
serving in the armed forces have been reunited with their
families, and 289 instances of child recruitment have
been prevented within the eight regional recruitment
centres. Notably, the directives of Afghanistan's
Ministry of Education in 2016, which instructed the
Afghan national defence and security forces to stop
using schools for military purposes, is commendable.
The Afghan Government has established a committee
to investigate instances of sexual abuse and exploitation
of children in the armed forces, and has welcomed
the independent Commission on Human Rights and
the Office of the Attorney General's investigation of
crimes committed by the Afghan national police force.
Additionally, the Afghan Government recently renewed
the penal code and, in 2016, adopted the child protection
law, which also seeks to criminalize various forms of
mistreatment and abuse, including the practice of so-
called bacha bazi.

Afghanistan faces tremendous challenges in our
efforts to securing lasting peace and security, which
inextricably affects the potential of the country's youth.
We will continue to advocate the implementation of
current policies so that we can end the practices that
put the lives and future of our children at risk. My
delegation is thankful to our international partners for
supporting us in that endeavour. Afghanistan looks
forward to a bright future free from violence and terror,
in which all children live in freedom and peace.

