Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Ijoin others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling today's
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, for his statement. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2012/907), and we are particularly appreciative of
the briefing by Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan.

As the year 2012 draws down, today's debate
provides us an opportunity for a stock-taking of the
collective efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan. An overview would indicate that the
international community in Afghanistan has achieved
important milestones this year on the long road towards
peace, progress and security in the country.

At major international conferences in Bonn, Chicago
and Tokyo and at regional-level conferences in Istanbul
and Kabul, the international community renewed its
commitment to peace, security and development in
Afghanistan. The realization of commitments flowing
from the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan is essential
for Afghanistan's fiscal sustainability and its quest for
self-reliance. Regional cooperation has also received
new momentum under the Istanbul Heart of Asia process
and other regional processes. The Delhi Investment
Summit on Afghanistan, held on 28 June and hosted
by India, was an important endeavour in focusing
regional and international attention on investmenting
in Afghanistan and its potential to provide economic
development and stability to Afghanistan during the
transition period.

Afghanistan looks forward to holding simultaneous
presidential and provincial elections in April 2014, which
will be another important step in the consolidation of
democracy in Afghanistan.

Amid those salient developments, Afghanistan
continues to face an existential threat from terrorism.
The infrastructure of terror is still intact in the region
and draws upon ideological, financial and logistical
support from beyond its borders. The syndicate of
terrorism, which includes elements of the Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups, is active in the region and is far
from being isolated. While the security situation
continues to remain fragile, the International Security
Assistance Force drawdown has proceeded apace.
That has accentuated the uncertainties, with a risk of
creating a security vacuum coupled with an economic
downturn in Afghanistan, which could undermine the
hard-fought gains we have achieved together during the
past decade. The security transition must ensure lasting
peace and security for all sections of Afghan society.

We renewed the mandate of the sanctions regimes
created under resolution 1988 (2011) and resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) just two days ago (see S/PV.6890). In the functioning ofthe sanctions regimes,
it is important to ensure that the fight against terrorism
is not be diluted. The linkages between Al-Qaida
and the Taliban are real and cannot be wished away.
The recently adopted Security Council resolutions
(resolutions 2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012)) clearly
recognize that aspect and have tasked the Monitoring
Team to report periodically on the matter.

As Afghanistan takes forward the task of national
reconciliation in accordance with the criteria set
forth in the Kabul communique, we fully support
the efforts for regional confidence-building as a
critical component of international efforts to support
the country. Regional cooperation and connectivity
are critical for Afghanistan's political and economic
progress. We are fully cognizant that the economic
viability of Afghanistan depends upon its fuller
integration into the neighbourhood so that it can regain
its historical role as a land bridge between South Asia,
Central Asia, the Middle East and Eurasia. Conscious
of that imperative need, India has taken the lead in two
commercial confidence-building measures under the
Istanbul Process.

Afghanistan and India have had a long shared
history going back over millenniums. The two countries
are natural strategic partners by virtue of geography
and a common vision of peace and cooperation in the
region. President Karzai's visit to India last month
offered us an opportunity to review the entire gamut
of the bilateral relationship and to discuss regional
and international issues of mutual interest. During
the visit, the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Manmohan
Singh, reiterated India's support of Afghanistan during
the crucial period of transition to the end of 2014
and thereafter. The implementation of the strategic
partnership agreement of October 2011 between the
two countries has already been set in motion with
the convening of the first meeting of the Partnership
Council on 1 May.

During the past decade, India pledged up to
$2 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
We have managed to carry out some of the most
economical and cost-effective projects in Afghanistan.
The $500 million in assistance announced by the Prime
Minister of India in May 2011 is being spent from
2012 to 2015. The projects under consideration will be
aligned with the projects suggested under the national
priority programme of the Government of Afghanistan.
The pace and nature of the utilization of the present
and future Indian assistance will be determined by the
preference, comfort level and absorptive capacity of the
Afghan Government.

India remains unwavering in its commitment to
assisting the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour
to build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation. We support the good work being done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
As we enter the new year, we must create an enabling
environment wherein the Afghan people can live in
peace and security and decide their future themselves
without outside interference, coercion or intimidation.
We need to impart added momentum to our effort to
strengthen the Afghan Government's capacity for
security, governance and economic development.
The international community must continue to work,
with renewed vigour and unity of purpose, towards
strengthening the efforts of the Afghan Government in
seeking solutions that are inclusive and are led by the
Afghan people themselves.

