Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein) (spoke in French): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting.

(spoke in English)

Today's meeting offers a good opportunity to take
stock of what has been achieved in our common fight
against international terrorism, as well as to look ahead
to the future. At the outset, we would like to offer some
thoughts on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

We all owe gratitude above all to Ambassador
Jeremy Greenstock, who has guided the work of the
Committee with exemplary circumspection and
transparency. Given the sensitive tasks of the CTC, his
leadership has played a decisive role in ensuring a
prominent place for the Committee. Liechtenstein has
accorded high priority to its cooperation with the CTC,
in particular in the light of the strong focus that
resolution 1373 (2001) places on the issue of the
financing of terrorism. We have submitted to the
Committee in a timely manner a report and a
supplementary report, and we have engaged in a
fruitful dialogue on issues relating to implementation.
We have ratified 10 out of the 12 anti-terrorism
conventions. We look forward to the early ratification
of the remaining two, as soon as we have enacted the
relevant implementing legislation, as is the practice in
our country.

It is encouraging to note that most States have
extended full and constructive cooperation to the CTC
and that, where full cooperation was not forthcoming,
that was due more often to inability than to
unwillingness. The CTC has thus had a tremendous
impact, in particular by also reaching out to other
organizations - especially regional organizations - to
ensure full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Looking to the future, we are of the view that
standards will be necessary to ensure a minimum level
of compliance at the global level. The standards to be
observed were set a year ago, and a set of minimum
requirements will be needed to ensure the effectiveness
of those standards and, thus, of the work of the
Committee. We agree with the philosophy of the CTC,
that the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is a
process and that no State is perfect when it comes to
implementation. Enhancing compliance will therefore
be of crucial importance in the second phase of the
Committee's work. My Government has offered our
expertise to the Counter-Terrorism Committee in the
past, and our offer still stands.

The rule of law has become a predominant theme
in the overall fight against terrorism. We remain
convinced that human rights must never fall victim to
the fight against terrorism. Our common fight against
terrorism must notjeopardize the existing human rights
standards, which are among the greatest achievements
of the Organization. If we were to curtail human rights
in the name of the fight against terrorism, we would be
making a fatal concession by sacrificing some of our
most fundamental values, the very values that terrorists
set out to destroy. While the danger posed by terrorism
is certainly unprecedented in its magnitude, existing
standards nevertheless provide a balance between the
enjoyment of human rights and security concerns in
that they allow for the limitation of some human rights
under clearly defined circumstances. At the same time,
there is also a set of irrevocable human rights. Those
solid human rights achievements must not be touched.

It is not only States that are called upon to uphold
the rule of law at the national level. Indeed, the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, are
challenged to live up to their obligation to uphold the
rule of law at the international level. Individuals
suspected of being involved in terrorist activities must
be guaranteed the minimum standards of protection
accorded to them by international law. The Security
Council, more than any other body, is called upon to
respect those rights. In particular, it must ensure that
there is never a conflict for States between their
obligation to fully observe human rights standards and
their obligation to implement decisions of the Security
Council.

