Mr. Sen (India): I thank you, Sir, for scheduling
today's debate on Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). This is
of immediate and abiding interest to India. We also
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/135), while thanking Special Representative
Kai Eide for his comprehensive briefing.

The latest report paints a bleak picture of the
situation in Afghanistan. We accept these facts. We
cannot but recognize that the Afghan people continue
to be confronted by the twin challenges of deteriorating
security and a sense that the peace dividend is being
reduced. At the same time, the international community
is simultaneously challenged by a renewed security
challenge from the Taliban and Al-Qaida and by
increasingly vocal questions over the utility of our
collective effort.

And yet the report also holds out elements of
hope. We see steady progress in the United Nations
effort to ensure greater coordination and cohesion in
our aid and assistance programmes. It also praises
efforts to reform the Ministry of Interior and the police,
the work of the various economic ministries and the
steady gains in reducing poppy production. It also
notes as a sign of progress the fact that the Independent
Electoral Commission of Afghanistan will organize the
forthcoming elections.

Furthermore, the fact that elections are being
contested hotly is a good augury. We are hopeful that
the elections will be free, fair and transparent and that
the Afghan people will exercise their rights in such a
manner. At the same time, we in the international
community must ensure that, during the run-up to the
elections, the gains secured collectively in Afghanistan
are built up, not eroded in any manner. In that context,
we condemn today's terrorist attack on representatives
of the Afghan people.

While the report, in our view, correctly identifies
these positive developments as a window of
opportunity to consolidate progress, there is a need to
address misgivings over our collective purpose. Let us
be clear - the world cannot afford to abandon

Afghanistan again. Despite the strains, this mission
remains vital not only to the aspirations of the long-
suffering Afghan people, but to the security and
stability of the region and beyond. Doubts, hesitation
and divergences in our approach to the Taliban and Al-
Qaida weaken our collective will. They also invigorate
our foe. Therefore, apart from continued application of
force wherever terrorist groups are active, we must
work together to deny them safe havens, financing and
political and material sustenance, whether within
Afghanistan or across its borders. The application of
force wherever terrorists gather must harmonize with
the larger political objective, and UNAMA must play
an important role in this essentially political task. Since
messaging is important, it is also essential to have
greater clarity regarding the ideas being discussed in
the public domain. Reconciliation is one of these.

The Secretary-General's latest report subjects this
discussion to important caveats. Not the least of these
is the idea that reconciliation must be an Afghan-led
process, within the parametres of the Constitution of
the land. Further, it must be pursued from a position of
political and military strength. To this, I would add that
the process needs to be undertaken with strategic
clarity and unity of purpose. In the absence of
consensus amongst concerned international parties
over the key questions of reconciliation - with whom
and how - such a process runs the risk of opening up
divisions amongst us, rather than amongst the elements
with whom we seek to reconcile. Furthermore, we must
move beyond attempts to distinguish between "good"
and "bad" Taliban; such efforts are totally unworkable.

From this standpoint, it is helpful that the
international effort is moving towards a more cohesive
and integrated approach. We fully endorse the notion
that coordination must be based on genuine Afghan
leadership and on recognition of the fact that there is
no purely military solution. It is precisely for this
reason that India strongly supports efforts to build
Afghan capacity. It is not only appropriate but essential
to invest in such capacity. Without this, we run the risk
of assigning responsibility without ensuring that our
partners have the means to shoulder it.

In this context, India welcomes the continuation
of the useful role provided last year to UNAMA via
resolution 1806 (2008). We see that as a logical
corollary of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, adopted formally last year, which is a
guidemap for the international assistance effort in

Afghanistan. UNAMA and the Government of
Afghanistan have made commendable progress
together since UNAMA received that new mandate,
and it is essential to build upon those first promising
signs resolutely. That effort needs to be supported with
greater resources for the United Nations Mission and
with greater commitment to alleviating the
humanitarian challenge in Afghanistan, especially
given the impact of rising food prices and adverse
climatic events. India is working to mitigate the
humanitarian impact, including through our recent
decision to send a quarter of a million tons of wheat to
Afghanistan, although, most regrettably, we continue to
face political difficulties in overland transport and
transit to Afghanistan.

Taking those points as a reference, I should like
to underscore India's firm and unshakeable
commitment to the international effort in Afghanistan.
For India, the stabilization of Afghanistan is integrally
connected with our security. It is for that reason that
while we are outraged by attacks upon our people and
symbols of our friendship with Afghanistan, we cannot
be deterred by such criminal acts. Not only has our
commitment to Afghanistan exceeded $1.2 billion, but
we have attempted to the best of our ability to expand
the range and variety of our projects. Thus, Indian
assistance spans the gamut of operations from
infrastructure projects, such as the Zaranj-Delaram
highway, to institutions, such as the parliament
building in Kabul. We have also simultaneously
targeted local projects that will provide a peace
dividend in the shortest possible period of time,
ranging from cold storage plants to equipment for
schools and hospitals. Through these efforts, we
maintain capacity-building as a core element of our
work in Afghanistan. It is in support of that core task
that India has agreed to increase the current allocation
of 500 seats each in capacity-building and scholarship
programmes.

Turning to the regional aspect, we need greater
efforts to embed the stabilization of Afghanistan within
regional processes for this country to regain its key role
as the crossroads of South, West and Central Asia - a
phrase that was also used in the statement today by the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan. That includes
regional economic processes, such as the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation. Such efforts are
in the collective interest of the entire region. Hindering
that not only affects Afghanistan, but equally each of us
in the region. We therefore need efforts to expand,
rather than hinder, trade, transit - especially transit in
that context, as I mentioned earlier - and transport ties.
That is, in our view, the best way of bringing the
regional dimension into the discourse on Afghanistan.

In conclusion, India believes that challenges in
Afghanistan need to be seen in their totality. We must
analyse where we are today from the perspective of the
past eight years. Every step forward has been hard won
but each step is a measure of distance away from the
destruction of the past. It is for that reason that we
must continue to emphasize the progress achieved,
rather than bemoan the challenges that remain. It is
also for that reason that we should set our sights on
realistic and achievable goals, not expectations that are
unrealistic in the local context. If we are truly
committed to an Afghan-led process of prioritization of
tasks, we should concentrate on where Afghanistan has
come from rather than on where we individually would
like it to be.

