Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China feels deeply anxious and sad about the

 

current difficulties in the peace process in Angola. Two
years ago we were elated at the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol, which brought hope for peace to the war-tom
Angolan people. Just four months ago we hailed the
establishment of the Angolan Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, which we regarded as the start of
a new era in Angola.

However, only by implementing in real earnest the
measures set forth in the Lusaka Protocol and the
agreements reached by the Government of Angola and
UNITA can peace and stability be truly achieved in Angola
and its people enjoy again a peaceful and stable life.
Regrettably, what we have seen in Angola over a period of
time are renewed conflicts in some parts of the country,
further delay in the normalization of State administration
and failure to complete the demilitarization of UNITA
forces. If this situation continues, peace can hardly be
achieved in Angola.

The Angolan people have waited for peace for a long
time. The international community has also made
tremendous efforts to settle the Angolan question. At this
final, critical juncture of the Angolan peace process, any
irresponsible action vis-a-vis the peace commitment goes
against the fundamental interests of the Angolan people.
We are of the view that it is necessary for the Council to
take further measures against UNITA in conformity with
the will of the Angolan people to ensure smooth progress
and the ultimate completion of the Angolan peace process.

As is known to all, China has always taken a very
prudent approach towards sanctions. However, for the
purpose of an early realization of peace in Angola, and as
a special case, China does not take exception to the
measures contained in the draft resolution before us and
will vote in favour of it.

We hope that UNIT A will size up the situation,
change its course of action, which goes against the popular
will on the question of peace, renounce separatist rule and
complete the demilitarization of its forces at an early date,
thereby avoiding the need for the implementation of the
above-mentioned measures. We hope to see UNITA return
to the track of unity and cooperation and, under the unified
leadership of the Angolan Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, make its contribution to the early
realization of national reconciliation and peace and to
reconstruction and development in Angola.

