Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express our thanks and appreciation to you,
Madame President, for your constructive initiative to
organize this open debate to consider the
interdependence between security and development -
an issue of priority and a very significant question for
developing countries. I would also like to express my
thanks and appreciation for the concept paper prepared
in this connection (S/2011/50), particularly since the
Council, in accordance with its mandate, as enshrined
in the Charter, is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Security, as we understand it, hinges on the
consistent fulfilment of several goals, chief among
which is development. Development is the sum of
efforts to meet the basic needs of human beings for
food, health care, education, livelihood and other
requirements of a decent life. All of these are enshrined
in the Holy Quran, which says that God "has fed them,
[saving them] from hunger and made them safe,
[saving them] from fear" (The Holy Koran, CIV:4).

International awareness of the relationship
between security and development has been increasing
over the past decade, especially as a result of the
United Nations experience in peacekeeping missions in
many regions of the world. That experience has shown
that a purely military approach to the deployment of
peacekeeping operations will not achieve the desired
results. Development must be taken into consideration
in order to achieve peace.

Addressing the root causes of conflict is the most
important step that the Council can take, and should
enjoy special priority. As the Council is aware, there is
no conflict, civil war or internal strife in which the
development dimension does not somehow come into
play. There is no conflict, civil war or internal strife
that cannot be attributed to a lack of development,
which is the main reason for that conflict or civil war.

Certain natural factors have been compounded by
climate change and its impact on the livelihoods of all
human beings, whose requirements and means of
sustenance vary greatly. For instance, they may be
farmers or nomads, and that difference can lead to
conflict or feuding between them, negatively affecting
their economic and social development. Such a
situation can then deteriorate into conflict, as seen in
Darfur in my country and in other regions, adversely
affecting the lives and security of our citizens.

The Government of the Sudan has long been
aware of the relationship between security and
development. It has adopted a comprehensive strategy
to address the conflict in Darfur, the main pillars of
which are development, rehabilitation and recovery.
Our deliberations undoubtedly complement the
conclusions reached by the Council in its previous
debates, in particular that organized by France in
February 2010 to address transition and exit strategies
and the transition from conflict to stability and State-
building (see S/PV.6270). Those deliberations came to
the conclusion that the lack of development was the
main reason for the setbacks witnessed by many post-
conflict States that relapse into war.

In the open debates organized by the presidencies
of Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council
discussed comprehensive peacebuilding strategies with
a view to preventing the outbreak of conflict. In those
debates, all Council members emphasized the close
relationship between security and development.

All aspects of security, be they social, political or
economic, are important in efforts to enhance peace.
Peace is vital as a springboard for development. We in
the Sudan have learned our lessons. The civil war that
persisted in the southern part of the Sudan for more
than four decades, which we ended by signing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in January 2005,
hindered the development of our country and was the
main cause of the deterioration of our economy over
that period. Thus, more than any other nation, we are
aware of the destructive impact of conflict and its
negative repercussions on development.

I wish to stress the importance of the Security
Council's adoption of a comprehensive strategy
combining peacekeeping activities and initiatives to
promote the political path and address the root causes
of conflict. In order to resolve issues remaining in the
aftermath of conflict, activities should be undertaken at
the outset of the transition from conflict settlement to
peacebuilding. Activating the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission will help to settle conflicts and ensure
reconciliation in a manner consistent with the
traditions of each country. That is the best way to
achieve peace, especially sustainable peace, and not
through mechanisms whose legal role can be called
into question, thereby entrenching conflict.

Beyond activating the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in seeking to achieve reconciliation the
Security Council should coordinate with United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Development Programme, in
implementing short-term, quick-impact projects to
meet the needs of all those affected by conflict, be they
combatants or internally displaced persons. The
Council should also assist in medium- and long-term
development projects in post-conflict regions, thereby
enabling those affected by conflict to regain their
livelihoods and establishing the main conditions for
stability.

In that connection, the Security Council should
play a coordinating role among the various organs. It
should not encourage the imposition of unilateral or
multilateral economic sanctions that would only fuel
and further complicate conflict at a time when our
priorities should be to address and resolve conflict and
achieve development.

I hope that the Security Council will address the
root causes of conflict, which are mainly development-
related. We call on the Council not to focus on the
symptoms of conflict and to waste no time or effort in
expressing its concern about those symptoms. We hope
that the Council will focus on coordination with other
bodies, the specialized agencies and the General
Assembly in addressing development issues in
countries in conflict or in post-conflict circumstances.

I would like to close by saying, Madame
President, that we appreciate your initiative. We wish
to stress the important responsibility of the United
Nations in general, the Security Council, international
partners, donors and the principal stakeholders in
providing all required financial and logistical support
to developing countries in the aftermath of conflict. We
believe that donors often organize conferences and
make generous pledges. But once peace agreements are
11-23198
signed, they rarely honour those pledges. That paves
the way for the vicious cycle of poverty and recurring
conflict.

