Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (interpretation from French): I, too, wish to thank the Secretariat, in
particular Mr. Miyet, for the very extensive report that, as
always, has been submitted to us. We are also grateful to
Ambassador Dahlgren of Sweden for his initiative in
visiting Sierra Leone and Liberia in his capacity as
Chairman of the Sierra Leone sanctions Committee. He did
so in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Council, in particular resolution 1196 (1998) on this
subject.

We are encouraged by certain positive signs, such as
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and the efforts of the
Government and the Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).

However, we are obliged to note that concerns persist,
in particular about barbaric activities undertaken by the
rebels. My delegation was especially shocked by the
information we have just received concerning the
mutilation, execution and burning of women, children and
other civilians. We believe that ECOMOG should be
supported by the international community in its efforts to
assist the Government of Sierra Leone in coping with the
rebels. We believe, like other delegations, that the execution
of members of the former military junta does not contribute
to dialogue. We favour their being granted amnesty, which
would promote national reconciliation in Sierra Leone.

We are also concerned by the significant trade in
weapons, which reinforces my delegation's conviction that
only a joint campaign against the illegal arms trade can
resolve this problem. We welcome the recent summit of
heads of State of members of the Mano River Union and
encourage them to help Sierra Leone pursue, in the light
of its experience, its campaign against illicit arms
trafficking. We believe that there is a need for the
involvement not only of the United Nations and the
Security Council, but also, as some Ambassadors here
have already said, of the entire international community
and all States Members of the United Nations, in a
sustained and coordinated effort against the illicit trade in
weapons.

My delegation reserves the right to return to the
report and its content in the impending debate.

