Mr. Im In Ryong (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate.

Let me begin by welcoming the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016) on 23 December 2016, which
clearly condemns illegal Israeli settlement activity
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.

The resolution of the Middle East question is today
one ofthe top priorities for sustaining peace and security
in the world. Almost 70 years have passed since the
international community started its endeavour to settle
the Palestinian and Middle East issues, which started
with Israel's occupation of Arab territories in 1948.
Nevertheless, no significant progress has been made
yet. This is entirely due to the Israel's anti-peaceful
stand and the prejudicial Middle East policies of
certain forces.

Israel has ignored the just and fair demands of the
international community and it is continuing to cling
to the aggressive and inhumane policies of illegally
occupying Arab territories, expanding settlements,
blockading the Gaza Strip, ruthlessly killing civilians
and so forth. This reality is negatively affecting the peace
and security process in the Middle East. Nevertheless,
the Security Council, whose main responsibility is to
safeguard international peace and security, has turned
its face away from Israeli atrocities without taking any
appropriate measures, thereby bringing about serious
damage to the credibility of the Security Council. This
is because the Security Council played into the hands of
the double standard of the United States, taking Israel's
side in the matter.
Such double standards are extremely visible with
respect to the Korean peninsula, and the Security Council
sanctions resolutions against my country, fabricated by
the United States, provide a typical example of that.
The United States persists in its desperate attempts to
deprive the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of
its independence and its legitimate and justifiable right
to defence. Obsessed with its ill-intended, inveterate
antipathy towards the independence of other countries,
the United States also fabricated a sanctions resolution
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
using the Security Council, in wanton violation of
international justice and the principle of impartiality,
and has pressured other countries to implement
such resolutions.

The main reason that the Middle East has fallen
into a chaos characterized by terrorism, destruction and
the refugee crisis is the high-handedness, arbitrariness,
military aggression and interference in other countries'
internal affairs by the United States. The United States,
which tolerates the Israeli expansionist policies and
nuclear capability, is the principle offender destroying
world peace.

All facts demonstrate that the Security Council,
which is mandated to ensure peace and security in the
world, should pay greater attention to today's changing
reality and undertake much stronger measures to reach
a fair solution to the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The establishment of
an independent State of Palestine is an inalienable and
sovereign right of the Palestinian people. The support
of the just struggle of Palestinians for an independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders, is a trend that no one can stop.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea strongly
condemns Israel for its illegal settlement expansion
and demands that it stop undermining peace and
security in the region, and that it withdraw its forces
from illegally occupied Arab and Palestinian territories
without preconditions.

I take this opportunity to clarify once again the

principled position of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea: all disputes should be settled peacefully
through dialogue and negotiation between the parties
concerned without any interference from outside forces.
In that connection, my delegation is of the view that the
Syrian issue should also be resolved peacefully through
dialogue, without foreign intervention, in accordance
with the Charter's principle of respect for sovereignty
and non-interference.
In conclusion, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea will continue to stand firmly with the Palestinian
and Arab peoples in their just struggle for peace
and stability.

