The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Spain.

I am grateful for the comprehensive statement
made by Mr. Steiner. Spain fully supports the statement
shortly to be made by the representative of Italy.

The key conclusion of the Thessaloniki summit
was that Europe would remain incomplete without the
Balkans and that Kosovo must be integrated into the
Balkans and the Balkans into the European Union. To
that end, however, it is essential that democracy,
tolerance, the rule of law and respect for human rights
prevail.

Kosovo is still far from achieving those goals,
despite progress. We are concerned about the lack of
security, and especially about attacks upon minorities.
Those attacks hinder the return of displaced persons
and refugees, which is critical to the creation of a
genuinely multi-ethnic society.

The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
must be devoted exclusively to matters within their
purview that affect all the people of Kosovo. The
transfer of competences must be gradual and take into
account the true capacity of the Institutions to assume
responsibilities.

Spain continues to view with concern the attitude
of Albanian Kosovar leaders who publicly advance
positions contrary to resolution 1244 (1999). Moreover,
it is necessary to encourage more active participation
by non-Albanian Kosovars in the work of the
Assembly and the Transfer Council.

We also condemn any attempt to create mono-
ethnic institutions and we appeal for the dismantling of
parallel administrative structures. In this regard, we
would ask Mr. Steiner to explain the details of the plan
of action that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo is preparing to
address the issue of parallel structures.
Spain would wish to see confirmation in practice
of the positive reply to the appeal made in Thessaloniki
for a dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope,
in conclusion, that the leaders of both parties will open
such dialogue on practical matters in a constructive
spirit as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro.

