Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for convening this open
debate. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his thorough report on this increasingly important
topic regarding justice and the rule of law, and for the
concrete recommendations he has put forward. I should
also like to thank the Chilean delegation for having
organized an Arria-formula briefing together with
representatives of non-governmental organizations who
provided many valuable and insightful comments on
the subject.

Last but not least, I should also like to thank
Special Adviser Juan Mendez for his highly valuable
participation in our meeting.

Brazil fully supports the Secretary-General's
statement to the General Assembly on 21 September. It
is indeed our major responsibility to instil, uphold and
restore greater respect for the rule of law, not only at
home but also throughout the world. In particular, all
Member States have an unquestionable and overriding
duty to abide by the United Nations Charter and, in the
present case, by international human rights,
humanitarian, refugee and criminal law. May I add that
we took note with interest of the points raised by the
Secretary-General in his report, and specifically when
he comments that

"We must learn... to eschew one-size-fits-all
formulas and the importation of foreign models,
and, instead, base our support on national
assessments, national participation and national
needs and aspirations". (S/2004/616, summary)

Much can be done by the United Nations in the
domain of the rule of law. Mandates recently adopted
by the Council include important rule of law and
justice components in missions such as those in Cote d'
Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti. In those multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations plays a
major role in formulating and implementing long-term
post-conflict initiatives, not only towards development
and democracy but also in relation to the strengthening
of the rule of law. All of those objectives are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and
contribute to build sustainable peace in war-torn
societies.

Where an independent and impartial judiciary is
functioning, justice tends to be pursued and done, rules
are fairly applied and, as a result, people trust their
legitimate institutions. In a post-conflict setting, the
cycle of violence can be broken and the recurrence of
conflicts can be effectively prevented.

Adherence to the rule of law entails the
observance of the principles of equality before the law,
separation of powers, democratic governance and
social justice, among other fundamental precepts. The
rule of law must be consistent with international
human rights norms and standards. Respect for human
rights is even more imperative in post-conflict
scenarios, where the protection of persecuted
minorities is urgently needed.

Helping shattered societies to re-establish the rule
of law and address past abuses in order to achieve
reconciliation involves a range of complexities. It is a
critical task that in many settings requires the
engagement of the international community.

On the subject of transitional justice in post-
conflict societies, some key issues should be
highlighted. We need carefully to consider the
particular rule of law and justice needs in each country.
Local consultation and ownership are very important
elements, especially in that which concerns the victims
themselves.

The dynamic is different in each experience and a
distinct and calibrated combination of mechanisms will
be required. For instance, it is necessary to make the
relationship between courts and truth commissions
conform to specific situations. Reparations
programmes to victims of gross violations of human
rights are also an essential element, as are vetting
processes. At the same time that we take into account
the rights and needs of victims, we must recognize and
respect the rights of accused persons.

True reconciliation requires a delicate balance
between the values of justice and peace. Together with
democracy, those values are indeed mutually
reinforcing imperatives, as mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General, and it is possible to promote all
three in fragile post-conflict settings. To do so, the
sensible timing and sequencing of the implementation
of transitional justice processes need to be borne in
mind.

Brazil has wholeheartedly supported the
establishment of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) as a permanent and independent tribunal to
promote the rule of law and to ensure that the gravest
and most heinous international crimes do not remain
unpunished. Now that the ICC is starting its work and
is becoming able to provide long-term and robust
deterrence, the confidence we have placed in its
effectiveness should be borne out. Ultimately, the full
credibility of the Court is directly proportional to its
universality. We therefore encourage all States that
have not done so to accede to or ratify the Rome
Statute at the earliest opportunity. Today, the ICC
counts nearly 100 States parties.

We welcome the fact that the report rejects any
endorsement of amnesty for genocide, war crimes or
crimes against humanity, and ensures that the United
Nations does not establish or directly participate in any
tribunal for which capital punishment is included
among possible sanctions.

We must give serious consideration to the
Secretary-General's recommendations, such as setting
up a roster of transitional justice experts and
guaranteeing that they receive appropriate pre-
deployment training. But we can achieve tangible
results only with the necessary financial resources and
highly qualified personnel for a solid investment in
justice and in the rule of law, which requires a viable
and sustainable funding mechanism.

Brazil has always favoured a comprehensive
approach that underscores the developmental nature of
the rule of law in order to enhance the provision of
support to countries for national capacity-building, a
primary strategy in strengthening the rule of law.

On my delegation's initiative, on behalf of the
Common Market of the South, and with 141 sponsors
in total, the General Assembly adopted in 2002
resolution 57/221 on the strengthening of the rule of
law. On that occasion, we all recognized the role
played by the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) in supporting national efforts
to strengthen the institutions of the rule of law. We all
expressed our deep concerns about the scarcity of
means at the disposal of OHCHR for the fulfilment of
its tasks. The United Nations system, in particular
OHCHR, should be given more resources to work with
countries to strengthen national human rights
institutions and to provide assistance, inter alia, in
programmes related to the training of police,
prosecutors, judges, lawyers and prison officers.

