I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, and I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. Viet Nam remains deeply concerned about the overall situation in Gaza and other occupied Palestinian territories, but most importantly the humanitarian conditions in those areas amid an ongoing, complicated pandemic ravaging the region. In Gaza, following the collapse of all productive sectors, basic social services and infrastructure, 53 per cent of the population is living in poverty. Movement restrictions associated with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have further increased vulnerabilities. In our part of the world, Viet Nam and other countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations with strong Governments and general stability are working hard to contain COVID-19, with encouraging, yet modest results. It is therefore hard to imagine the additional challenges faced by the Palestinian people, who lack adequate financial and medical resources and basic facilities and live with constant instability and fear in these difficult times. While the primary responsibility lies with the Palestinian Authority, we call on the international community to direct its support and assistance in all forms and through all channels to help Palestinians overcome this multifaceted crisis. Support needs to be effective, well-coordinated and people-centred, with priority given to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to vulnerable groups. Enhanced assistance for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, an agency with a long history of experience working in the region, is important to help it fulfil its mandate of providing relief for the Palestinian people. And yet the pandemic does not seem to curb hostilities. Violence is still rampant, adding to the chaos that reigns in the occupied territories. We are alarmed by the security situation in Gaza and have grave concerns about the killing of innocent civilians, especially children and women. In the West Bank, house demolitions disrupt the lives of ordinary Palestinian people. We therefore continue to urge all parties to exercise restraint, de-escalate tension, stop all acts of violence and take the interests of innocent civilians to heart. Viet Nam is of the strong opinion that peace and stability are preconditions for all development. Progress in the political process, such as preparations for the upcoming Palestinian elections, cannot be sustained without stability and a strong commitment to peace by all parties. Viet Nam does not support unilateral acts that complicate the current situation in the occupied West Bank, in particular the expansion of Israeli settlements in that area. Those actions run counter to international law and agreements recently reached between Israel and other countries in the region. Viet Nam supports all efforts and initiatives that seek to enhance regional peace, security and stability, including the proposal of Palestinian President Abbas to convene an international peace conference early next year with all the parties concerned. We believe that a comprehensive, just and sustainable solution to the Palestinian question can be reached only on the basis of international law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the United Nations. In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm our solidarity with the Palestinian people and our consistent support for their just struggle to affirm their inalienable rights. We also express our firm support for a two-State solution - the establishment of an independent State of Palestine that coexists in peace with the State of Israel along the pre-1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
