Mr. Giiven (Turkey): Mr. President, it gives me great
pleasure to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are
confident that, under your able guidance, the Council will
successfully discharge its responsibilities.

I should also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador
J can-Bernard Merimee of France for the remarkable manner
in which he conducted the work of the Council in May.

Regrettably, three years after the beginning of the
aggression against a State Member of the United
Nations - the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina -
the extremist Serbs in Pale are continuing their defiance
of international law. The systematic, genocidal campaign
pursued by the Pale Serbs continues unchecked. The Pale
Serbs have intensified their terrorist attacks on the civilian
population as well as on UNPROFOR personnel. The
Pale Serbs have even declared null and void all the
pertinent Security Council resolutions and NATO
decisions. Nevertheless, the most important problem
continues to be the failure of the international community
to distinguish between the aggressors and the victims of
their aggression.

The international community is committed, under
numerous General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, to preserving the territorial integrity, unity
and independence of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. UNPROFOR should implement its existing
mandate fully and in keeping with this commitment. It
cannot and should not continue to be a tool for a policy
of appeasement.

As a troop-contributing country we attach great
importance to the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. However, we believe that priority number one
was always, and continues to be, the protection of the
civilian population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Almost all Security Council resolutions on Bosnia
and Herzegovina refer to Chapter VII of the Charter. The
United Nations Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina was
established as a protection force and has never, from the
very outset, been a traditional peace-keeping force.

It is the strong conviction of my Government that
UNPROFOR should be reinforced so that it has the
capability to implement its existing mandate robustly and
in full. The Turkish Minister of Defence therefore
participated actively in the NATO and European Union
Defence Ministers' meeting on 3 June in Paris, and
supported the meeting's conclusions.

Turkey has also stated its readiness to contribute to
the force that is to be created to provide UNPROFOR
with a rapid reaction capability. Consequently, we believe
that the adoption of the draft resolution on UNPROFOR
by the Council will be a step in the right direction. In this
context, I should like to draw particular attention to the
draft resolution's operative paragraph 9. We hope that a
time has come when resolve and firmness will be
demonstrated.

 

The defenceless civilian population in the strangulated
and unsafe "safe" areas is coming under constant and brutal
terrorist attacks. UNPROFOR's commitment to protect the
safe areas pursuant to resolutions 824 (1993) and
836 (1993) has yet to be carried out. UNPROFOR must be
strengthened in such a way as to enable it to act vigorously
to deter attacks on the safe areas. Furthermore,
humanitarian assistance to the safe areas should be secured
by establishing land corridors.

It will soon be a full year that the Pale Serbs have
been refusing to accept the five-nation Contact Group peace
plan. This intransigent position on their part is the only
stumbling-block in the way of credible peace negotiations.

Recognition by the former Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) of Bosnia and Herzegovina within
its internationally recognized borders is also essential for a
lasting peace. If Belgrade is sincere in its policy of isolating
Pale, it should side with those Bosnian Serbs who want to
live in a multicultural, multi-religious and democratic
Bosnia and Herzegovina, not with those who long for an
ethnically pure Greater Serbia. However, and regrettably,
we still do not see any promising signs that Belgrade is
moving in this direction.

If we want to restore the credibility of the United
Nations, we should make a determined stand against
terrorism and blackmail. Resolute action is long overdue.

