Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the Kingdom of Sweden on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and we express our
appreciation to you for convening this important and
timely debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. We once again welcome the new Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and thank him for his
informative briefing and vision on today's topic.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as well as the joint statement made by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Mediation.

South Africa holds the view that, while we must,
undoubtedly, seek to strengthen the tools at our
disposal for addressing conflicts as they arise, we must
also emphasize the preventive approach to addressing
conflict and its root causes in order to prevent conflict
and prevent countries emerging from conflict from
relapsing into conflict. On his first day at the helm of
the Organization, the Secretary-General called on all
of us to resolve to put peace first. This debate, as the
first open thematic debate of the Security Council this
year, is therefore symbolic, as it places the emphasis on
prevention and sustaining peace before moving to the
task of resolving conflict once it occurs.

South Africa is convinced that global peace and
stability will remain elusive if we do not address the
nexus between security and development. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes that
vital link. The nature of contemporary conflicts reveals
that such conflicts are, to a large extent, precipitated
by dispute-burdened economic development
issues, including access to mineral resources, the
disproportionate distribution of wealth and power,
bad governance, the lack of people's participation in
democratic processes, and corruption.

Sustainable peace consolidation also requires the
strengthening of political approaches, such as efforts
aimed at preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention
and management, mediation and peacebuilding. In that
context, we must consider the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the 2015 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, which noted that
peacebuilding

"must be the principle that flows through all

the United Nations engagements, informing all

the Organization's activities - before, during
and after violent conflicts - rather than being

marginalized." (S/2015/490, p. 3)

We need to be aware that the under-resourcing of
conflict prevention interventions remains an obstacle.
South Africa believes that a commitment to sustaining
peace and conflict prevention requires adequate and
predictable resources in support of those priorities.
That will invariably lead to less spending on costly
interventions such as peacekeeping, humanitarian
responses and the protection of developmental gains.

South Africa further welcomes and reaffirms its
commitment to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That allows for consistency with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. As the United
Nations has already recognized, regional organizations
are well positioned to understand the causes of armed
conflicts, owing to their knowledge ofthe region, which
can strengthen their efforts to influence the prevention
or resolution of those conflicts. Furthermore, they have
a comparative advantage, owing to their increasing
political resolve to address the situation. It would
be beneficial for the United Nations to work closely
with regional and subregional organizations in their
mediation and peacemaking efforts.

In addition to traditional threats to international
peace and security, the nature of conflict is changing,
with a multiplicity of armed actors, many employing
asymmetric methods. Against that background, the
United Nations faces new challenges to its efforts
to ensure peace and security, promote sustainable
development, protect human rights and deliver
humanitarian aid.

In conclusion, South Africa continues to recognize
the importance of carrying out the recommendations
of the reviews on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and on
women and peace and security. In particular, we echo the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which noted that the prevention of conflict must
be the priority, not the use of force, thereby stressing
the need for both short-term prevention measures and
longer-term measures to address the root causes and
structural drivers of conflict.

The Security Council should not act as the
proverbial man with the hammer. Instead, using all
aspects of the Charter at the disposal of the United

Nations system, including the good offices role of the
Secretary-General, we must commit ourselves to doing
everything we can to prevent conflict and sustain peace.

