The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to welcome High
Representative Valentin Inzko to the Council and to
thank him for both his comprehensive briefing and his
report on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2012/813).

It is a matter of satisfaction that there has been
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the period covered by the report. However, political
developments are of serious concern. There has
been little progress in the country's Euro-Atlantic
integration. Negative rhetoric has adversely affected
economic prospects. Those issues need to be addressed
by political entities within the framework established
by the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We commend the conducting of local elections
on 7 October, and we hope that grass-roots
democratic institutions will promote nation-building,
intercommunity harmony and the rule of law. The
joint declaration of the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia
on cooperation to protect and promote the rights of
refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons,
signed earlier this year, should serve as an important
confidence-building measure. Such cooperation
will not only promote regional cooperation, but also
facilitate their common aspirations for Euro-Atlantic
integration.

We have noted that the progress on outstanding
issues for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative has been somewhat slow. We are,
however, glad that the recent State property ruling by
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has laid out guiding principles for the resolution of the
State property issue. We also welcome the closure of
the Brcko Final Award office on 31 August.

Through their continued presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union and NATO military
missions have carried out an important role in ensuring
that country's citizens' safety and security, even when
the political situation is tense. We commend the efforts
made by the European Union-led force and support the
extension of its mandate.

As I have said in previous meetings, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a novel experiment in building a new
nation from the rubble of the civil war that the peoples
of the former Yugoslavia had to endure in the 1990s.
It is never easy to build a multi-ethnic, multilingual,
multicultural and multi-religious country. The problems
that have been mentioned in the report and the briefing
of the High Representative are bound to be encountered
in the path of building a nation inhabited by people of
different faiths, ethnicities and languages.

Our own experience over the last six decades has
convinced us that although the path to building such
a nation is long and arduous, the fruits are well worth
the efforts.

Resolving the problems facing the Bosnian peoples
therefore calls for patience, determination and mutual
accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual suspicion,
rhetorical statements and violations of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace will only Vitiate
the political and social atmosphere and delay the
achievement of their goals.

The General Framework Agreement for Peace and
its implementation have ensured peace and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last 17 years. Nothing
should be done to undermine the Peace Agreement's
foundations or roll back the reforms undertaken to
implement it. We would therefore urge the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the international
community, to persevere in spite of the problems that
are encountered. We hope that the Bosnian parties
will engage, in a spirit of compromise and maturity,
in addressing political problems so that the Peace
Agreement and its implementation are strengthened.
They should also take concerted steps so that the
currently deteriorating economic prospects are reversed
and the country can return to the path of high growth of
the pre-recession years.

In conclusion, I would like to highly commend the
work being done by the High Representative in assisting
the people and leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
their nation-building endeavours. We fully support his
efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.

