Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The Sahel is a priority region for Spain. This morning
on my way to the office, I was reviewing the statements
of my Minister for Foreign Affairs, and today he said
once again that the Sahel is a priority region for Spain.
Why is that? It is because we share four types ofthreats.

First, there is terrorism. The attacks on the Radisson
Blu Hotel have demonstrated that terrorism is a main
threat to peace and security. For that reason, Spain
actively cooperates actively in Mali in the training of
the Mali security forces as part of the European Union
Training Mission.

Secondly, there is the migration factor. The Sahel
has a determining role to play. Suffice to recall that
90 per cent of the migrants from the sub-Saharan region
cross the Niger to reach the Mediterranean. Spain's
position is very clear in that regard. There is a clear
shared responsibility among countries of origin, transit
and destination, and I believe it was clearly shown at
the Valletta Conference on Migration that Africa and
Europe should face the challenge together.

Thirdly, there is the security-development factor.
Without security there can be no development, and
without development there can be no security. That is
why Spain is investing decidedly in the Sahel.

Lastly, climate change is a factor. We held an
Arria Formula meeting on 30 October during which
we highlighted the fact that climate change is a clear
multiplier of risk. In 2013, we launched the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. It raised great
expectations, but not all of them have been met. Two
years later, there are two central issues that I belive are
still fully valid.

The first is the consistency of the strategy, which
the representative of France mentioned in the first
debate. The Strategy is, first and foremost, a real
exercise of consistently bringing together the efforts of
United Nations agencies.

The second overarching idea is that of action.
We must prioritize taking action over diagnosing
problems. The Sahel does not need further studies,
surveys or analyses. We all agree on the diagnosis, and
the challenges are clearly identified. What the Sahel is
calling for is for us to take action now and that we act
bearing in mind the region's priorities, and in particular
those set by the countries of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

In that connection, I would like to congratulate,
first, the Special Envoy for her briefing and the
enormous task she is undertaking and to tell her
that she has all our support. Secondly, I would like
to congratulate Chad for its dual presidency of the
Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel and the
Group of Five Sahel, which we believe will align the
efforts of the United Nations in the region.

In would like to conclude by saying that, as my
Deputy Foreign Minister said at the G-5 Sahel summit
in N'Djamena last Friday, Spain's commitment to the
Sahel is not temporary. It is ongoing with a View to the
future.

