We thank the Dominican presidency for the opportunity to continue our engagement with this topic. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his first comprehensive report (S/2020/167), and to all briefers for their briefings today. This year marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), the landmark resolution on youth, peace and security. In the past five years, millions of children have become young men and women, and millions of young people have entered adulthood. But youth should not be simply defined as a transition from childhood to adulthood. Youth is a unique period of dreaming big and aiming high, full of potential, energy and creativity soon to be realized. The report of the Secretary-General highlights many positive examples of youth participation in peace processes and youth-led peacebuilding initiatives, from the Philippines to Mali to Colombia. We are also encouraged to see the pioneering role that youth is playing to address today's challenges, including that of climate change and, more recently, the coronavirus disease pandemic. However, those examples are just a few of thousands of other untold examples, and many thousands more could have been a reality if they had received due recognition and support. The lack of awareness, the absence of a comprehensive youth framework and limited resources are among the biggest impediments to the enhancement of the role and participation of youth in many places around the world, especially conflict-affected areas. To further promote the youth, peace and security agenda, we need to, first and foremost, redouble our efforts aimed at raising public awareness about the role of young people, particularly young women. At the national level, we dedicate the month of March to youth, in celebration of our youth's outstanding achievements and to inspire young generations. At the regional level, the leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) hold annual face-to-face dialogues with youth representatives to hear their thoughts and recommendations on issues of peace, security and development. Such activities show how much we trust our youth as important partners. These dialogues also serve to strengthen our young people's sense of responsibility as future leaders. Investment in youth policies always yields great returns, both tangible and intangible. Viet Nam has enacted the Youth Law and, for 10 years, has implemented a youth-development strategy as an integral part of its national socioeconomic strategy. We believe that with a comprehensive framework for youth-related issues, including education, vocational training, employment and health care, we are on the right track to addressing the root causes of conflicts, violent extremism and radicalization. For youth affected by conflicts, in particular youth in phases of disengagement or reintegration, such a framework is key to helping them heal the scars left by conflicts, regain confidence and rebuild their lives. It is also necessary to further underscore the crucial importance of education and a culture of peace. All initiatives on conflict prevention and resolution and national reconciliation come primarily from the understanding of the values of peace, tolerance and moderation. We welcome all efforts aimed at upholding and instilling these values, especially with the active participation of youth. Last but not least, we call for strengthened cooperation with respect to youth. Regional and subregional organizations play an important role in this regard by connecting and coordinating efforts related to youth, peace and security at all levels. ASEAN has established youth-cooperation mechanisms at the ministerial and senior-official levels and is now implementing the ASEAN Work Plan on Youth. ASEAN is also undertaking youth exchange programmes with external partners. We encourage further youth cooperation among regional organizations and between the United Nations and regional organizations in order to make meaningful progress in this agenda. In conclusion, all our efforts today will be continued and led by our youth tomorrow. The value of their role, participation and contribution in issues of peace and security cannot be overemphasized. We reaffirm our support for the youth, peace and security agenda and its effective implementation, and believe that today's meeting is a meaningful commemoration of the anniversary of this agenda.
