Mr. Dumitru (Romania) (spoke in French):
Romania fully associates itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union.

I would like to make a few brief remarks. First, I
would like to thank Ambassador de La Sabliere for the
outstanding way in which he led the most recent
mission of the Security Council to Central Africa. The
thorough grasp of the issues that he demonstrated, in
addition to his indefatigable dynamism and the
eloquence for which he is so well known, meant that
the messages of the Council were transmitted
forcefully and clearly to the various interlocutors. We
are also grateful to the countries of the subregion that
received the mission. The dialogue that was conducted
there, backed up by the views expressed today by the
representatives of the countries concerned, provide an
essential input for the deliberations that members of
the Council will continue to conduct on matters of
concern to them.

Secondly, we welcome the specific outcomes of
the mission, which again prove how this instrument
that the Council possesses can add value.

First of all, the mission stressed the ongoing
commitment of the Council to peace and security in a
key region of Africa. The direct contacts with the
stakeholders improved our understanding of the facts
on the ground and strengthened cooperation with
regional and subregional partners. The mission was
able to assess, at first hand, the excellent job done by
both peacekeeping operations deployed in the
region - the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB), as
well as the effectiveness of the activities of the special
representatives of the Secretary-General and other
parts of the United Nations presence, whose synergy
translates the Council's mandates into action.

In View of the challenges that must be met in
order to meet the 2005 deadline for elections, we
welcome the fact that the Council mission stressed the
need for the Governments and parliaments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi to
hasten the adoption of the decisions and measures
required of them. Accordingly, Romania wishes to
reiterate that the primary responsibility of the political
leaders of Central African countries is not only to their
own peoples and countries, but also to neighbouring
peoples and States.

Thirdly, we wish to point out something that is of
particular interest to Romania, as well as to other
members of the Council. While the mission focused on
the two situations that require the vigilant attention of
the Council - those in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi - it also adopted a regional
approach. That regional approach included talks with
the Rwandese President, Mr. Paul Kagame, and the
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni; it is
crucial to resolving, in an integrated and consistent
manner, the common issues of peace and security. As
an African proverb says, everyone travelling in the
same boat has the same destination.

The fact that the Council mission had two focuses
was very important, since progress in the transitional
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi is still fragile, due both to domestic
difficulties and to negative external factors. Among
those factors, we wish to draw the Council's attention
to the serious lack of trust that continues to prevail in
the domestic political atmosphere, among the political
leaders of groups and communities and in relations
between the main regional actors. Accordingly, we
welcome the recent Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. We take note of the fact that
confidence-building is among the priority policy
options and guiding principles mentioned in the first
section of part III of the Declaration, on peace and
security. However, it is clear that, in the light of the
discussions conducted by the Council mission and of
subsequent events related to the renewed tension
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, this priority must indeed be put into practice,
in order to overcome the currently prevailing distrust.

Fourthly, we share the broader vision of the
mission, since it called upon parties in the region to
look beyond the preparation and organization of the
2005 elections. While primary energy should be
devoted, in the short-term, to that essential goal, we
must also consider the political future of both countries
after the elections are held and after the current
transitional processes are completed. As shown by the
experience of other countries, including Romania, that
have seen successful political transitions holding
elections is not an end in itself. Obviously, stability,
peace and security will depend on what happens during
the post-electoral, post-transition phase in the political
and development areas.

There are, of course, many other lessons to be
learned from the Council's mission to Central Africa.
We support the set of recommendations made by the
mission and systematic follow-up of these
recommendations by the Council. At the same time, the
indubitable impact on the ground prompts us to
conclude that while we should continue to plan
missions to Africa, also we must think about similar
activities for 2005 in other regions in conflict that are
on the Security Council agenda and that directly
concern the maintenance of international peace and
security.

