Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing on the situation in
Kosovo.

I should also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Kosovo. Chad fully supports their
efforts to build peace in the region.
Chad welcomes the progressive improvement in
the political, institutional, security and human rights
situation in Kosovo. With regard to the political
situation, Chad commends the holding on 16 March
of transparent legislative elections in Kosovo, which
demonstrated the political maturity of that country
and signaled the growing engagement of Kosovo's
political class and population in a genuine process of
national reconciliation. Those significant achievements
should be built upon and strengthened through the
establishment of a legitimate and credible constitutional
order.

Concerning Belgrade and Pristina's commitment
to the normalization of their relations, we note with
satisfaction the efforts deployed by Kosovo and the
European Commission to finalize a Stabilization
and Association Agreement. In addition, the onset of
post-electoral talks has allowed Pristina to take a new
direction, the main challenge which will be reform of
the electoral system. We welcome the progress of the
dialogue with Pristina, facilitated by the European
Union, and the full implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013, in accordance with the
implementation plan of 22 May 2013.

At the local level, we commend the adoption of new
municipal statutes in the north and in Pristina with a
view to normalizing the administrative and budgetary
situation. In the judicial sector, Chad notes that the
Special Investigative Task Force, with the support
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), has collected sufficient proof of ethnic
cleansing of the Serb and Roma populations during
the armed conflict. Similar results have also been
achieved with regard to cases involving violence and
intimidation against the Kosovar Albanian oppposition.
Nevertheless, the prosecution of these allegations can
be addressed only once the special criminal tribunal
has been established to that end. Chad urges the
Kosovar authorities to establish the special tribunal by
early 2015 so as to ensure that justice is served and to
close this painful chapter in the history of the country.

We commend and encourage the efforts of the
Kosovar judicial authorities in their fight against
impunity. With regard to security, Chad strongly
condemns the violent acts in the Mitrovica area, where
violence has claimed victims among law enforcement
officers and civilians, and damaged property belonging
to the Kosovo police, EULEX and UNMIK. Chad
commends the effective intervention and actions of the
Kosovo police, EULEX and the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
in resolving problems involving public disorder, such as
the demonstration of 8 July in Pristina at the Embassy
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

With regard to human rights, Chad notes with
satisfaction the significant progress of the Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
notably the resumption of the exhumation and
identification of bodies. Chad also commends efforts
to promote the voluntary return of 48 displaced persons
to Kosovo. We urge the Kosovar authorities to ensure
the implementation of the law so as to find a lasting
solution to the problem of displaced persons and
refugees and the restitution of their property. We take
this opportunity to encourage the work of UNMIK to
create a reconciliation programme in 18 municipalities,
notably in northern Kosovo, and to commend the
adoption of amendments to the law on the status and
the rights of martyrs, invalids, veterans and members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army, civilian victims of war
and their families, and survivors of sexual violence in
order to guarantee their access to compensation.

In conclusion, Chad notes with satisfaction the
two-year extension of the EULEX mandate. Chad
commends the sound management and dedication of
the entire UNMIK team for its work on the ground
and its fruitful collaboration with EULEX, KFOR, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
all United Nations agencies on the ground, and the
institutions of Kosovo. Chad urges the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to
redouble their efforts to support Kosovo at this very
delicate time in its transition towards stability, security,
peace and development.

