Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has consistently supported the safeguarding of
the international nuclear non-proliferation mechanism
and opposed the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We
do not wish to see fresh turbulence in the Middle East.
We are in favour of a peaceful solution to the issue of
Iran's nuclear programme through political and
diplomatic efforts and negotiations.

Developments related to Iran's nuclear
programme are currently a source of concern. China
respects and recognizes Iran's right to the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. However, we are also disappointed
that the Iranian side has failed to respond positively to
the requests of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Security Council. Under these circumstances,
we support the Security Council's taking of further,
appropriate actions aimed at urging the Iranian side to
suspend enrichment-related activities in order to bring
the process back onto the negotiation track.

At the same time, China believes that any
measure taken should aim at safeguarding the
international non-proliferation mechanism and at
maintaining international and regional peace and
stability. Actions taken by the Security Council should
be appropriate, incremental and proportionate. They
should help enhance diplomatic efforts rather than
aggravate conflicts and lead to confrontation. Given
that the resolution that has just been adopted basically
reflected the views of China that I have just expressed,
we voted in favour of it.

It needs to be pointed out that the purpose of the
new resolution is not to punish Iran but to urge it to
return to negotiations and reactivate diplomatic efforts.
The relevant sanctions measures should neither harm
the Iranian people nor affect normal economic, trade
and financial exchanges between Iran and other
countries. The new resolution does not introduce any
change to the exemption provisions contained in
paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006). The assets
freeze therefore does not prevent a person or entity
designated in the annexes to resolution 1737 (2006)
and this new resolution from making payments due
under contracts entered into before that person or entity
was listed in cases covered by paragraph 15 .

The new resolution and the sanctions measures in
resolution 1737 (2006) are all reversible. If Iran
suspends its enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities and complies with the relevant resolutions of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
the Security Council, the Security Council shall
suspend, and even terminate, the sanctions measures.

It is impossible to resolve the issue
fundamentally by imposing sanctions and pressure
only. Diplomatic talks remain the best option. That is
also the common understanding of the international
community. A solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
requires all-around diplomatic efforts, especially
diplomatic efforts outside the Security Council. We
wish to call upon all the parties concerned to adopt a
highly responsible and constructive attitude, keep
calm, practice restraint and refrain from any actions
that may lead to deterioration or the escalation of
tensions. At the same time, we should bear in mind the
following principles in seeking solutions to the Iran
nuclear issue.

First, in handling the Iran nuclear issue,
safeguarding international non-proliferation
mechanisms and maintaining international and regional
peace and stability remain the premise and ultimate
objective. No actions should deviate from that goal.

Secondly, it is essential to keep the process on the
path of dialogue and negotiation and to insist on
seeking a peaceful solution through political and
diplomatic efforts. It is therefore particularly important
to reinforce diplomatic efforts outside the Security
Council.

Thirdly, we should firmly safeguard the
international non-proliferation mechanism. The IAEA
remains the main framework for solving the Iran
nuclear issue. Its authority and role should therefore be
safeguarded and strengthened.
Fourthly, it is necessary to handle, in a balanced
manner, the relations between the peaceful use of
nuclear energy and non-proliferation. The international
community should recognize Iran's right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. Iran also has the
obligation to accept effective supervision by the IAEA
and to resolve outstanding issues through cooperation
with the IAEA, so as to prove the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme and establish international
confidence in that regard.

Fifthly, all the parties concerned should act on the
basis of equality and mutual respect, strengthen
dialogue and communication, increase trust, reduce
doubts and remove each other's concerns, so as to
create the necessary atmosphere and conditions for the
settlement of this issue.

Sixthly, the current urgent task for all the parties
is to show full flexibility and creatively seek to resume
negotiations. The June 2006 proposal put forward by
the six countries is still on the table. The time-out
proposal by IAEA Director General ElBaradei and the
establishment of a mechanism for talks that includes
Iran also deserve our consideration.

China is ready to work with other parties to
continue to play its due role for a comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the Iran nuclear issue.

