Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr.
President, allow me to join those who preceded me in
congratulating you and your predecessor on ably
leading the work of the Council.

The Council has been convened to debate yet
another in a series of repeated and grave crimes
perpetrated by the Israeli regime against the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories. Indeed,
in the course of the past six decades, Palestinians have
been subjected to daily brutality by the Israeli regime.
The systematic pattern of violations of the most basic
human rights of the Palestinian people and massive
breaches of international law and international
humanitarian law by Israel have continued unabated,
resulting in the killing of nearly 4,000 Palestinians just
since September 2000.

Recent military operations against Palestinian
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, have only
added to the misery and suffering that the Palestinian
people have long endured. As a consequence of that
military aggression, the casualties and destruction
inflicted on the Palestinian people continue to mount.
In fact, Israel's deadly air strikes and shelling of Gaza
are part of a larger policy characterized by State
terrorism, expansionism, aggression and oppression.

Increased military operations in densely
populated areas, especially in Gaza, indiscriminate use
of force by the Israeli army, the practice of collective
punishment, extrajudicial killings, targeted
assassinations, expansion of settlements and the attack
by Israeli forces on the Jericho prison - which
happened only a few minutes after American and
British observers left the prison - are but a few
examples of Israeli breaches of basic international
standards and law.

Moreover, in defiance of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice and the unambiguous
calls of the international community, the Israeli regime
not only continues the construction of the illegal wall
in the occupied Palestinian territories, but has even
accelerated plans for its completion. At the same time,
settlement construction and land confiscation in the
West Bank and other parts of the Palestinian territories
are continuing unabated.

As eloquently stated by the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People in last month's meeting of the
Council (S/PV.5404), Israel has continued its unlawful

activities in the occupied territories with the intention
of undermining the prospects for establishing the
Palestinian State, and approximately 12,000 Israelis
have established themselves in the West Bank colonies
in recent months, while only 9,000 have been
evacuated from Gaza and the northern West Bank.

The impunity with which Israel has been allowed
to carry out its war crimes has emboldened it to
continue such policies and practices. It is therefore
high time for the international community to take
effective measures to protect and enforce the basic
rights of the Palestinian people and to help put an end
to their suffering caused by the illegal occupation of
the Palestinian territories by Israel.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, should live up to that immense duty by
preventing Israel from continuing to commit atrocities
and flout the will of the international community, as
incorporated in numerous United Nations resolutions.
Regrettably, the Council has thus far failed to take any
serious and tangible action, or even to attempt to
implement its own modest and limited decisions on the
Palestinian question, due to the unconditional support
extended to Israel by a permanent member of the
Council. It is regrettable that such a failure has become
a commonplace feature of the Council, even in the
wake of the most atrocious crimes committed by Israel.

The recent opposition of the same permanent
member to the adoption of two presidential statements
on the Palestinian issue in the course of the past five
weeks cannot but be regarded as explicit support for
the unlawful activities persistently pursued by Israel.
In fact, the Council cannot retain its credibility and
authority when its work is labeled an exercise in group
therapy and while it has been ineffective and inactive
in addressing the Israeli crimes in Palestine as the
gravest situation of international concern.

The Palestinian Legislative Council elections,
which reflected the free will of the Palestinian people
in exercising their democratic rights, were, a
democratic accomplishment for which the Palestinian
people should be congratulated and admired. The
democratic choice of the Palestinian people deserves to
receive the respect and support of the international
community.

The Israeli decision to halt the transfer of taxes
due the Palestinians is nothing but the blackmailing of
the Palestinian people for exercising their democratic
rights. Similarly, the withholding of aid to the
Palestinian Authority by certain countries amounts to
punishment of the Palestinians for exercising their
basic right in choosing their own representatives. In
fact, by taking such inadmissible punitive measures
against a nation, the principles of democracy and
democratic choice of the people are breached by those
who often pretend to preach them.

Israel should disburse to the Palestinian
Authority, without further delay, the full amount of the
monthly tax and custom revenues which rightfully
belong to the Palestinian people. Besides, the
international community should continue to provide
financial and economic grants and assistance to the
Palestinian Authority so as to avoid any dangerous
repercussions in the day-to-day lives of the Palestinian
people. The Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran has done its share in financially assisting the
Palestinian Authority in order to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian people, which
has deepened as a result of the restrictions on aid
applied by certain countries.

In the context of Israel's defiance of the
international community, particular reference should be
made to the infamous Israeli nuclear weapons
programme, which is a showcase of five decades of
concealment and deception and total disregard for the
demands of the international community, as echoed in
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) 2000 Review Conference, which
specifically called upon Israel to accede to the NPT
immediately and without any condition.

Nuclear weapons in the hands of a regime with an
unprecedented record of State terrorism and resort to
aggression and the threat of force against other
countries present a real threat to regional and global
peace and security and to the non-proliferation regime.
That threat needs to be urgently and decisively
addressed by the international community, and the
initiative for the creation of a zone free from weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East should be
actively pursued.

The question of Palestine lies at the core of the
Middle East issue. Deterioration of the situation in
Palestine not only threatens the wider region, but also
adversely impacts global peace and security. The recent
Israeli war crimes in Gaza have led to more instability
and inflame tensions and threaten to further destabilize
the situation in the region. The Council cannot and
should not turn a blind eye to such a critical situation.
Those who prevent the Council from addressing the
situation should be held accountable for the escalation
of the crisis and instability.

It is evident that achieving a peaceful settlement
of the question of Palestine is imperative for the
attainment of a comprehensive and lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East. Peace in the Middle East
cannot be achieved through aggression, State terrorism,
intimidation and occupation. We are convinced that a
durable peace in Palestine will be possible through
justice, an end to discrimination, an end to the
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories, the return of all Palestinian refugees, a
democratic mechanism through which all inhabitants of
Palestine as well as the Palestinians driven out of their
homeland would have the possibility to determine their
future in a democratic and peaceful fashion, and the
establishment of a democratic Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

Finally, I do not wish to take the time of the
Council to respond to the irresponsible claims of the
Israeli representative. I should only like to point out
that the Islamic Republic of Iran has officially declared
its commitment to the fundamental principle of the
Charter to refrain from the threat or use of force
against any Member of the United Nations.

On the other hand, the daily barrage of illegal
threats relating to the resort to force by officials of the
Israeli regime, recent instances of which started in
December 2003 and continue to date, requires urgent
and serious attention by the Council. At the very least,
the Council should demand that the Israeli regime
abandon its policy of flouting international law and the
Charter of the United Nations and cease and desist
immediately from resorting to the threat of the use of
force.

