Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Ambassador John Negroponte of the United
States of America and Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones
Parry of the United Kingdom for their important
briefings.

My delegation is pleased to welcome the progress
made in the process of rebuilding Iraq, especially as
regards the restoration of national and local institutions
with a view to the establishment of a representative
Government. We welcome the political agreement
signed in Baghdad on 15 November between the Iraqi
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional
Authority on the timetable for the gradual restoration
of sovereignty to the Iraqi people. That timetable was
called for in Security Council resolution 1511 (2003).
My delegation hopes that the Council will soon receive
an official communication regarding the timetable from
the President of the Iraqi Governing Council so that we
may hold a more in-depth discussion, examine the
timetable's implications and eventually consider
adapting the United Nations mission to the political,
humanitarian and security situation.

In that regard, my country welcomes the political
will expressed United States President Bush, which he
echoed during his official visit to the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland during his talks
with his British counterpart, Mr. Tony Blair. That was a
commitment to take appropriate measures leading to an

improvement of security and stability in Iraqi and the
creation of conditions to enable the Iraqi people to
quickly determine their political future. We hope that
that resolute commitment on the part of the principal
leaders of the member countries of the Coalition
Provisional Authority in Iraq will contribute to the
establishment of a new framework for political and
institutional devolution to the Iraqi people, in support
of the peace, stability and harmonious development of
the countries of the region as a whole. As Ambassador
Negroponte emphasized, that offensive phase needs to
be strengthened through the firm support of the
international community and, in particular, through
greater involvement by the Security Council.

In that regard, my delegation appreciates the vital
role that the coalition continues to acknowledge exists
for the United Nations in the political and economic
recovery process and in the provision of humanitarian
aid in Iraq. As described in the reports, it is of course
essential to quickly carry out the timetable for political
transfer and to give priority attention to strengthening
security in the country. That would entail the widest
possible mobilization by all the people of Iraq, as well
as by the countries of the region and the
neighbourhood, vis-a-vis the agreed programme
contained in the timetable to ensure the transfer of
sovereignty and responsibilities. We believe that a new
political logic is taking root that is likely to contribute
to further strengthening the work of the Governing
Council, which is daily seeing its powers and
responsibilities expand.

Finally, we await the report of the Secretary-
General on the overall situation in Iraq that we hope
will be issued in December. We hope that it will
provide us with an overview of current developments.
We also hope that the report will point out ways and
means of ensuring the active participation of the
United Nations in the implementation of the timetable
for the transfer of power and resources to the Iraqi
people.

