Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to convey my delegation's most
sincere congratulations to the friendly delegation of the
United States on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing this morning, during which he provided very
important information regarding recent developments
in the region.

My delegation also endorses the statements made
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Monthly briefings are organized on a regular
basis, open debates are held, meetings with influential
parties are organized, and initiatives are taken by
regional and international bodies and even some States,
and we continue to hope for positive change on the
ground. We hope to see encouraging signs of increased
effort to achieve the ultimate goal of peace through a
two-State solution, with both States living side by side
in peace and security, and to achieve the decades-old
Palestinian dream of establishing a recognized,
independent, sovereign State on its historical land, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Unfortunately, the signs we see are dangerous
ones. Inflexibility on the part of Israel has become the
rule, as have the policies of equivocation in the
political approach to the Israeli-Arab conflict and the
Israeli-Palestinian question in particular. The signs on
the ground are not promising. Rather than a real desire
for peace, there seems to be an unfair settlement policy
that deprives citizens of their rights, restricts their
freedoms, causes them to be massacred, expels them
from their own houses and usurps their land.

Everybody in the world wants more justice and
more freedom. Those are legitimate aspirations to a
decent life in which rights such as those to gender,
racial and cultural equality may be enjoyed. Despite
the rising tides of liberation from injustice across the
world, the Palestinian people are still struggling for the
very basic rights enjoyed by States Members of our
Organization enjoy - the right to live on one's own
independent, sovereign land. These very fundamental
rights are still inaccessible to the Palestinian people,
who are faced with daily suffering. There has been no
clear international condemnation of the ongoing
repression of the Palestinians. The principles of
international law must be respected.

My delegation reaffirms the legitimacy of
Palestine's quest for full membership of the United
Nations. Tunisia recalls the historical, legal and moral
importance of that legitimate claim. It is the right of
the Palestinian people to enjoy their rights after a long
struggle. The Palestinian people have the right to
recognition of their independent sovereign State. They
have the right to live on their historic lands, based on
the June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as their
capital, in peace and security alongside the Israeli
people.

My country believes that due importance must be
attached to Palestine's request. It is not an obstacle to
peace, but will promote peace. It is not a mere unilateral
act; far from it. The Palestinians have adhered to all the
relevant rules in their quest to achieve membership of
the United Nations, which enjoys broad international
support, as reflected in the acceptance of their
membership in UNESCO.

Over and above the recognition by such
organizations and international bodies as the World
Bank, we would like to see recognition of the right of
the Palestinian people to build their independent State
and of the progress that has been made in establishing
their institutions, the rule of law and economic rights.
That is important.

Israel's settlement activities pose a serious threat.
Despite some differences of opinion, all States agree
that the settlement policy remains a significant obstacle
to relaunching the peace process. Tunisia firmly
condemns the ongoing settlement activities and their
intensification last year and this, which have led to an
alarming Shrinkage in the land area of Palestine and
will have a significant impact on the outcome of any
negotiations that might be undertaken to resolve the
conflict.

Israel's settlement activities violate international
law. That is an established fact. They violate the Road
Map, as affirmed in the Quartet's statements. Article 49
of the Fourth Geneva Convention declares such
settlement activities illegal. The advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 2004 addresses the
legal impact of the construction of the separation wall
in the occupied Palestinian territories. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs also
considers the wall to exacerbate the daily suffering of
the Palestinian people.

Tunisia calls for an immediate end to the
separation of families, the looting of lands and
expulsions being carried out by the settlers, the
Judaization of Jerusalem and the altering of its
religious and demographic composition. Tunisia fully
condemns any plan to change the demographic and
religious nature of that city by the occupying State.
Israel continues to impose such changes despite the
numerous appeals of the international community to
end such practices.

We call for an immediate end to the blockade of
Gaza, which is causing terrible suffering for more than
2 million Palestinians. Despite the claims of Israel, the
occupying Power, that recent measures have led to a
decrease to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, official
United Nations reports note a strengthening of the
blockade.

Finally, the political stalemate in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the lack of hope for peace,
despite the commendable efforts of Jordan and the
latest statement of the Quartet on 11 April (see SG/2182), cause my delegation to fear a new cycle of
tension in the region that could lead to a further
deterioration of the situation. My delegation reaffirms
its support for negotiations and dialogue to resolve the

l2-30747
crisis, as well as the role of the international
community, which has a historic responsibility to
ensure the appropriate context for a settlement.

Tunisia hopes for a more effective role for the
influential partners, in particular the Quartet, and looks
forward to specific measures to be taken by the Quartet.
Moreover, we want harsher positions taken with regard
to Israel. My delegation also reiterates the need to
compel Israel to fully withdraw from the occupied
Palestinian territories in Lebanon and Syria.

