Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and the United
States for the convening of this debate. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Dr. David
Nabarro, Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola; Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the
World Health Organization (WHO); and Mr. Jackson
Niamah of Medecins Sans Frontieres for their briefings.

Let me begin by extending my delegation's deepest
condolences to the families and friends of all those
who have perished in the Ebola outbreak. Malaysia
pays tribute to the many brave doctors and health-care
workers engaged in the tireless effort to counter this
deadly disease.

The scale of the Ebola outbreak is unprecedented.
The situation is worsening as the deadly disease
transcends national borders, with profound impacts
on socioeconomic activity and the security situation
of the affected countries. The challenges posed by the
outbreak would be overwhelming for any single country
to cope with alone. The health crisis constitutes a global
threat that would require a global response.

Malaysia commends the contributions and pledges
by various countries to fight the pandemic. However,
action taken so far is insufficient. More is needed to
be done by the international community to reverse the
situation. The open debate today is timely as we take
further action to address the crisis.

Malaysia is also concerned that the outbreak could
potentially reverse the peacebuilding gains achieved
in the three countries that are on the peacebuilding
agenda, namely, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea.
In their hour of need, we must not abandon or isolate
the affected countries. My delegation concurs with the
briefers that we must work together to coordinate and
mobilize resources to ensure adequate humanitarian
response on the ground and to combat the outbreak
effectively.

At this juncture, it is crucial to ensure that support
to the affected countries is coordinated and sustained at
the international level. It is also important for all United
Nations agencies to stay proactive, coordinated and

flexible in responding to the unparalleled challenges
posed by this deadly epidemic.

Earlier this week, Malaysia responded to the call
for international contributions, particularly in response
to the testimonies by medical authorities that identified
the shortage of medical rubber gloves as a problem
in combating the outbreak. On 15 September, the
Malaysian Prime Minister, Dato' Sri Mohd Najib bin
Tun Haji Abdul Razak, handed over the consignment of
20.9 million medical rubber gloves, in 11 containers to
be distributed to the affected countries. Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea will each receive three containers
of medical gloves, each container carrying 1.9 million
gloves. Meanwhile, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria will receive one container each. The
gloves will be transported from Malaysia to the main
ports of each country as soon as possible.

Malaysia sincerely hopes that this modest
contribution will help prevent the spread of Ebola and
save lives. We will continue to monitor the situation
closely to see how we can further support the affected
countries, whether in the immediate or longer term.

My delegation welcomes the outcome of this debate
in the form of resolution 2177 (2014), which Malaysia
co-sponsored. I wish to assure the Council of Malaysia's
fullest support and cooperation in working closely with
all partners in combating the Ebola outbreak.

