Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): In Turkey's capacity
as the Summit Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), I have the honour to deliver my
statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Today's open debate takes place as the Palestinian
people continue to endure decades of displacement,
injustice and denial of their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations, as a result of the
ongoing Israeli occupation. Furthermore, it coincides
with the grave circumstances and challenges generated
by the decision taken by the United States last month
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and to
transfer its Embassy to that location.

The decision violates international law and
contradicts the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. It not only constitutes blatant
disregard for the historical, legal and national rights
of the Palestinian people and their very existence in
the city; it is also a painful affront to the religious
rights of Christians and Muslims worldwide and to
universal values. We call upon all States to refrain from
recognizing and supporting the decision, and to fully
implement resolution 478 (1980). Al-QudsJerusalem is
the holy city for all three monotheistic religions. It is
the responsibility of the entire international community
to preserve its historic status. Unilateral decisions on
its status threaten the multi-ethnic and multicultural
fabric of the city. They undermine prospects for a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East and hinder the
vision ofa two-State solution.

During its sixth Extraordinary Summit in Istanbul
on 13 December, the OIC, as the world's second largest
intergovernmental body, unanimously repudiated and
condemned the United State decision and declared it null
and void. During the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly, convened on 21 December
at the request of Turkey, on behalf of the OIC, and
Yemen, on behalf of the Arab League, the Assembly
repudiated the United States decision. With that vote,
the membership overwhelmingly demonstrated its
commitment to the relevant United Nations resolutions,
assumed its collective responsibility for preventing the
erosion of international law and stood by the people of
Palestine. The OIC is determined to continue to follow
developments on this issue very seriously and to take
whatever action may therefore be necessary.

Any measures designed to alter the demographic
composition, character or status of East Jerusalem
are illegal and entirely invalid. The Security Council
has reaffirmed that fact on numerous occasions, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the Fourth Geneva Convention. Yet Israel, the occupying
Power, has ignored the Council, violated its resolutions
and persisted with measures that continue to have far-
reaching and extremely dangerous consequences on the
ground and for the prospects for justice and peace.

Despite international protests, Israel's violations
in the occupied Palestinian territory, especially in and
around occupied East Jerusalem, have been increasing
at an alarming rate. The OIC reiterates its condemnation
and rejection of all actions imposed by Israel with the
goal of altering the character, status or demography of
East Jerusalem, as well as the historic and legal status
quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the Al-Aqsa
mosque, calls for a halt to all such illegal actions and
violations and urges the Council to take decisive action
to that end. The OIC is also appalled by the actions and
provocations by violent settlers and occupation forces
in occupied Al-Khalil/Hebron - which UNESCO has
declared a world heritage site - including at religious
sites. Such provocations threaten to transform a solvable
political conflict into a never-ending religious war, and
that must be avoided at all costs.

The OIC has repeatedly warned the Council that
if it fails to deal with persistent non-compliance with
its resolutions, Israel will only be further emboldened
to continue its violations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Expectations were
high following the Council's adoption of resolution
2334 (2016). But Israel's deliberate and dramatic
escalation of its illegal settlement activities, based on
decisions taken at the highest level, continues to defy
the will of the international community, as embodied
in numerous Security Council resolutions. It should not
be met with silence. The international condemnations
of Israeli settlement policy must be translated into
international action. Full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) will be crucial to advancing the cause
of peace. In that context, the OIC calls on all States
to uphold their obligations under the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including with regard to ensuring
accountability for violations, refraining from
recognizing Israel's illegal annexation of Palestinian
land, including Jerusalem, and other measures, as
well as distinguishing on the basis of the pre-1967
borders. We further call on the Secretary-General to
present written reports as provided for in resolution
2334 (2016), in view of the deterioration in the situation
since the first anniversary of the resolution's adoption
has come and gone.

The OIC welcomes the progress on Palestinian
national reconciliation, including as it relates to
the Palestinian National Consensus Government's
assumption of its responsibilities in the Gaza Strip.
We call on the international community to maintain its
support to Palestinian reconciliation efforts. The unity
of both the Palestinian people and their land will help to
foster peace and stability in the region. We would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our call for lifting
the Israeli blockade on the Gaza Strip and all the Israeli
restrictions, combined with the effects of successive
Israeli wars, that have generated and compounded a
severe humanitarian crisis and further fragmented the
Palestinians' lands.

The OIC calls on all States to continue their
support to the Palestinian people and their institutions.
In the light of the critical financial shortfalls and
the recent United States decision to dramatically
reduce its funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, the OIC will continue to highlight the need for
sustained, predictable and sufficient funding in order
to enable the Agency to fulfil its important mandate
by providing vital assistance to the Palestine refugees
and contributing to regional stability at this time of
heightened need and volatility. We welcome the State
of Palestine's recent accession to membership of
INTERPOL and its ratification of several international
conventions. The OIC reaffirms its full support to the
State of Palestine's endeavours to join international
organizations and treaties as an integral member of the
community of nations and with respect for international
law, and we reject any punitive measures that might be
instituted in that regard.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation reiterates
its full support to all international measures and efforts
aimed at launching a multilaterally sponsored peace
process, within a well-defined time frame, in order to
promote the consolidation and realization of a two-State
solution consistent with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, including land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the OIC's full support to the Palestinian
people in their endeavour to regain their legitimate
rights, including the consecration of their independent
and sovereign Palestinian State within the June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to achieve
a just solution to the issue of the Palestine refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

I would also like to make a couple of points about
Syria in my national capacity. We are continuing our
efforts to advance the political process. At the last
round of the Astana talks, in December 2017, two
important confidence-building measures were adopted,
on the release of detainees/abductees and the conduct of
humanitarian demining. We continue to reiterate that the
United Nations-led Geneva process should be the main
forum for efforts to find a lasting political solution to
the Syrian conflict, emphasizing that Astana and Sochi
are mutually supportive and complementary platforms.

Only a multidimensional long-term strategy
can achieve the goals of eliminating terrorism and
stabilizing Syria. Turkey's resolve to fight terrorism
remains firm. There can be no religious, ethnic or
other justification of any kind for terrorism. If the
international community starts to draw distinctions
between good and bad terrorists, our joint efforts
will fail. In that understanding, on 21 January we
launched a counter-terrorism operation. Operation
Olive Branch is being conducted in line with Article
51 of the United Nations Charter and with full respect
for Syria's territorial integrity. The operation's target
is terrorists and their hideouts, weapons, vehicles and
equipment. Every precaution is being taken to protect
civilians. The operation aims to ensure border security
against the infiltration by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and attacks by the Kurdish Workers Party
and the Kurdish People's Protection Units; neutralize
terrorists in Afrin; and save civilians from the scourge
of terrorism. Turkey will continue to take whatever
measures are necessary, in line with international law,
to protect its national security.

