Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, for his briefing
on the situation in South Sudan, as well as the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Senegal, Mr. Ciss, for his
briefing on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan over the recent reporting period. We welcome
the personal engagement of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Guterres, in favour of finding a solution to the
conflict in South Sudan.

We support the initiative to coordinate action in
the format of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the United
Nations, which should ensure peace, stability and
security in the country. Our View is that IGAD indeed
should play a leading role in the process. Generally
speaking, we must note the consistent commitment of
the Secretary-General to expanding the partnership
with the African Union and subregional organizations
to resolve the most difficult conflicts on the continent,
seeking African solutions to African problems with
relevant support from the United Nations, including in
South Sudan.

We pay tribute to our colleagues of the Secretariat,
who have once again presented a balanced assessment
in their monthly briefing. We agree that there has
been some progress in preparing for the deployment
of the regional protection force. The timetable for the
deployment ofthe advanced teams was slightly delayed,
but that is not the fault of South Sudan. The fact is that
Juba has maintained a constructive position on the
issue of the Regional Protection Force, as evidenced
by the Government's allocation of the first land parcel
for deployment. We call on the Secretariat to continue
to cooperate with Juba so as to resolve all existing
problems with regard to the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), including the
need to create a mechanism for the prompt resolution
of visa problems and for determining the modalities for
deploying the regional protection force while complying
with the basic norms of peacekeeping.

We note the efforts of the Secretary-General to
fully cooperate with all troop-contributing countries
as they participate in UNMISS. We have always
advocated a thoughtful and mutually respectful
dialogue among the parties, especially when it comes
to such dangerous missions.

We share the concern of our colleagues about the
disastrous humanitarian situation in the country, and
we note the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to improve things. We call
on South Sudan to ensure conditions conducive to the
provision of international humanitarian assistance to
those in need. We welcome the statement of President
Kiir on granting humanitarian access to regions that
are experiencing a food crisis.

We would be remiss were we not to note the
assistance provided to the people of South Sudan by
neighbouring countries, in particular the Sudan, which
opened the border crossing in the area of Bentiu,
and the hosting by Uganda of a significant number
of refugees. At the same time, we stress that the
famine in various parts of South Sudan, just as that in
neighbouring Somalia and Kenya, is the result not only
of security problems but also of bad weather, which
has been recognized by representatives of international
humanitarian organizations, among others.

We agree that it will be impossible to stabilize
South Sudan without a full ceasefire and the launching
of an inclusive political process. In that connection,
we welcome President Kiir's announcement that a
national dialogue will be held in the framework of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. In principle, our view is that
the parameters of a national dialogue and the location
of the consultations should be determined by the South
Sudanese themselves. It would be unfair to blame
the ongoing violence exclusively on the Transitional
Government of National Unity, which, as we know,
has declared unilaterally a ceasefire. It is important
that the opposition take similar measures. We hold the
view that, to a large degree, the security incidents are
the result of command-and-control problems, as well
as a lack of discipline among party ranks. We must not
forget the splintering of the anti-Government forces
between supporters of Taban Deng Gai and Machar, as
well as clashes among members of different ethnicities
and criminal gangs.
Our position on the tightening of Security Council
sanctions against South Sudan has not changed. If we
are to establish lasting peace in South Sudan, what we
need is not a Security Council arms embargo, but rather
targeted measures to disarm civilians and demobilize
and reintegrate combatants. We also believe that it is
essential to heed the views of the countries of the region
that the discussion of the introduction of additional
restrictions on Juba is counterproductive.

Against that backdrop, we draw attention to the
duplicity of the approach of some of our colleagues
who appear to strongly advocate introducing an
arms embargo in the Security Council, but outside
the Chamber bring pressure to bear on independent
members of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), who are
investigating the possible involvement of those Council
members in supplying weapons to South Sudan.

