Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, and Ambassador Umarov, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for their briefings. I welcome the presence in the
Council today of Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan.
China also listened attentively to Ms. Frogh's briefing.

Afghanistan is facing multiple challenges in critical
economic and social sectors. China appreciates the fact
that the Afghan Government has made a number of
efforts to maintain security and stability in the country,
promote its national reconciliation and advance
economic development. We value the important role
of neighbouring and regional countries in resolving
the Afghan issue, and hope that the international
community will continue to provide support and
assistance to Afghanistan.

First, the international community should continue
to support the capacity-building of the security forces
in the country, as well as security-sector reform,
with a view to combating the threats of terrorism,
transnational crime and drug trafficking. The
international community should step up its cooperation
in combating terrorism and support the efforts of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other regional
actors in playing an active role.

Secondly, promoting national reconciliation is
fundamental to settling the Afghanistan issue. All
Afghan parties should prioritize the country's long-
term interests and the well-being of its people by
actively participating in the reconciliation process. The
international community should promote the realization
of broad and inclusive political reconciliation that is
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, and should also engage
in with the relevant parties in Afghanistan with a
view to launching peace talks as soon as possible. We
welcome the assistance provided by regional countries
and relevant mechanisms in that regard.

Thirdly, enhancing the capacity of the Government
is an important element in ensuring Afghanistan's
development. China welcomes its efforts in the area
of anti-corruption reform. The political parties in
Afghanistan should work for greater unity and seek
to resolve their differences through dialogue and
consultations. The international community should
fully respect the Afghan people's right to choose their
political system and their own path to development
independently while providing assistance to the
Government targeted to improving governance on the
basis of their own national development strategy and
concrete needs.

Fourthly, the international community should
honour its commitment to assisting Afghanistan and
supporting its economic and social development.
With the advantages represented by its geographical
location and natural resources, there is great potential
for Afghanistan's participation in regional economic
cooperation. The relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly highlight the fact that
parties should work to build a community of common
destiny for humankind, in the spirit of win-win
cooperation, and promote economic development
through the One Belt One Road and other initiatives.

China applauds the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and hopes that it
will continue to respect Afghanistan's sovereignty and
ownership of its future, while continuing to promote
the peace and reconciliation process and the economic
development of the country. China has always played a
constructive role in the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process and in regional peace and stability. In June,
Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China,
visited Afghanistan and Pakistan and encouraged
all three countries to establish a trilateral dialogue
mechanism between their Foreign Ministers. The first
round of the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan trilateral
Foreign Ministers' dialogue will be held in Beijing
on 26 December. Foreign Minister Wang Yi will be
attending the event, which is the first dialogue to be
held between the three Foreign Ministers. We hope that
the meeting will enable them to build trust and reach
a consensus that will help to improve the relations
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. The aim is also
to promote cooperation between all three countries
so that they can work together to achieve peace,
stability and development in the region. Together with
the international community, we are ready to work
tirelessly to achieve peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan as soon as possible.

