Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Nicholas Haysom. We congratulate him on his
responsibilities and thank him for his briefing. We also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, for his presence and briefing, and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.

My country applauds the successful creation of
a National Unity Government and the first peaceful,
democratic transfer of power in Afghanistan. We
welcome the end to what was a prolonged electoral
process and call particular attention to the role played
by President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah Abdullah. We also appreciate the good
offices of former President Mr. Hamid Karzai in the
democratic process.

We wish to remind the new Government that in
order to effectively address the political, economic and
security challenges set out in the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2014/876), it will be necessary to name
and confirm other high officials of the Government.
We hope that that part of the process will be resolved
swiftly and without difficulties.

Chile supports a process of national reconciliation
guided and led by all Afghans. In that context, we hope
that the new Government will continue to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels in order to guarantee
the participation of women in decision-making. We
also hope that women's needs will be duly addressed.
We stress the importance of continuing to promote
dialogue, inclusion and consensus among Afghans, an
essential factor when it comes to building a country
capable of standing on its own - a country with solid
democratic institutions and subject to the rule of law.

We are concerned by the ongoing impact of the
country's security situation on the Afghan civilian
population, in particular on women and children.
According to the Secretary-General's report, this has
been one of the most violent years since 2001, and we
are disturbed by the high number of civilian casualties
and displaced communities.

Chile reiterates the need to strengthen the
protection of civilians and condemns the use of
force against unarmed civilians, by both pro- and
anti-governmental elements. We recall that it is the
fundamental responsibility of the new authorities to
ensure the due protection of civilians and to prevent
anti-Government forces from undermining confidence
in the new Government before it has fully established
itself.

In that regard, we commend the increase in the
capacities and competencies of the Afghan national
defence and security forces in preparation for the
conclusion of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force at the end of 2014. We hope that
the Afghan authorities will be able to effectively
take over responsibility for their country's security.
We also welcome the agreement between NATO and
Afghanistan to establish a post-2014 Resolute Support
Mission in order to train, advise and assist the Afghan
national defence and security forces.

Moreover, we share the concerns expressed by other
members of the Council regarding the surge in opium
production and hope that that trend will be reversed.
We therefore support the proposals put forward by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

I conclude by expressing Chile's support for the
efforts of the Afghan people to build a democratic State
with full respect for the rule of law and the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. We also
reiterate our call for the international community to
continue to support the Afghan people by strengthening
their capacities to address the security challenges their
country faces. We believe that is equally essential for
the development of Afghanistan and that of the region.

