Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the Chair for the month of December and assuring
you of my delegation's support. Allow me also to thank
the Ambassador of Costa Rica for his sterling work in
presiding over the Council during November. I also
wish to express the appreciation of my delegation to
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for his statement in this Chamber and in
particular for his important work.

Since the Prosecutor's last report to this body, an
event has taken place that has resulted in a closer look
at the Rome Statute and specifically article 16 thereof.
I am of course referring to the application by the
Prosecutor to the Pre-Trial Chamber for the issuance of
a warrant of arrest in respect of President Omer
Al-Bashir of the Sudan, a matter which is still pending.
This sensitive matter has, more than any other event
over the last six months, stimulated debate on the
relationship between peace and justice. The debate has
raised the challenge of finding a balance between
ending impunity for international crimes through
judicial accountability, on the one hand, and the
realities of bringing an end to conflict through a
sensitive peace processes, on the other.

The wise drafters of the Rome Statute were
keenly aware of that sensitive balance between
political and legal considerations during the drafting
process, and that is what led to their recommendation
that the Security Council be accorded the powers
contained in article 16 - powers that allow the
Council to strike a balance between the important
principles of peace and justice, should the situation on
the ground demand it.

We appreciate the fact that the Prosecutor's
responsibility is to follow the evidence wherever it
leads him and to implement the law without fear,
favour or even political considerations, and we support
his role in that respect. However, we also recognize a
corollary responsibility of the Security Council, which
is to consider political imperatives in situations with
which it is seized that are before the Court and, if the
Council finds it meritorious, to request the Court to
defer prosecution in accordance with article 16 of the
Rome Statute.

The African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council had considered it advisable that the Security
Council consider making a request to the ICC to defer
the potential case against President Al-Bashir. The
decision of the African Union Peace and Security
Council was brought to the attention of the Security
Council on 31 July 2008. The AU Peace and Security
Council

"expresse[d] its conviction that, in view of the
delicate nature of the processes underway in the
Sudan, approval by the Pre-Trial Chamber of the
application by the ICC Prosecutor could seriously
undermine the ongoing efforts aimed at
facilitating the early resolution of the conflict in
Darfur and the promotion of long-lasting peace
and reconciliation in the Sudan as a whole and, as
a result, may lead to further suffering for the
people of the Sudan and greater destabilization
with far-reaching consequences for the country
and the region" (S/2008/48], annex, para. 9).
It is also worth noting that the African Peace and
Security Council is not advocating for impunity; on the
contrary, in the same decision that I quoted, the Peace
and Security Council also invited the AU Commission
to set up

"an Independent High-Level Panel made up of
distinguished Africans of high integrity, to
examine the situation in depth and submit
recommendations to Council on how best the
issue of accountability and combating impunity,
on the one hand, and reconciliation and healing,
on the other, could be effectively and
comprehensively addressed" (ibid., para. 1] (ii)).

The AU Peace and Security Council further
"urge[d] the Government of the Sudan to take
immediate and concrete steps to investigate human
rights violations in Darfur and bring to justice their
perpetrators" (ibid., para. 11 (iv)).

In the light of the steps being taken by the
African Union and others to ensure that peace and
justice are mutually reinforcing in Darfur rather than
contradictory, we continue to hope that this Council
will take the time necessary to have a discussion and
decide on an article 16 deferment as it relates to the
President of the Sudan.

South Africa is a member of the International
Criminal Court and indeed, one of the founding
members of that important Court, and we remain fully
committed to supporting its work. It is precisely based
on our support for the Court and the Statute
establishing the Court that we advocate for the
application of the Rome Statute in resolving any
challenges that arise between peace and justice. Article
16 of the Rome Statute was contemplated for precisely
the kind of situation we face with regard to the
application by the Prosecutor for the indictment of
President Al-Bashir. It is our contention that article 16
can best be applied prior to issuing a warrant of arrest,
so as to avoid interference with the judicial process.
Thus, the Council's consideration of the request by the
AU Peace and Security Council becomes urgent.

As we have said before in this Chamber, we see
the International Criminal Court as central in ending
impunity for international crimes and in establishing
conditions under which justice and the rule of law can
be maintained. The Court, through its ability to deter
the further commission of international crimes, serves
as an advocate of adherence to the rule of law, and thus
we expect cooperation by States with its work.

We are acutely aware of the challenges facing the
Prosecutor, which arise primarily from the fact that the
International Criminal Court does not have its own
police force, or even an army, to enforce its arrest
warrants and therefore depends entirely on the
cooperation of States. The Security Council has a
responsibility to demand the cooperation of States,
particularly in cases in which the Council has referred
cases to the Court. It was for that reason that the
Security Council issued presidential statement
S/PRST/2008/21, urging the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate fully with the Court. We therefore reaffirm
that appeal by the Council and expect that the
Government of the Sudan and all parties to the conflict
in Darfur will cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court.

Finally, through you, Mr. President, I should like
to pose a question to the Prosecutor. A couple of times,
he warned the Council not to be induced into
protecting President Al-Bashir and others who may be
under investigation by the Court. The question that I
would like to pose to the Prosecutor is: Does this mean
that if the Security Council discusses article 16 of the
Rome Statute as it applies to this case, we will be
understood as either attempting to protect those people
or having been induced in some way into covering up
of what is happening in the Sudan? I think that that
needs to be made very clear. Otherwise, should the
Council get into a discussion of this, those on the
outside might think that we have been trapped into
some kind of cover-up or inducement.

