Mr. Qazi: The report before you is the second
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
1546 (2004), paragraph 30. I trust that you will find it
to be in large part self-explanatory. I will therefore
confine myself to a few remarks.

The forthcoming election represents a test of the
new political order and of the transition process in
Iraq. The Iraqi people have yet to be given the
opportunity to assert their political rights through the
ballot box. While there is clearly a widespread desire
among Iraqis to participate in the elections, some
important segments of the population still feel
alienated or excluded from the political transition.

The overall security situation remained difficult
during the reporting period. Violence of all types,
much of it extreme in its brutality and indiscriminate in
nature, has disrupted a significant portion of the
country. Daily reports of insurgent, terrorist and
criminal activities and of military and security
operations graphically illustrate the fragility of the
situation. The chief victims are, as always, the civilian
population.

From our contacts with almost all sectors of Iraqi
society, we are convinced that violence is abhorrent to
the overwhelming majority of the Iraqi people. They
demand a way out of this situation through the
establishment of a government that demonstrably
enjoys the assent of the majority of the population.
This desire to find political solutions to political
problems is by and large shared by all Iraqis, with the
exception of a few irreconcilable extremists. The vast
majority, including those who have so far chosen to
remain outside the political process, understand that
the long-term consequences of violence seldom if ever
meet expectations and are most often very counter-
productive to the achievement of desired goals.

Over the past three months, the United Nations
has actively continued its efforts to engage in dialogue
with a wide spectrum of Iraqi opinion, including those
outside the political mainstream, with the aim of
understanding their needs and aspirations and
encouraging them to enter the political process.
Equally, we have continued to encourage those parties
that comprise the Iraqi Interim Government to intensify
their efforts to reach out to the widest possible range of
Iraqi opinion, since an inclusive process is the best
guarantee of a successful transition.

My colleagues and I have tried to impress upon
all our interlocutors that the forthcoming elections
must provide a platform for the expression of all
shades of Iraqi political opinion and allow for the
adequate representation of Iraqis of all backgrounds,
whether ethnic or religious, or members of civil society
and independents. To its credit, the Interim
Government has made efforts to reach out to alienated
elements and is continuing to do so. It needs every
encouragement to increase its efforts in this direction;
the success of the transition depends to a great extent
on them.

Because the future Transitional National
Assembly will also be the constituent assembly, it must
be seen as sufficiently representative by all
constituents of the Iraqi polity. Equally, for those
opposition elements who claim to have a substantial
base of political support, there can be no better
opportunity to demonstrate that support than by
participating in the forthcoming elections. Accordingly,
there is no alternative to an inclusive and successful
national election.

Free and fair elections conducted by an
independent electoral commission have so far not been
part of Iraqi political life. This is why it is so important
that, despite the challenging security environment,
Iraqis make every effort to avail themselves of this
opportunity to participate in the forthcoming elections.
Those who choose to opt out of or seek to undermine
such a transforming process do neither themselves nor
their country any favour. The self-restraint and
accommodation exhibited with regard to certain
opposition groups, and their subsequent decision to
eschew violence and participate in the political
process, show that peaceful political alternatives are
always available.

At the same time, it is a fact that political opinion
remains very polarized. Along with the general
insistence that elections be held as scheduled by the
Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq (IECI),
there have been calls from some quarters for the
boycott of elections. Others have called for the
postponement of elections to allow time and
reconciliation efforts to heal the wounds of recent
events. It is imperative that every effort be made to
promote dialogue, compromise and reconciliation
among all Iraqis in order to bring about a more secure
environment. Otherwise, there is a real danger that the
political transition process will be impeded, rather than
facilitated.

A successful transition will also be facilitated
through sustained regional and international
engagement with the Iraqi Interim Government and
with representatives of the spectrum of Iraqi civil and
political opinion. The Sharm El Sheikh Conference in
late November brought together key regional and
international actors, and the subsequent meeting of
regional interior ministers in Tehran built on the
consensus reached at Sharm El Sheik. The Sharm El
Sheik and Tehran communiques should help to bring
about a regional environment conducive to Iraq's
transition. Political outreach efforts inside Iraq, as well
as growing regional cooperation with respect to Iraq,
offer the best prospect for an improved political and
security environment and a successful transition in
Iraq.

I am optimistic that the Interim Government and
the people of Iraq are willing and able to successfully
negotiate the transition to a united, democratic and
prosperous Iraq. Despite its current problems, Iraq
possesses the human and material capital to rebuild
itself. Moreover, the support of the international
community to Iraq's political and economic
reconstruction was again reaffirmed in October at the
Tokyo meeting of the International Reconstruction
Fund Facility. The Paris Club has decided to
significantly reduce Iraq's external debt burden, and it
is hoped that other creditor nations will follow suit.
Substantial resources have been used to mitigate
emergency and rehabilitation needs, as well as to
support the work of the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq. Additional economic support can
be expected as Iraq succeeds in advancing its political
transition.

The potential of Iraq remains its surest hope of
success. That is why the United Nations is in Iraq,
despite many constraints. We are and shall remain
sensitive to the expectations that Iraqi people have of
the United Nations. We are determined not to
disappoint those expectations and aware of the
important role the United Nations has in facilitating a
transition process that answers to the aspirations of
Iraqi people.

The next year will see many challenges and
opportunities: the election of a Transitional National
Assembly, a constitutional referendum and a general
election under the new constitution. It will be all the
more important to have wider and deeper consensus in
the international community, particularly in this
Council, in support of the efforts of the Secretary-
General and UNAMI to implement our mandate under
resolution 1546 (2004) to the fullest extent possible, as
circumstances permit.

With the Council's support, the Secretary-General
and I remain committed to doing our utmost to help
promote peace, stability and development in a united
Iraq.
