Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank you and your country,
Mr. President, for having organized this important and
very interesting open debate on the theme "Maintenance
of international peace and security: Reflect on history,
reaffirm the strong commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations".

Burundi is pleased to have been associated,
following the rebirth of its democracy in 2005, with the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations and the
African Union. Burundi is the top African francophone
troop-contributing country to peacekeeping operations
in several conflict areas across the world. Its military
and police personnel work courageously each day under
the blue flag of the United Nations and under the green
flag of the African Union, so as to re-establish peace
in troubled areas, notably in Somalia and the Central
African Republic.

It is our turn to return the favour to the international
community, which participated in the restoration and
consolidation of peace in my country after several
years of unprecedented crises and war. It is then

understandable that the deployment of our troops
to peacekeeping operations is our way of thanking
the international community, which has remained at
Burundi's side as much in time of peace as in time of
war.

Since the 1990s, peacekeeping operations have
become the rule rather than the exception so as to
re-establish peace and stability, especially in regions
targeted by internal conflicts, such as in our region of
the African Great Lakes. The nature of the mandates
of those operations has evolved throughout the decades
and has been constantly changing. At the same
time, the implementation mechanisms have become
increasingly complex, which means that the challenges
the Organization must face continue to multiply.

Nothing can be done without security, yet everything
becomes possible when security is guaranteed and
extends throughout the national territory. In that
regard, the early mobilization of sufficient resources for
capacity-building and the financing of related activities,
such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), are key to any security sector reform. In that
regard, Burundi welcomes the success of its own DDR
programme, which allowed for the proper integration
of foreign rebels into the regular army. Thanks to that
successful integration, Burundi now has defence and
security forces that are truly national and inclusive,
and currently help to maintain peace in several hotspot
areas. Burundi stands ready to share the experience of
its DDR programe with other nations in the framework
of a tripartite partnership that would include Burundi,
the country concerned, and the United Nations and/or
the African Union.
Extending mandates for existing operations and
establishing new operations must be done in strict
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States, and non-intervention in
domestic affairs. Moreover, it is necessary to comply
with the basic principles adopted by the General
Assembly with respect to those operations, such as the
consent of the parties, impartiality, and the non-use of
force except in self-defence.

As we all know, a large number of peacekeeping
operations are mandated to protect civilians. We
reiterate that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians falls to sovereign States, except
in the event ofmass atrocities, such as genocide, crimes
against humanity or ethnic cleansing. The protection of
civilians cannot serve as a pretext to promote a change
of regime, a military intervention or any other act that
would run counter to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. In that respect, it is important to
continue to strengthen dialogue among countries that
host peacekeeping operations, troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Security Council.

Burundi believes that peacekeeping is an important
tool of the United Nations for resolving conflict
situations around the world, and we believe in that tool.
However, peacekeeping does not replace other, more
cost-effective mechanisms already in existence, such
as preventive diplomacy and political efforts to settle
disputes peacefully before they happen. We underscore
that when establishing a peacekeeping operation or
extending the mandate of an existing operation, there
is a need to adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles
that govern those operations. We must, inter alia,
respect the principles of sovereign equality, political
independence, territorial integrity, and non-intervention
in domestic affairs.

It cannot be said enough that cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries is key to the success of peacekeeping
operations. The role played by troop-contributing
countries, whose soldiers risk their lives for peace in
the overall peacekeeping process, and the importance
of their full participation in the development of policy
or reaching of decisions related to troops, the mandate
and the composition of peacekeeping operations can
hardly be underestimated.

The provision of any financial and logistical support
necessary to peacekeeping operations is essential to
ensure that their mandates are successfully carried out.
The financing of peacekeeping operations should not
become a burden for troop-contributing countries.

While reaffirming that the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security rests
with the Security Council, it is imperative to continue
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in resolving
conflict andpost-conflict situations throughjoint efforts
in conflict prevention and settlement, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The ongoing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is testimony to
the potential of cooperation between the United Nations
and other regional organizations. This cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
should be continued, strengthened and made lasting.

Given the short amount of time allotted to discuss
this extremely broad and relevant topic, allow me to
briefly make some concrete proposals in the framework
of our shared goal to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This is not an exhaustive list.

First, in the context of maintaining multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding elements can
be incorporated quickly. Any strategy for peacebuilding
must be based on national experience and planned in a
consistent and cross-cutting manner to ensure that it is
in line with the needs of the country in question, and
with the principle of national ownership and priorities
set by national authorities. To that end, the views of
the host country and the lessons learned by and best
practices of troop-contributing countries may prove
necessary to determine the real needs of field missions.

Secondly, we recall that women play a key role in
conflict prevention and rebuilding broken societies. In
that respect, we advocate for the systematic inclusion
of women throughout the process of settlement of
disputes, mediation, community recovery and local
administration after conflict.

Thirdly, it is crucial to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations and those mandated by the
United Nations - such as the African Union Mission
to Somalia and, more recently, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic - have clearly defined and adequately
resourced mandates, objectives and chains of command
that are based on a realistic assessment of the situation
on the ground. We believe that each mission must take
into account the needs and priorities of the countries
concerned, in cooperation with national authorities,
from the earliest stages ofthe mission planning process.

Fourthly, we call for strengthened and sustained
dialogue and cooperation among the Security Council,
the troop- and police-contributing countries, and the
Secretariat in order to meet peacekeeping challenges
in a spirit of partnership, cooperation and mutual trust.

Fifthly and finally, we call on the Security Council
to continue to support regional and subregional
initiatives so as to strengthen their ability to contribute
to efforts to maintain international peace and security.
We have witnessed the important role that the African
Union and subregional organizations - such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States, the East
African Community and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, whose headquarters are in
Bujumbura - have played in the area of peacekeeping
and conflict resolution.

