Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council to guide the
Council's work for this month. We would like to thank
you for inviting us to participate in this open public
debate on the Middle East. I would also like to thank
Sir Mark Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for having presided over the work of
the Council last month.

My delegation supports the statements made on
behalf of the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Today more thank ever, the situation in the
Middle East is characterized by a feeling of profound
disappointment. That feeling is due to the continued
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territory -
the longest occupation that the world has seen since the
United Nations was founded. The Palestinian people
have placed great hope in the United Nations to save
them from that painful experience and from their
suffering. The Palestinian people are committed to
peace and to the olive branch, but their hopes depend
upon the Security Council. The Council must deal with
the occupation in a serious and firm manner.
It is deplorable that the occupying Power is
continuing its hostile practices, which are characterized
by the expulsion of civilians, detaining people,
torturing prisoners and expanding and building
settlements. Just yesterday, in the middle of the day,
Israel expelled two Palestinian families from their
homes in East Jerusalem, while more building permits
were granted to settlers. The aim is simply to Judaize
Jerusalem and to enshrine the status quo for the Jewish
inhabitants of the city.

Israel is also rejecting the work of the Quartet, in
particular with regard to the Quartet's statement of
11 April (see SG/2182), which, in and of itself, does
not meet the aspirations of the Palestinian people.

Saudi Arabia, which has responsibility for the
holy places in Medina and Mecca, is very closely
following those attacks against East Jerusalem, and in
particular against Haram Al-Sharif. Saudi Arabia is
very concerned. There have been many attempts to
violate that site, undermine its foundations, burn it and
demolish it. We call attention to Israel's plan to step up
its destruction and to increase the size of settlements.

The League of Arab States has endorsed the
Initiative put forward by Saudi Arabia to bring an end
to the Arab-Israeli conflict in all its aspects, including
by putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Syrian Golan Heights, the Shaba'a farmlands and the
remaining Lebanese territory. We seek to establish a
Palestinian State. Although it has been broadly
accepted by the international community, Israel has
rejected the Initiative.

We urge the Council to go beyond these routine
debates and to take the measures necessary to end the
blockade of Gaza, dismantle the settlements, bring an
end to the occupation and recognize an independent
Palestinian State, on Palestinian land, in line with the
4 June 1967 borders, with its capital in Jerusalem. We
urge the Council to accept Palestine as a full Member
of the United Nations and of its agencies - a matter
on which the Council has been very dilatory. We hope
that the Palestinian people and the world will have to
wait no longer to attain justice from the Council.

I would now like to refer to the Iranian
occupation of the three islands that belong to the
United Arab Emirates, namely, Greater Tunb, Lesser
Tunb and Abu Musa. That occupation is a factor
fuelling Iranian threats against the Arab Gulf States.
The visit of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad
to the islands of the United Arab Emirates was
unacceptable and showed a lack of good intentions. We
support the United Arab Emirates in its efforts to
resolve this problem peaceably through negotiation,
arbitration and mediation. We call upon Iran to
preserve its good neighbourly relations, cooperate with
the United Arab Emirates and display wisdom in
addressing this issue.

With regard to Syria, we supported the adoption
of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
concerning the deployment of a United Nations
Mission to monitor developments. We have also
supported the initiative to send Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and of the League
of Arab States, whose efforts we fully support. We call
attention to the fact that the Syrian Government is
nevertheless continuing its violence against its own
people, using heavy weapons to attack population
centres, including towns and villages.

Instead of prisoners being released, people
continue to be detained. It is clear that the Syrian
Government is not respecting the commitments it made
to the international community through Mr. Annan. It
is high time for the Syrian Government to put an end to
the use of weapons against its own people. The
aspirations and resolve of the people will prevail.
Repression and violence no longer have a place in the
modern world.

We urge the Security Council to ensure that the
Syrian authorities are not able to delay any further and
that Syria is no longer able to continue to ignore its
commitments, as it has with regard to the League of
Arab States Initiative. The Council cannot give the
Syrian authorities additional deadlines at the expense
of the lives of the women, children and young people
of Syria.

The world is watching events closely in the
Middle East. The international community, as
represented by the Security Council, is called upon to
uphold international law and to heed the aspirations of
the people of the Middle East to justice, freedom and
national independence.

