At the outset, Guatemala thanks the Federal Republic of Germany, as President of the Security Council, for convening this important virtual open debate on pandemics and security. This debate is an opportunity to exchange views on the implications of international health threats and pandemics and the corresponding role of the Security Council in maintaining peace and security. As we all know, the world is facing the unprecedented impact of a human and social crisis due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. These challenging times require a coordinated response based on a reinvigorated multilateralism, in which international cooperation must be a priority. As a Central American country, Guatemala has also been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. This situation reminds us of the critical importance of addressing this worldwide health emergency at the regional level. First, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Guatemala has established coordination mechanisms with countries in the Central American region to avert the consequences of this pandemic and its harmful expansion. Our primary focus is on the most vulnerable groups: elderly people, women, children, people with disabilities, migrants and indigenous people. Secondly, despite the efforts made by our Government, the pandemic has adversely affected the health system. No country in the world was totally prepared to face the impact of COVID-19. This pandemic has revealed our vulnerabilities, but also proven that humankind - in solidarity and in unity - can transform the worst situations into scenarios of hope. Guatemala is firmly convinced that international solidarity, based on effective and coordinated partnerships through multilateralism, is the key tool for dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic and its widespread negative effects. Only through mutual cooperation will we find a comprehensive response for recovery. We are grateful for the cooperation provided by several partners, particularly the European Union and the Federal Republic of Germany, in these unprecedented times. Thirdly, as a troop-contributing country, we believe that peacekeeping plays an essential role in countries emerging from conflict. In many peacekeeping operations, quick-impact projects can help local communities address the immediate needs of the populations. Hospitals, schools and emergency health centres can improve the capacity of host countries, particularly those with weak health systems, in order to deliver on their mandates in times of global crisis. Fourthly, there is no conventional practice for addressing such unprecedented circumstances as currently affect the basic assets of the people we represent: their human rights, life and health. In that scenario, it is necessary to establish social protection mechanisms that can provide emergency assistance to the most vulnerable, prioritizing their needs. In this context, United Nations country teams as well as national institutions can also play an important role through planning, monitoring and providing adequate assistance. In our country, Guatemalan women are agents of change who play an indispensable role in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic as main caregivers in homes and community spaces and as workers and professionals in the health, social work and humanitarian aid sectors. In conclusion, Guatemala is pleased to have co-sponsored the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. This is also a call to reflection, which reminds us that solidarity among nations must prevail. That solidarity must be considerable as there should be only one fight in our world today: our shared battle against COVID-19.
