The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council takes note of the report
(S/2015/866) of the Secretary-General on the
progress towards the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS)
and welcomes the briefing on 25 November 2015
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie. The
Security Council encourages further progress
by the United Nations system and its partners
towards the implementation of the UNISS,
including through support to the Group of Five
Sahel (G-S Sahel) in order to assist in addressing
the security and political challenges to the stability
and development of the Sahel region. The Security
Council reaffirms its continued commitment to
address all these challenges, which are interrelated
with humanitarian and development issues, as well
as the adverse effects of climate and ecological
changes. The Security Council reiterates the
importance of national and regional ownership of
the UNISS, and commends the growing leadership
role assumed by the countries of the region. It
welcomes in this regard the establishment of the
G-5 Sahel, which aims to enhance ownership of
the initiatives focused on addressing the threats to
peace, security and development in the Sahel.

"The Security Council encourages the Office
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel (OSES) to continue to work closely
with the G-5 Sahel countries, as well as other
countries of the region, regional and international
actors, including the African Union (AU) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to tackle the threats to peace, security
and development in the Sahel, as well as their root
causes. The Security Council encourages greater
cooperation among all stakeholders, including the

AU and ECOWAS, calls on them to collaborate
with the OSES and the Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel,
as well as the G-5 Sahel countries, and reiterates
its call for the rapid and effective implementation
of the UNISS.

"The Security Council is gravely concerned
that Libya remains a safe haven for terrorist groups
operating in the Sahel region, and expresses deep
concern at the threat posed by the widespread
availability of unsecured arms and ammunition
and their proliferation, which undermines stability
in Libya and the Sahel region, including through
transfer to terrorist and violent extremist groups.
In this regard, the Security Council calls on the
international community to provide support to
Libya and its neighbours in the Sahel, including
by providing them with the necessary security and
capacity-building assistance in the struggle against
Al-Qaida-linked terrorist groups and individuals.
The Security Council calls on all Libyan
stakeholders to endorse and sign the Political
Agreement and work swiftly towards the formation
of a Government of National Accord.

"The Security Council urges Member States
of the Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb to
coordinate their efforts to prevent the serious threat
posed to international and regional security by
terrorist groups crossing borders and seeking safe
havens in the Sahel region, to enhance cooperation
and coordination in order to develop holistic,
inclusive and effective strategies to combat, in a
comprehensive and integrated manner, the activities
of terrorist groups, and to prevent the expansion of
those groups, as well as to limit the proliferation
of all arms and transnational organized crime. The
Security Council welcomes the efforts of the AU
and ECOWAS, as well as of Member States of the
Sahel, to strengthen border security and regional
cooperation, including through the G-5 Sahel and
the Nouakchott process on the enhancement of the
security cooperation and the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture in
the Sahel and Sahara region, the most inclusive
security cooperation mechanism in the region. It
takes note of the establishment by the G-5 Sahel
countries of a framework to strengthen regional
security cooperation, as well as to conduct cross-
border joint military operations, including with the
support of the French forces.

"The Security Council reaffirms that Member
States must ensure that any measures taken to
counter terrorism comply with all their obligations
under international law, in particular international
human rights law, international refugee law, and
international humanitarian law. The Security
Council recalls that those responsible for abuses
and violations of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law must be held
accountable and brought to justice.

"The Security Council calls for funding for
humanitarian programmes in the Sahel region,
which continue to be underfunded, hampering
timely responses to humanitarian needs. The
Security Council expresses its concern at the scale
of the growing humanitarian crisis caused by the
activities of the Boko Haram terrorist group, which
has displaced over 2.5 million people, including
an estimated 1.4 million children and 200,000
refugees in Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. It
commends the support provided to the refugees by
these Governments, including with the assistance
of humanitarian actors and relevant United Nations
entities, and calls on the international community
to provide its support.

"The Security Council commends the AU,
ECOWAS and the Lake Chad Basin Commission
member States, as well as Benin's courageous and
active contribution to peace and stability in the
Sahel region, and in particular pays tribute to the
engagement of their soldiers in Mali and in the
fight against Boko Haram. The Security Council
notes that the creation of the Multinational Joint
Task force (MNJTF) has led to steady progress
in the fight against Boko Haram. The Security
Council reiterates its call upon the international
community and donors to support the MNJTF.
The Security Council reiterates its call on Member
States to contribute generously to the African
Union trust fund and requests the Secretary-
General to continue to advocate strongly with the
international community and donors in support of
this effort. It calls on the African Union to establish
its trust fund without further delay.

"The Security Council recalls the importance
of coordinating the effective implementation of
Sahel initiatives and strategies, and commends
in this regard Mali for its chairmanship of the
Ministerial Coordination Platform over the last

two years. It encourages Chad, as the new Chair, to
intensify efforts to improve coordination between
partners, including through the regular sharing of
information and the strengthening of operational
cooperation between partners.

"The Security Council calls on the international
community and donors to fulfil all their pledges
made towards boosting economic growth,
eradicating poverty and supporting governance
reforms through projects that would support peace
and security efforts in the Sahel region, and calls on
all relevant entities of the United Nations system to
focus on identifying and funding such projects, as
a matter of priority, in consultation with the OSES
and the Member States of the Sahel, including the
G-5 Sahel member States and relevant regional
organizations.

"The Security Council calls upon the Member
States of the Sahel region, with the support of the
international community, to initiate programmes
aimed at creating opportunities that would engage
the youth in productive activities to reverse the
tide of radicalization and recruitment into terrorist
groups. It also calls on the OSES to support as
a matter of priority, efforts focused at creating
opportunities for youth and women. The Security
Council expresses strong support to the States in
the region affected by the smuggling of migrants
and human trafficking, emphasizes the need to step
up coordination of efforts in order to strengthen
an effective multidimensional response to these
common challenges, and stresses that addressing
both smuggling of migrants and human trafficking
requires a coordinated, multidimensional approach
with States of origin, of transit and of destination.

"The Security Council takes note of the
organization of the Sahel Women's Forum in
N'Djamena, Chad, on 22 and 23 July 2015, to
strengthen the role of women in the Sahel region
and encourages the Member States of the region
to enhance the active participation of women in
decision-making. The Security Council also takes
note of the organization in N'Djamena, Chad,
on 19 and 20 November 2015, of a G-5 Sahel and
partners ministerial meeting and an ordinary
Summit of the G-5 Sahel, respectively.

"Recognizing the strong nexus between peace,
security, good governance and development,
the Security Council encourages regional and

international financial organizations to provide
a substantial financial assistance package to
countries of the region to boost economic growth
and reduce poverty. The Security Council
welcomes plans by the United Nations to establish
a multi-partner trust fund for the Sahel in order to
pool contributions, including from donor countries
and the private sector, to support the region's
efforts. The Security Council notes the active
resource mobilization efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General to continue to engage
with potential donor countries and organizations to
accelerate the implementation of selected regional
projects, in consultation with the Member States of
the Sahel region, including the G-5 Sahel member
States and relevant regional organizations.

"The Security Council takes note of the
adoption ofa declaration ofthe G-5 Sahel countries
on the fight against radicalization and violent
extremism in the Sahel. The Security Council
requests the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and its
member entities, including the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, as well as
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre,
to support Sahel countries' efforts to counter
terrorism and address conditions conducive to the
spread of violent extremism which can be conducive
to terrorism. It calls on the CTITF to explore
expanding its I-ACT initiative to all the countries
of the G-5 Sahel. The Security Council recalls
that the 1540 Committee, as its subsidiary body,
remains committed to supporting States, including
the Sahel States, that require assistance in their
efforts to comply with the obligations contained in
resolution 1540 (2004). The Security Council calls
on the United Nations to accelerate action to also
support the G-5 Sahel in the implementation of
the African Union's "Silencing the guns" flagship
project, consistent with its presidential statement of
16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27).

"The Security Council strongly encourages
another high-level visit to the Sahel region as
soon as possible by the United Nations Secretary-
General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, the President of the World Bank
Group, the President of the African Development
Bank and the European Union Development
Commissioner to assess the implementation of the
vision set out during the November 2013 visit, and

to strengthen the focus and commitment of the
international community in the region.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
the series of consultations between the United
Nations, the G-5 Sahel and its Permanent
Secretariat, which helped promote convergence
between the UNISS and the Priority Investment
Programme of the G-5 Sahel, and led to a road
map for consolidating cooperation between the two
entities. The Security Council calls on the OSES to
continue to coordinate with the national focal points
appointed by the G-5 Sahel, and calls on the United
Nations Secretariat to hold at least one meeting
per quarter with the Permanent Representatives of
the G-5 Sahel member States in New York to share
information and follow up on the implementation of
the UNISS. The Security Council encourages the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to continue
to meet with the officials of the G-5 member States
to discuss developments in the region, activities of
the OSES, and progress towards the implementation
of the UNISS, as well as the priorities of the G5
member States.

"The Security Council looks forward to
considering the recommendations of the Secretary-
General's strategic review of the OSES to be
conducted in December 2015, and requests the
inclusion of recommendations on the location
of the OSES, in consultation with the Member
States of the Sahel region, including the G-5 Sahel
member States and regional and international
actors, bearing in mind the need to more fully and
directly anchor the implementation of the UNISS
in the region including the five priority countries,
namely, Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger, as well as to maximize synergies with
the relevant entities of the United Nations system.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to inform it of the progress towards the
implementation ofthe UNISS through oral briefings
as needed, as well as through a report and a briefing
no later than 31 October 2016. The Security
Council also requests the Secretary-General to
include in his report detailed information on the
financial contributions towards boosting economic
growth and eradicating poverty through projects
that would support peace and security efforts in the
Sahel region, noted in paragraph 26 of his report of
24 July 2014 (S/2014/542) and recommendations for
strengthening Sahel Member States' capabilities
to prevent drivers of violent extremism which can
be conducive to terrorism. The Security Council
encourages the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to pursue her efforts and good offices
in order to enhance regional and interregional
cooperation and strengthen coordinated
international assistance to the countries of the
Sahel region in close coordination with the Special
Representatives of the Secretarnyencral for West

and Central Africa, In this regard, the Security
Council welcomes updates on the overall situation
in the Sahel region in the Secretary-General's
regular reports on the situations in West and
Central Africa."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/24.

The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.
