Mr. Steiner: Let me first thank all the speakers
here in the Council for the support that I have received
for the concept of priorities and benchmarks. Let me
say, too, that of course the situation is not easy and
there is no doubt that we still have serious
shortcomings. Deputy Prime Minister Covic' has rightly
pointed out the fact that freedom of movement for non-
majority communities is still in a very unsatisfactory
state. That is one of the reasons why freedom of
movement for all is part of the benchmarks concept.

Let me just respond briefly to the specific points
that have been mentioned. First, on the transfer of
prisoners, I join those who have commended the step
taken by Belgrade to transfer prisoners, after two and a
half years, to Kosovo, where they legally belong. The
agreement that Mr. Covie and I both signed relates to
how we will deal with these cases - specifically, cases
within Kosovo - in the future. We have identified 16
prisoners who fall under the terms of the agreement,
which is shaped in accordance with the European
agreement on the transfer of prisoners. We and lawyers
from Belgrade have asked these prisoners whether they
want to leave. We cannot force them; that is something
which needs to be done voluntarily. Unfortunately, I
must say that so far not one has taken up this
opportunity to be transferred to a prison in Serbia
proper. We are ready, of course, if the prisoners agree,
to follow this up expeditiously.

Let me also say a word about Mitrovica, as it has
been mentioned by the representative of China and
others. I think we need to keep the facts straight. On 8
April, policemen doing their jobs were attacked - not
only with stones, but also with bullets and hand
grenades. Twenty-two were wounded and, as has
already been said, one seriously. By the way, that is the
reason why Polish Prime Minister Miller went to
northern Kosovo a day later to express his solidarity
with UNMIK. So here, on this issue, we are talking
simply of criminal acts. We cannot respond to those
acts with agreements on horizontal redrawings of maps,
on whatever level, or by taking action against the
proceedings of international judges.

As I have outlined several times, what is
necessary first in Mitrovica is a calming of the
situation. We also need to have an unhindered
international presence in the north, including
international police. Once we have the situation there
normalized and we have an international presence as
prescribed by resolution 1244 (1999) - and of course
the Serb community also has legitimate interests and
concerns - we can talk about the delegation of
competencies to municipalities and about the re-
assessment of the operations of local communities.

But first things first. When we talk about
Mitrovica, we should not forget the facts. Mitrovica is
a municipality with 130,000 inhabitants. Ninety per
cent of the inhabitants of Mitrovica are non-Serbs. If
one looks at the news coming from that area today, I
am being heavily criticized for not moving forward in
avoiding parallel structures and in deploying the
international presence everywhere, including the north.
One has to see that for every action there is an opposite
reaction. One also has to see that we need to support
others living in the municipality.

I think that the answer - and my understanding
in our discussions with Mr. Covie was that, in essence,
we agree on this - cannot be one of horizontal
division. The answer must be a vertical answer on
decentralization. That must be something that happens
in the whole of Kosovo. I also think that we need
economic help and that small and medium businesses
in the north should be helped. I would be very grateful
if Belgrade would support, and continue to support,
such an approach to decentralization once we have
calmed the situation.

Return was mentioned as one of the core issues
we need to address, and I totally agree. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
has put the official number of minority Serbs, Bosniacs
and others who have returned so far at 453,000. That is
not enough by far. This is an issue on which we must
now put priority. I think we have a chance to do that,
because for the first time we can follow an integrated
approach. If we have finally nominated a Serb
coordinator for returns within the Government; if we
have nominated a senior adviser on returns for my
Office from among the Kosovo Serbs; if we see that,
while the climate on the ground is still difficult, it has
changed; and if one listens to what Prime Minister
Rexhepi is telling the mayors out there in Kosovo
about returns - then that is good news. We have the
right messages going out to Kosovo from the
provisional institutions. Now, if we have the
institutions, the representatives and the Serbs involved
in an integrated approach on return, and if we do it
together with Belgrade - which has to play a decisive
role here because most of the internally displaced
persons are, of course, in Serbia proper - if all those
factors are working together, I think we have a chance.
For one thing is also clear, 2002 and next year will be
decisive when it comes to returns.

Let me now answer your specific questions,
Mr. President.

With regard to the Agreement between Belgrade
and Skopje on the borders and the position of the
Assembly and the institutions, I have made UNMIK's
position clear on every occasion in Pristina and in
Skopje. In March of last year, the Security Council
called for respect for that Agreement. I have said to
everyone who wants to hear it and to those who do not
want to hear it that that is also the position of UNMIK.
Now, if there are different views - and that is
something I cannot forbid - that is one thing, but I
have also made it clear to the provisional institutions
that they have no competence as provisional
institutions to take any decisions to the contrary. If the
Assembly discusses these issues, I cannot hinder it, but
what I can and will hinder, as I have told Mr. Covie, is
any decision by the Assembly in this area, because it is
an area of reserved power and not for the Assembly.

Mr. President, you have asked where the
prisoners are. Those who have been found guilty by
international judges of having committed the crimes of
murder, stealing and so on are in prison in the north-
east of Kosovo, and they will stay there. After a review
and decision by international judges, those who have
been found not guilty have been or will be released.
Every step we are taking here we are taking together
with the international judges.

You have also asked, Mr. President, about the
status of the review of possible war crimes. You must
understand that I cannot disclose judicial processes
here, but let me say one thing very clearly. First, Carla
del Ponte was in Pristina about a week ago and said
that the court is currently investigating three cases
concerning Kosovo. We will see what the outcome is in
that case. If there is an indictment - of whomever and
on whatever charge, whether of a member of the
Kosovo Liberation Army in Kosovo or not - we will
arrest that person. That is our role. We are duty-bound
to do it and we will do it.

Finally, with regard to the question of
privatization and property of the Federal Republic or
Serbia, it is highly disputed who owns what. This is the
reason why, in our draft legislation on the Kosovo
Transfer Agency, we have frozen the whole question of
ownership. We will introduce an economic framework
that can boost the economy without addressing or
interfering with the question of who owns what. We
have simply frozen the question. It is too complicated
to solve now and, were we to wait for a solution to it
before solving the problem of property, we would not
get the economy going. We simply do not have the time
to do that in a situation where financial contributions
from donors are declining and the international
presence is being downscaled.

The representative of Singapore addressed, as
have others, the issue of final status and referred, as
Mr. Covie has, to the report of a very active
organization which follows the situation in Kosovo. Let
me be very clear on this issue. Yes, we will have to
address this issue when the time is right, under
resolution 1244 (1999), paragraph 11. We will do so in
the form of a dialogue with Belgrade, of course. But I
continue to believe that the time for that has not yet
come. I think that we need to do first things first. My
philosophy on this issue would be standards first, then
status. That means we need to do our homework now.

That is what the people in Kosovo want too,
irrespective of whether they are Serbs, Kosovo
Albanians, Bosniacs or others. What do these people
want? Do not forget that more than 50 per cent of the
population is under the age of 23. They are young
people. They want jobs, reliable institutions and
security. Those are the issues that we need to address
first.

I firmly believe that if we address those
benchmarks - even if not in an ideal way - which
will still take time, the question of how we should
address and discuss the question of the final issue will
be much easier. But that is not the issue for the
moment. I think we have to concentrate on the things
that the population expects of us. I talk to these people
constantly. No one asks me about the final status.
Politicians may, but not normal people. Normal people
want to have electricity, security, jobs and their normal,
decent living. That is what we are there to address first.
That is why I frankly believe that prematurely
addressing final status issues would not help us in the
current situation.

Finally, sometimes in the evening I, too, am
pessimistic and am concerned at our slow progress on
the issues that the Council has rightly mentioned. But
there is something that comforts me. I think that we
have three allies. The first ally - and forgive me for
saying so, but it is true - is the Secretary-General of
the Organization. To have the support for this
enormous Mission from the Secretary-General and
from the Secretariat here in practice is extremely
helpful to us.

The second ally is the Security Council,
representing the international community. The Council
support for what we are doing - as we report to it in
the hope that the Council supports our philosophy and
line of action - is quite a powerful tool. I must say
that so far I am very encouraged and that it is helpful to
have this support.

In my analysis, the third ally is the population of
Kosovo. That is true for the majority population, the
Kosovo Albanians, and for the Kosovo Serbs and the
others, because we have the same aims. They want a
decent, secure life, and that is how we see our task. Of
course, we also address the question of the region and
the many practical issues we have with Belgrade. But I
think that we have a common line and common goals.
For that reason, I think we have a real chance to do our
work, which is, in the end, to help create a respectable,
inclusive society. Anyway, we have no alternative, and
we have to continue along this path.

I just want to thank you once again for all the
expressions of support that the Council has made today.
It is very encouraging as I go back to Kosovo
tomorrow.

