Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation is extremely pleased, Sir, to see you again
presiding over the work of the Council this month and
also to thank you again for the initiative you are taking
as part of the process of transparency that each one of
us - as members of the Security Council and other
Member States present here - would like to instil into
the work of the Council. Perhaps it might even be
possible one day to think of opening up this kind of
debate to general participation by all Members that
wish to participate. They are all actors following the
affairs of the world, in particular with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
they would all like to know what the Security Council
is doing from day to day to keep the peace and to
maintain security throughout the world as well as to
participate in a frank and transparent exchange of
views on the appropriate way for the Security Council,
representing the conscience of humanity, to deal with
all matters of international peace and security. They
would also like to say - and, indeed, why not - why
the Security Council has failed, if it has failed, to
shoulder its responsibilities in this particular area of its
competence.

All my colleagues have discussed how the
Council, under the presidency of Colombia and thanks
to the skill of Ambassador Valdivieso and his very able
team, has acquitted itself of its responsibilities on the
items on its agenda during the month of August.

For my part, I would here like to refer to one set
of issues that is a constant puzzle for many delegations
and that is food for wide reflection. It is a simple
subject. It concerns the lethargy of the Security
Council in regard to what is happening in the Middle
East. The situation in that region is declining from day
to day, but the Council constantly sends erroneous
signals to the protagonists in the conflict. The Council
sometimes hurries forward and skips certain stages in
reacting to a conflict, and we note an incomprehensible
activism, for instance when it comes to imposing or
strengthening sanctions when more appropriate means
could be used. But then we see the same Security
Council totally ignoring other explosive situations.

Looking at the Council's agenda for the month,
we note that the situation in the Middle East and in the
occupied territories has been considered on four
occasions: 20, 21, 23 and 24 August.

But what was the outcome of those four days of
work? They resulted in false signals sent to the parties
to the conflict and in a sense of desolation that has
been building since 24 August, the last time the
Council examined the issue in informal consultations.

My delegation will not dwell on the issue of the
situation in the occupied territories once again, but
would nevertheless like to underline that the Council
has shown itself incapable of shouldering its
responsibilities in this regard. That is regrettable in
view of the tragic situation of the Palestinian people,
and, in particular, in the light of the threat that today
hangs over the whole region. The Council, all of us,
and all Member States should ponder this seriously.

