Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me start by joining
previous speakers in welcoming the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-
Ocampo, to the Council, and thanking him for his
briefing on the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005). We would like also to welcome the presence of
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Foreign Minister of Costa
Rica. We also warmly welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium in our midst.

Since the Prosecutor's last briefing, on
5 December of last year (see S/PV. 5789), the security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate. The international community's efforts to
help Sudan to address the Darfur situation are facing
mounting challenges, the primary one being the
intensifying armed clashes. All armed conflicts
everywhere, without exception are accompanied by
criminal acts, including serious crimes. Failure to
achieve peace produces not only prolonged suffering
but also the continuation of those crimes. Indonesia
strongly condemns all gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We condemn those
who commit war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Impunity must not be tolerated, and the perpetrators of
those crimes must be brought to justice without
unnecessary delay.

Here, we share the profound concern expressed in
the Prosecutor's report with regard to ongoing crimes
by all parties. The Prosecutor's briefing today noted
intensifying criminal acts in Darfur, including the
violent targeting of civilians, peacekeepers and aid
workers, as well as their premises and equipment.
However, the realities of both peace and justice will
have to be taken into account in order to achieve a
comprehensive and durable settlement in Darfur.

We therefore deeply regret the refusal by some of
Darfur's rebel movements to participate in the political
process led by the Special Envoys of the African Union
and the United Nations. As a result, the political
process initiated in Sirte more than seven months ago
has faltered, while discussions of security at the
technical level are being hampered by those same rebel
movements.

We recall in this regard that the Security Council,
in its presidential statement of 24 October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/41), had underlined its willingness to
take action against any party that seeks to undermine
the peace process, including by failing to respect such
a cessation of hostilities or by impeding the talks,
peacekeeping or humanitarian aid. The Council may
indeed consider it timely to act upon that willingness.

My delegation regrets that no progress has been
made in the cooperation between the ICC and the
Government of Sudan. In the interests of justice in the
long run, cooperation between the ICC and the
Government of Sudan will have to be resumed if
judicial processes in the Sudan and by the ICC are
going to take place.

We note that the Prosecutor is proceeding with
two new investigations, namely on crimes committed

against peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel and
on the mobilization of State apparatus to plan, commit
and cover up crimes against civilians. We encourage
investigations that are not only thorough but also
comprehensive. Crimes committed by Darfur armed
rebel movements, including the Haskanita incident, as
well as other attacks against peacekeepers and
humanitarian organizations, require thorough
investigation as well. The international community,
including the ICC, needs also to be seen as impartial in
order to continue to play a constructive role.

My delegation strongly believes that Sudan's
sovereignty must always be respected, but that
sovereignty also comes with rights and responsibilities.
In this regard, we underline the obligations of the
Government of Sudan to comply with the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005). At the same time, it is
Indonesia's position that the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005) and actions of the Prosecutor
shall neither nullify the principle of complementarity
nor absolve Sudan's national court of its responsibility
regarding the perpetrators. We are confident that
Sudan's national court will take up that responsibility.
Cooperation with the ICC will be essential if Sudan is
expected to investigate and prosecute the cases selected
by the prosecutors. Indonesia strongly believes that the
issue of cooperation by the Government of Sudan with
the ICC should be addressed in a comprehensive
manner, in the context of achieving durable peace and
security.

Finally, my delegation stresses once again its
appreciation of the Court's independence, as well as
the Prosecutor's efforts to implement resolution 1593
(2005). It is our long-held view that once the Security
Council refers a case to the ICC it should be obliged to
respect the Court's independence and allow its legal
processes to take their due course.

