Today, we are talking about a pandemic - a global virus much older than the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) but equally devastating. Sexual and gender-based violence in conflicts has been destroying lives and communities for years, with no vaccine in sight. Twenty years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and more than a year since the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), progress remains painfully slow. Rape, forced prostitution and sexual slavery continue to be used as weapons in conflicts around the globe. I can only commend the courage and strength of our briefers in speaking up and sharing their experiences with us. I thank them very much. We have all heard how COVID-19 is making survivors' situations even worse. Lockdowns are restricting survivors' access to medical and legal services. The underreporting of sexual violence has become even more alarming. And while we are able to uphold safe distances between us, many women, girls and boys cannot escape the brutal proximity of their tormentors. Today's debate is therefore overdue. And I want to thank the Dominican Republic for co-organizing it with us. As co-chairs of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, our message is clear. Implementing the women and peace and security agenda, including resolution 2467 (2019), is a duty for all of us and for the Security Council - even more so in the era of COVID-19. Four points will be key. First, we need to ensure that survivors get the medical and judicial assistance they deserve. As an example, Germany is working closely with the Dr. Denis Mukwege Foundation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Together, we are defending survivors' sexual and reproductive health and rights, including access to medical services and reparations. Secondly, women must play a central role in peacebuilding. Without gender equality and human rights, lasting peace and reconciliation remain impossible. Germany therefore supports such non-governmental organizations as Together We Build It in Libya, which promotes the political participation of women in the peace process. Thirdly, sanctions can and must play a greater role in ending sexual violence. The two United Nations listings brought forward since 2019 can only be a first step. Fourthly, impunity must end. Perpetrators must be brought to justice. We support creative solutions, such as the mobile courts in South Sudan, which put rapists around the country on trial. And I am glad to report that in Koblenz, Germany, a court recently opened the world's first trial against two former officials of the Syrian regime, on charges of torture and sexual assault. These examples show that, while we may not have a vaccine against the pandemic of sexual violence, we are certainly not powerless. What we need to do is act on the commitments we made in resolution 2467 (2019) to protect and empower survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and to place them at the heart of our actions.
