Mr. Vento (Italy): Let me begin by paying
homage to the Dutch presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's open debate. This
brainstorming session is an important complement to
the Security Council's July debate on conflict
prevention. It is very timely indeed and forces us to
look beyond contingent factors in our reflections on
peace-building strategies. Peacekeeping without peace-
building is a headless torso. What we need, and
urgently, is a comprehensive strategy covering conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, and peace-building. Such a
strategy requires the coordinated efforts of all the
actors in the United Nations system, especially in
preparing exit strategies for peacekeeping missions.

There can be no exit strategy unless a
comprehensive strategy is already in place at the start
of a peace operation. Too often an exit strategy has
amounted to little more than a quick escape route. We
need a clear political vision to prevent the recurrence
of another situation, such as the unravelling of the
mission to Sierra Leone. We need to move beyond a
logic that is dictated by emergencies or by partial,
temporary interests. Instead, we need to build a
functional connection between the conflict prevention
phase and the possible action to be undertaken if a
crisis degenerates into a threat to international peace
and security. Such a strategy must also include
provisions for peace-building, a stage that is essential
to achieving sustainable peace once an operation has
ended. Let us not forget that well-planned peace
building can also have a preventive effect by stemming
any potential relapses.

Peace-building in the context of an integrated
strategy has two key dimensions: consolidating the
judicial and public-order systems, and the
reconstruction efforts that also seek to eliminate the
economic and social problems at the roots of conflicts.
These two aspects are complementary: they require
both a holistic approach and specific concrete actions.

A number of recommendations in the Brahimi
report, such as the development of a standing rapid
deployment capacity and the emphasis on the use of
civilian police, dovetail with thinking currently under
way in the European Union. The United Nations and
the European Union have much to learn from each
other in the fields of crisis management and conflict
prevention. These same issues were high on the
Secretary-General's agenda in discussions with
European Union leaders during his trip to Europe last
October. And it is around such issues that United
Nation-European Union relations can further develop.

The rule of law is fundamental to the success of
any comprehensive peace strategy, particularly in the
phase encompassing the withdrawal of complex United
Nations missions.

Alongside the affirmation of the principle of the
rule of law, I would underline Italy's longstanding
commitment to the advancement of international
justice, the chief guarantor of the rights of the weakest.
We need higher standards of international legality. Far
from representing a threat, this trend creates a safety
net against double standards. The time has come to put
an end to the law of the strongest and to affirm a form
ofjustice that will gradually foster outgrowing the need
for an international presence in crisis areas.

We cannot exempt ourselves from concrete
action. Prompt ratification of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court is the best way for
Member States to meet this need. International justice
has both a preventive and a constructive function. It
fosters reconciliation through the search for truth. Let
us not forget that at the basis of the concept ofjustice
lie the principles of impartiality, generality and
abstraction. They guarantee that Member States'
demands will be met and that there will be an effective
transition from the emergency phase of a crisis to its
resolution and the successful exit of the international
presence.

In this light, let me draw your attention to the
criminal justice system, a series of measures involving
police forces, investigating magistrates, judges and
incarceration. The Brahimi report makes a useful
proposal to establish a system of transitional norms
governing criminal law procedures in order to facilitate
the work of those engaged in police and civil justice
administration as part of complex peace missions. We
have already experienced this need in Kosovo and East
Timor.

In terms of policing duties, within the European
Union Italy has been involved in efforts to develop
greater consistency and coherence of action. In
December 1999 the European Council, meeting in
Helsinki, set the goal of creating, by 2003, a rapid
reaction force of 60,000 soldiers for deployment to
peacekeeping operations, including those launched by
the United Nations. Last June in Feira the
complementary goal was set to establish, by 2003, a
rapid response team of 5,000 police officers ready for
deployment as part of peacekeeping operations. This
development will foster more intense collaboration
between the European Union and the United Nations.

Attention to economic and social aspects is an
indispensable corollary to an international presence in
crisis areas. This is even truer when we consider the
close connection in developing countries between
deeply rooted economic and social problems and the
outbreak of conflicts. The Secretary-General's seminal
report on the causes of conflicts in Africa underlines
this critical nexus. We need to assure greater continuity
between political and military action and the economic
and social reconstruction, without which there can be
no peaceful international pull out. Better synergy
between the Secretariat and the relevant United Nations
programmes and funds is essential to this goal.

Let us also focus on elections as a crucial
moment in complex peace operations. Exiting from an
operation without first holding elections can be a recipe
for failure. Here too the Brahimi report indicates
concrete steps, such as strengthening the Department of
Political Affairs Electoral Assistance Division. Another
need frequently cited in the debate on peacekeeping
operations is training. Addressing the Security Council,
the Secretary-General has underlined the importance of
courses on early warning and conflict prevention given
for some years now by the United Nations Staff
College at Turin. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights are holding a course at the Staff
College on peace-building and human rights for
military and police personnel, with special attention to
gender balance.

Integrated strategies also entail the rejection of
arbitrary sunset clauses. In fact, the United Nations
must assure that conflicts have been settled before
dismantling a peacekeeping operation. We must pay
close attention to the definition of clear, credible and
achievable mandates. Such a goal can never be reached
without Member States who are willing to contribute
personnel. This is why Italy is pleased that the Security
Council adopted two days ago a series of decisions
pursuant to the Brahimi report and the Secretary-
General's action plan. These measures include a more
regular and systematic involvement of troop-
contributing countries in the Security Council's
activities in every phase of a peacekeeping operation,
from defining the mandate to implementing the
relevant Security Council resolution, to changing a
mandate owing to a mutating situation on the ground.

Italy's heavy involvement in three very different
peacekeeping operations has taught us some important
lessons. In Somalia, the lack of a clear strategy and of a
well-defined mandate led to the exit of the international
presence. We are still suffering the consequences today.
Troop-contributors were kept on the sidelines of the
Security Council's and the Secretariat's decision-
making, starting with the definition of the original
mandate. When the crisis degenerated, the error was
compounded with an even more ambiguous mandate,
while ignoring the opinions of troop contributors.

We also learned from another experience, this
time positive, in Albania in 1997. Here the Security
Council quickly authorized a resolution proposed by
both Albania and Italy - both non-members of the
Council - to prevent the deterioration of a political
crisis that would have seriously threatened peace and
security. A core group of countries was formed of
participating countries. This guaranteed effective
management of the crisis and ongoing contacts with the
Security Council, as well as with the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe in Vienna, which
successfully monitored democratic and fair elections in
the country.

Your introduction to today's debate, Mr.
President, mentions another United Nations success
story: the mission in Mozambique. The peacekeeping
operation there was preceded by an accurate
assessment of the local political context, with the
active contribution of an Italian non-governmental
organization. This facilitated the maintenance of peace
and the subsequent withdrawal of the international
presence, accompanied by elections and ongoing social
and economic reconstruction. That positive situation
kept the constructive attention of the international
community focused on Mozambique, as was
demonstrated by the response to the natural disasters
that struck that country last May.

In a similar manner, the fact that the mission to
Ethiopia and Eritrea was prepared for with, and
accompanied by, intense political and diplomatic
efforts on the part of the Organization of African Unity
and the facilitators, allowed us to place greater trust in
the outcome of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea from the outset. We have much to learn
from the example of Mozambique in designing future
peacekeeping missions and exit strategies that are able
successfully to meet the situation on the ground and
interface actively and rationally with the various
national and international players involved.

