Mr. Holmes: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and, more specifically, on the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/643) before the Council
today. I believe the specific recommendations for
action in the report will be critical to more systematic
consideration by the Council of protection of civilian
concerns and the implementation of the Council's
landmark resolution 1674 (2006).

A leap of imagination is not always easy to make,
sitting in this warm and comfortable Chamber, but let
us remember the essential background. Throughout the
world's conflict zones, people live under almost
constant threat of being attacked in their homes, of
having their lives, or those of their families, wrecked
as they travel to work or to school, to visit the market
or to worship. They risk random killing, violence and
abduction, harassment and discrimination. They risk
being forced to take up arms, sometimes even against
their own families and communities, in the most brutal
ways. They risk torture, rape and abuse. They risk,
above all, being forced from their homes and their
land, forced into a downward spiral of opportunities
lost forever, lasting dependency and destitution in
temporary and inadequate shelters that often become
urban slums.

A case in point is the growing toll on civilians in
Somalia from fighting between insurgent groups and
Ethiopian and Government forces. I urge all parties to
the conflict to refrain from indiscriminate attacks
affecting civilians. And I call on the Council to remind
all forces of their responsibilities under international
humanitarian law. Reports of civilian suffering in the
Ogaden region of Ethiopia, as a result of fighting
between the Ethiopian forces and the Ogaden National
Liberation Front (ONLF) rebels, are also of increasing
concern.

Likewise, in a different but similarly worrying
context, the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Gaza, is reaching the limits of
what is bearable for any community. The combination
of access restrictions even for humanitarian deliveries,

economic deprivation, Israeli military incursions and
aerial attacks and intra-Palestinian violence is driving
the civilian population into a situation where the risk of
provoking even more violence and tragedy is only too
evident.

And in Darfur, too, the humanitarian issues grow
ever more worrying, as the violence increases once
again, resulting in yet more deaths, more displacement
and more relocations of humanitarian personnel.

These are three situations of particular current
concern. But, as reported to the Council before,
civilians are also frequently the victims of attacks in
places like Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sri Lanka and
Iraq. Such attacks are often aimed deliberately at
instilling fear, destabilizing civilian populations and
forcing displacement. Suicide attacks are a particularly
disturbing manifestation of that, given their often
intentionally indiscriminate nature. This was
demonstrated with chilling effect earlier this month
when a suicide bombing in the northern Afghanistan
province of Baghlan led to the deaths of scores of
civilians, including many schoolchildren.

Incidentally, let me take this opportunity to
correct a misleading impression given by one sentence
in paragraph 22 of the report, which was intended to
say that suicide attacks are a feature in an increasing
number of countries, mentioning Afghanistan, Iraq,
Israel and Somalia, but which could be read as
suggesting, incorrectly, that suicide attacks are
increasing in each of those countries, including Israel,
which is not the case.

Targeting civilians shows blatant contempt for the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, including its basic tenets: the principles of
distinction and proportionality. It also often presents
Member States with the daunting challenge of how to
respond to such violence, particularly when perpetrated
by non-State armed groups, whose members are often
difficult if not impossible to identify. What is clear,
however, is that any military response must itself
comply with international humanitarian law as well as
show respect for the human and cultural dignity of
those already exposed to insurgent attacks.

Previous reports on the protection of civilians as
well as the Council's aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6, annex), have outlined a broad range of concerns and
proposed actions. Unfortunately, as the nature of
conflict evolves, so do the issues of protection. The
present report makes a number of proposals with
regard to compliance with international humanitarian
law in situations of asymmetric warfare, the use of
cluster munitions and accountability. But I would like
to focus my remarks today on four of the actions
presented in the report: on combating sexual violence;
on ensuring rapid and unimpeded access; a more
systematic and proactive action to address housing,
land and property issues; and the establishment of a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians.

First, there is an unequivocal need for more
concerted and innovative action to prevent and respond
to sexual violence in armed conflict. The report
contains a number of recommendations to this end
addressed to Member States, with whom the primary
responsibility lies for preventing and addressing sexual
violence. But combating sexual violence, and the
impunity on which it thrives, requires a rethink of how
we use the tools at the disposal of the international
community and, in particular, the Security Council.

We need, for instance, to look at referring
situations of grave incidents of rape and other forms of
sexual violence to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In addition, or as an alternative, we may even
need to look at imposing targeted sanctions against
States or non-State armed groups that flagrantly
perpetrate or support such crimes. I fully appreciate
that the latter, in particular, would be a complex
undertaking. However, complexity cannot be an excuse
for inaction in the face of these appalling crimes.

Also, as recommended in the report, in situations
where local justice mechanisms are overwhelmed, the
Council should look for creative ways to support States
to hold the perpetrators of sexual violence accountable,
for example, through the establishment of special ad
hoc judicial arrangements.

This would, I believe, be a particularly important
step in relation to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As I noted in my briefing to the Council
following my mission to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in September, to do justice to the women of
that country, we cannot be satisfied with just treating
the wounds inflicted by sexual violence; we have to
find better ways to stop it. The Council should send a
clear message of deterrence by treating serious acts of
sexual violence for what they are - war crimes and
crimes against humanity that should no longer be
tolerated.

The second action is access - an essential, if not
the most essential element of our efforts to provide
assistance and protection. The Council has on several
occasions underlined the need for all relevant parties,
including non-State actors and neighbouring States, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations in providing
safe, timely and unimpeded access to civilians in
armed conflict. Yet as the report brings out, constraints
on access are many, varied and, in a number of places,
the rule rather than the exception. The result is millions
of people excluded from access to life-saving
assistance and the minimal protection provided by the
mere presence of humanitarian workers. Constraints on
access should have consequences for those that impose
them and not just for those who suffer from them.

Alarmingly, in a number of the countries referred
to in the report, already critical situations have
deteriorated still further. In Somalia, for example,
fighting in Mogadishu has led to an increase in the
number of internally displaced to an alarming one
million people, while thousands of others are trapped
in their homes, unable to reach safety, let alone
assistance.

In the meantime, humanitarian agencies are
increasingly treated with suspicion by the parties to the
conflict and their activities impeded. A recent example
of this was the forcible detention of the head of the
World Food Programme (WFP) by the Somali National
Security Service in October.

Elsewhere, the expulsions earlier this month of
the Humanitarian Coordinator in Myanmar and the
head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in South Darfur,
impede our efforts to provide assistance and protection
in already difficult circumstances. Of particular
concern is the fact that security incidents involving
humanitarian staff continue to mount and to undermine
our ability to provide life-saving assistance. The
Secretary-General's report on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel notes that between July 2006
and June 2007 there were 507 violent attacks directed
against United Nations personnel, 442 incidents of
harassment and intimidation, 534 cases of robberies,
232 physical assaults, 126 cases of hijacking and 273
reported cases of arrest and detention by State and non-
State actors. Those figures do not include similar
attacks and incidents involving the staff of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), who are
often present in greater numbers and more places than
United Nations personnel.

During a similar period, attacks, for example,
against United Nations and NGO staff in Darfur,
increased by 150 per cent. Only last month, seven
humanitarian workers were killed; ten vehicles were
hijacked and seven convoys were ambushed. In
Afghanistan, the WFP has suffered unprecedented
attacks on its food aid convoys in the past 11 months.
More than 30 incidents involving WFP trucks have
been reported this year, against five in 2006.

As requested by the Council, OCHA is
developing a monitoring and reporting mechanism to
facilitate more in-depth analysis of the causes and
consequences of access constraints. This analysis will
be annexed to future reports on the protection of
civilians and included in my regular briefings to the
Council. Such analysis will provide an important
opportunity for action in response to particularly grave
situations. It will also produce an expectation of action
by the Council. And, in my view, justifiably so.

To overcome some of the less obvious obstacles
to access, we need to give serious consideration to the
development of a standard moratorium on immigration
and customs requirements for humanitarian workers
and supplies. But in particularly grave cases, the
Council should consider concerted advocacy and
negotiation with warring parties for the establishment
of "deconflicting" arrangements, for example, high-
level diplomacy to promote humanitarian corridors or
days of tranquillity where these can make a real
contribution. Last but not least, the Council should
hold situation-specific debates on access and even,
where appropriate, consider referring grave instances
of denial of access, as well as situations involving
attacks against humanitarian workers, to the
International Criminal Court. Denying access
exacerbates malnutrition and disease, increases civilian
deaths and prolongs human suffering. There should be
no impunity for those responsible.

Thirdly, there is the critical need to address more
effectively, and much earlier on, housing, land and
property issues, often at the origins of conflict and
almost always a result of conflict, as people leave or
are forced from their homes and their land. The
resolution of such issues is inevitably linked to the

achievement and consolidation of lasting peace and the
prevention of future violence. In Darfur for example,
after four years of conflict and continuing
displacement, reaching common agreement on land
tenure and compensation for the loss of property has
emerged as a key element of a sustainable peace.

Recording loss of land, homes, or property,
upholding rights and entitlements, reinforcing the right
to return as a means of demonstrating our non-
acceptance of ethnic cleansing or sectarian violence,
and mediating disputes in areas of return - all these
should become standard measures, even while conflict
continues. This means ensuring that mechanisms are in
place at the national level to address such issues. And it
means equipping peacekeeping missions with the
mandate, tools and expertise required to promote and
support these national efforts.

Finally, whereas the first years of establishing the
protection of civilians on the Council's agenda were
dedicated mostly to raising awareness of the issues and
then to developing possible tools, we have now
reached a critical new phase in our collective efforts to
implement resolution 1674 (2006). Establishing a
Council working group on the protection of civilians,
as suggested in the Secretary-General's report, would
mark this new phase. I am not suggesting the
establishment of a heavy reporting mechanism similar
to the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflicts. Rather, we would like to see a regular forum
for timely consultation on protection of civilians'
concerns between the Council in its entirety and OCHA
and other relevant departments.

We believe this would help ensure a more
consistent application of the aide-memoire and other
protection of civilians concerns in the Council's
deliberations, for example on the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping mandates and other relevant
missions, the development of draft resolutions, and
presidential statements.

I realize that these are all significant proposals
for the Council and its working methods and require
further deliberation.

Fundamental to the protection of civilians is the
resolution of the conflicts which cause their suffering.
The United Nations in all its aspects certainly needs to
do more to that end, but beyond that, the systematic
implementation of resolution 1674 (2006) and the
measures contained in an updated Council aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians would show real
commitment to the millions of victims. That would
send a message whose impact would reverberate
around all the conflicts that civilians face throughout
the world.

