Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Over the past 25 years,
Pakistan has been a principal victim of terrorism. We
have therefore been in the forefront of the global
campaign against terrorism. Periodically confronted by
terrorist attacks against innocent people in our cities -
including yesterday in Multan - my Government is
steadfastly committed to achieving success in the war
on terrorism.

We believe that the resolution that has been
adopted unanimously today will strengthen
international cooperation, beyond our cooperation
against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, to other sources of
international terrorism. Operative paragraph 3 of the
resolution enumerates a number of criminal acts that
constitute offences within the scope of and as defined
in international conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism.

We participated constructively in the negotiations
on the resolution. We are grateful to the Russian
Federation and other sponsors for their flexibility in
addressing some of the concerns we had with regard to
specific aspects and language in the resolution. We
believe that the resolution reaffirms the imperative to
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

We attach particular importance to the ninth
preambular paragraph of the resolution, which
emphasizes that

"enhancing dialogue and broadening the
understanding among civilizations, in an effort to
prevent the indiscriminate targeting of different
religions and cultures, and addressing unresolved
regional conflicts and the full range of global
issues, including development issues, will
contribute to international cooperation, which by
itself is necessary to sustain the broadest possible
fight against terrorism". (resolution 1566 (2004))

Finally, I would like to reiterate the need for a
comprehensive strategy to address terrorism. In that
context, President Musharraf of Pakistan stated in the
General Assembly last month that

"The immediate anti-terrorist response has to be
accompanied by a clear long-term strategy that
strikes at the root of the problem if we are to
ensure final success against this scourge".
(A/59/PV.5)

