Ms. Adamson: The candidate countries Montenegro
and Albania align themselves with this statement.

On 16 October, the 28 Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the European Union (EU) adopted a statement on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) - the
culmination of 12 years of diplomacy facilitated by
the EU, unanimously endorsed by Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015). The successful implementation
of the JCPOA continues to ensure that Iran's nuclear
programme remains exclusively peaceful. While the
EU expresses its concerns related to ballistic missiles
and increasing tensions in the region, the EU reiterates
the need to address them outside the JCPOA, and it is
determined to preserve the JCPOA as a key pillar of the
international non-proliferation architecture.

The Middle East peace process remains at the top
of the European Union agenda. At the open debate on
25 July (see S/PV.8011), we restated the EU's core policy
positions on this topic, as reflected in successive EU
Council conclusions, proving clarity and consistency.
The EU's commitment to achieving a two-State solution
is the central element of our policy. A negotiated two-
State solution that ends the occupation and fulfils
the aspirations of both sides is the only way to bring
about the lasting peace and security that both Israelis
and Palestinians deserve. That is also why the EU will
continue to speak out clearly when developments or
incidents threaten the two-State solution and undermine
the peace process.

We have noted with deep concern the reports of
the United Nations Special Coordinator Mladenov
on settlement activities and related actions, not least
in East Jerusalem, including the third report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), stressing the
high rate of settlement activities throughout 2017.

The EU deeply deplores the decisions taken this
week by the Israeli authorities to promote further plans,
tenders and permits for thousands of settlement units
across the West Bank, including, for the first time since
2002, in the heart of Hebron. We have also seen reports
of construction work starting for the first new settlement
in 20 years, Amihai, and of preparatory ground work
being initiated in the sensitive area of Givat Hamatos in
East Jerusalem, where further settlement construction
would severely jeopardize the contiguity and viability
of a future Palestinian State. We urge Israel to reverse
those decisions, which run counter to international law
and directly threaten the two-State solution.

The EU's position on Israeli settlement construction
and related activities, including recent evictions in East
Jerusalem and plans leading to the forced transfer of
the Bedouin communities in the West Bank, is clear
and has not changed - the EU remains strongly
opposed to Israel's settlement policy, which is illegal
under international law. As reaffirmed by resolution
2334 (2016), it also dangerously threatens the viability
of the two-State solution. The international community
will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed to by the parties themselves through
negotiations. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem
seriously jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem
serving as the future capital of both States.

The EU also strongly opposes related actions
taken in the same context, such as continued
demolitions and confiscations - including of EU and
EU member State-funded projects - in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The EU is deeply concerned that the continuing
cycle of violence has led to a serious loss of human life
in Israel and the Palestinian territory in recent months.
The EU firmly condemns the terror attacks and
violence from all sides and in any circumstances. In
late September, a fatal shooting incident took place at
the entrance of a West Bank settlement, as a Palestinian
gunman killed three Israelis - one police man and two
security guards. Another security guard was gravely
injured. The EU expresses condolences to those
affected, and its regret for all loss of life. Resolution
2334 (2016) condemns all acts of violence against
civilians. The EU also firmly rejects any incitement
to hatred or violence, which we see as fundamentally
incompatible with advancing a peaceful resolution.
Upholding commitments to act effectively against
violence and incitement is critical in order to rebuild
mutual trust and avoid another escalation.

Let me now turn to the situation in Gaza, where an
already dire humanitarian situation has been worsening
in past months, not least due to the division in the
Palestinian political arena. The EU has consistently
urged all Palestinian factions to work together to address
the needs of the Palestinian population. A single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority, with
full control over the West Bank and Gaza, is critical for
achieving a viable Palestinian State.

The EU welcomes the agreement signed in Cairo on
12 October. We believe that it can become an important
step for making genuine progress on intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. The EU will closely study the details of
the agreement and its implications, and we welcome the
continuing engagement of Egypt. If fully implemented,
the agreement can become an important step towards
achieving the goal of Palestinian unity under a single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian national authority
on the basis of the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform, the Quartet principles and in accordance with
existing agreements. The EU is ready to fully support
those efforts and will continue to liaise with Egypt,
our interlocutors on the ground and our international
partners, in order to help the process succeed.

The EU calls for unimpeded humanitarian access
to Gaza, as foreseen by international humanitarian
law, for national, local and international humanitarian
organizations, including EU bodies and all EU member
States. The unsustainable situation in Gaza and recent
tensions in Jerusalem serve to underline the need for
a political horizon. That is why the EU will continue
to work tirelessly with the parties and regional and
international partners, not least within the Middle
East Quartet, to promote a return to a meaningful
process towards a negotiated two-State solution, in line
with known parameters - towards a peace that can
be sustained.

Let me also speak about Lebanon. On 30 August
2017, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2373 (2017), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for one year. We welcome the resolution and reaffirm
our full support of UNIFIL, including its maritime
component, whose deployment within its existing
mandate, alongside the Lebanese Armed Forces, is
crucial to maintain stability and security in southern
Lebanon and along the Lebanese shores. UNIFIL must
be provided with the necessary means and equipment
to guarantee its full operational capability. In parallel,
assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces must continue
to allow it to maintain security across the country and
fight terrorism.

In Syria, the fighting is not over. The EU firmly
believes that there can be no military solution to the
conflict, and is committed to the unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Syrian
State. Only a credible political solution, as defined in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), will ensure the stability of Syria
and enable a decisive defeat of Da'esh and other United
Nations-designated terrorist groups in Syria. The EU
fully supports Special Envoy de Mistura's efforts to
that end.

The EU strongly condemns the continued
systematic, widespread and gross violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties, particularly by the
Syrian regime. This must end and those responsible
must be held accountable. At the Syria event that the EU
organized in New York on the margins of the General
Assembly, High Representative Mogherini launched the
Brussels process, which aims at maintaining the focus
of the international community on the conflict in Syria,
the continuing humanitarian situation and sustaining
international engagement in support of achieving a
lasting political solution, negotiated in Geneva in line
with resolution 2254 (2015), to the benefit of the Syrian
people and the region. The EU has agreed to increase
efforts to ensure both the full and effective participation
of women and sustained consultation and dialogue with
civil society in the political process.

The EU reiterates that it will be ready to assist in
the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, negotiated
by the Syrian parties in the conflict, on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique, is
firmly under way.

Turning to Iraq, first of all, we welcome that Iraqi
forces - with the support of the Global Coalition
against Da'esh - have succeeded in inflicting a
rapid defeat on Da'esh in Hawijah. In relation to the
unilateral referendum held in the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq, the EU continues to support the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq. The EU believes that
the general interests of Iraqi people are best served
through dialogue and cooperation, that unilateral steps
must be avoided and that all open questions must be
resolved through consensual positions based on the full
application of the provisions of the Iraqi Constitution.

The EU calls on the Federal Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government to build on their
successful cooperation on security in the campaign to
liberate Mosul and to engage in a constructive dialogue
on all issues across the political and economic spectrum,
including the disputed internal boundaries. The EU
also urges all parties in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
to seek common ground and restore the functioning
of its democratic institutions, including by holding
regional elections.

In that respect, we are extremely worried about
the risk of escalation, not least in Kirkuk. There can
be no military solution to intra-Iraqi differences. All
parties must now show restraint, refrain from further
escalation and engage in a constructive dialogue about
all open questions, based on the provisions of the
Iraqi Constitution.

