Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for presenting her eleventh report to
the Security Council in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011).

The arrival of the members of the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord in
Tripoli in March has raised hopes for the restoration of
peace and stability in the country. We are encouraged
by the Presidency Council's ongoing efforts to foster
inclusivity through engagement and dialogue with
partners and stakeholders at the local level. That is the
way forward, by building trust and acceptance among
local communities for the Government of National
Accord. Malaysia believes that an effective and
credible Government will bolster Libya's commitment
and ability to address impunity, promote and restore the
rule of law and bring all the perpetrators of crimes to
justice. Despite the instability and insecurity across the
country, we are encouraged by the Libyan authorities'
continuing efforts and commitment to complying with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
the ongoing cooperation of Libya's Prosecutor
General's office. It is therefore crucial to ensure that
the international community supports the Libyan
authorities by providing the assistance they need.

We share the concerns expressed by Council
members about the unacceptably high levels of violence
in Libya, resulting in large numbers ofcivilian casualties
and attributed mainly to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, as well as the reports of abductions, detentions
and ill treatment in detention centres. The precarious
situation of refugees and migrants, who are some of
the most vulnerable segments of society, susceptible to
violence and abuse, is equally distressing.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate how
important it is that the international community provide
full support to the legitimate authorities in Libya. We
remain firmly supportive of the efforts of the United
Nations and the international community in general to
assist Libya in prevailing over its adversities, achieving
a lasting political settlement and stability and restoring
law and order.

