Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My country is grateful to the Dominican
Republic for having convened this open meeting of the
Security Council amid the grave political, economic
and social crisis in the brotherly country of Venezuela.
1 thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.

Ecuador reaffirms the right of all the peoples of
the world to democracy and the obligation of their
Governments to promote and defend it. For that reason,
we echo the pronouncement of the Venezuela's National
Assembly, which, within the framework of the norms
of the Venezuelan Constitution, has declared that a
presidential changeover is necessary. As such, the
Republic of Ecuador recognizes the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaido, as interim President
of Venezuela.

Ecuador endorses the statement made yesterday by
the Argentine Republic in the Organization of American
States, on behalf of a group of countries, including
my own. Echoing that position, we wish to reiterate
the constitutional authority of the democratically
elected National Assembly of Venezuela and our firm
support for the actions taken to secure international
humanitarian aid, the release of political prisoners, the
freezing of the assets of corrupt Government officials
and the provision of guarantees to civilian and military
officials who support the restoration of democracy and
the rule of law in Venezuela.

Our country has always shown its solidarity with
the Venezuelan people, which is why we have welcomed
more than 240,000 Venezuelans into our territory,
of whom 100,000 already have a long-stay visa, thus
helping the 3 million Venezuelans, to date, who have
been forced to emigrate. We call for continued efforts
to help return Venezuela to the path of democracy
via a peaceful transition while safeguarding and
guaranteeing the integrity, exercise and full respect of
the human rights of its people, especially the rights to
life, integrity and personal freedom. Ecuador hopes that
the new interim president, within the context of the law,
will call as soon as possible for free and transparent
elections, with broad international monitoring, and
thus inaugurate a new era of democratic prosperity and
fraternity in his country.

I want to address the references to the public
reactions to the death of Diana, a 22-year-old pregnant
woman, at the hands of her Venezuelan partner. We
regret that, but I want to assure the Venezuelan people
that my people consider them brothers and sisters,
which is why, as I said before, more than 240,000 are

now living in my country on the path to being granted
full permanent residence. In addition, hundreds of
thousands of Venezuelans have been able to enter and
leave my country, to whom we have given medical care
and support that they had not received in their country.

In April, Ecuador convened the third meeting
on the problem created by the migration of 3 million
Venezuelan brothers and sisters in order to seek
solutions to the greatest humanitarian problem in
our region. A democratic solution to the Venezuelan
crisis will be achieved only through dialogue and
compromise, and cannot be imposed through terror,
torture and murder. Instead of succumbing to the chaos
of unarmed innocents becoming victims of hit men and
State agents, we need calm, foresight and intelligent
and comprehensive political solutions.

