Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I make
this statement on behalf of Ambassador Hilale, who
would have liked to be present but was called upon to
attend to other functions of his office.

I thank the Argentine presidency for organizing
this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council and for providing a helpful and
thoughtful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) to
guide our discussions. We welcome the fact that this
debate has become institutionalized and is now part
of the annual practice of the Security Council, which
allows States non-members of the Council to express
their views on likely ways of improving the Council's
working methods. I also take this opportunity to
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing this
morning.

My delegation takes the opportunity to commend
you, Madam, for your able chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, which culminated in the
adoption of six important presidential notes.

The Charter of the United Nations endows the
Security Council with the primary responsibility in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council can fulfil its role only on the basis of an
efficient and transparent approach. In that context,
Morocco welcomes the many positive developments in
recent years to improve the functioning of the Security
Council.

In that regard it is important to note the greater
number of open debates, the dynamic return to
the practice of wrap-up sessions and monthly
informal briefings and the more frequent use of
videoconferencing. Those new practices contribute to
enhancing the transparency of the Council's work and
its quality as well, and enable it to take advantage of the
diversity of positions and views of States Members of
the United Nations.
The presidential note of 2010 (S/2010/507),
which summarizes experiences and provides specific
recommendations to improve the working methods of
the Council, is a major achievement in the quest for
transparency and in strengthening the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the Council - but it can always be
improved. As was the case in the past, that presidential
note can be improved according to new measures
agreed upon to develop and enhance the Council's
work. In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco is always
willing to contribute to that important project, as it had
the opportunity to do during the two years of its term
of office when it participated in the adoption of a set
of measures, spread over several presidential notes, to
ensure the full implementation of note 507.

The task of improving the working methods still
calls for follow-up in many areas. Given the time
limitations, I shall mention only the most important
ones.

First, the importance of close cooperation with
police- and troop-contributing countries is no longer in
doubt. Given the multidimensional, complex mandates
they are expected to implement and the growing number
of challenges they must respond to on the ground with
limited resources, troop- and police-contributing
countries must be regularly and promptly consulted
when necessary, to discuss urgent matters as dictated
by the evolving situation in the area of operations, in
order to ensure strengthened decision-making on the
part of the Council and the appropriate conduct of its
functions.

Secondly, we emphasize the importance and
usefulness of the open debates, which encourage greater
interaction between the Security Council and Member
States. Nevertheless, in order for the Council to take
full advantage of those deliberations, it is essential that
the discussions be focused on precise themes with a
specific scope.

Thirdly, we appreciate the increased cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly
the contributions made by chairpersons of the
country configurations to the Council's debates and
consultations. We urge the Council to intensify its use
of that practice.

Fourthly, access to Council documents and
their availability can assist in achieving the goal of
transparency. We welcome the efforts made by the
secretariat of the Council for that information to be
regularly updated on the website of the Council, in
particular in relation to the monthly programme of
work.

We believe that beyond technical or practical
considerations, improving the working methods of the
Council will clearly lead to strengthened capacities in
the maintenance of international peace and security
and to effectively responding to its increasing workload
as well as the multiple complex issues on its agenda.
That is why we hope that today's debate will give rise
to specific proposals in this area.

