The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I should like once again to thank
the representative of Romania and his team for their
successful presidency in July. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/613) and Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his substantive briefing
on the situation in the province. We note the
participation in today's Council meeting of Mr. Zoran
Loncar, Minister of Public Administration and Local
Self-Government of Serbia, on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro.

The widespread surge of ethnically motivated
violence in March, provoked by extremists in Kosovo,
Serbia and Montenegro, and directed particularly
against Kosovo Serbs, dealt a serious blow to the
normalization process in the province and called into
question the timetable for implementing the democratic
standards established for Kosovo by the international
community. In those events, we see a conscious
attempt at the ethnic cleansing of the non-Albanian
population in Kosovo. We are certain that no one
should be allowed to benefit from, or to seek political
objectives through, the use of violent measures.

The current situation in the province requires full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). In that context, we remain committed to full
and consistent support for the policy of "standards
before status". Only the genuine achievement of
democratic standards in Kosovo can serve as the basis
for the Council to take a decision on whether
discussions can begin on the issue of future status.

Unfortunately, the progress noted in the
Secretary-General's report in the activities of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government is still
extremely limited, particularly with regard to the key
issues of the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan,
including in the areas of rebuilding the properties
damaged in March, resuming the process of returns to
the province by refugees and displaced persons and
ensuring freedom of movement. The facts speak for
themselves. Approximately 2,400 people are still
unable to return to their homes following the wave of
violence in March. Healthcare facilities that had served
minority patients have not been rebuilt, particularly in
the area of Kosovo Polje, in the Pristina region.

The returns process has been reversed. One must
conclude that the key principle of multi-ethnicity
continues to be inoperative in practice, both at the
provincial and municipal levels, where Kosovo
Albanians are predominant. After all, as the Secretary-
General has correctly noted, it is specifically the
majority community that bears the primary
responsibility for the well-being of minorities.

It is of particular concern that neither local
leaders nor civil society supported UNMIK's efforts to
maintain law and order in the wake of the violence in
March.

Unfortunately, we must reach the unequivocal
conclusion that minority rights - and in particular
those of Kosovo's Serbs - continue to be violated.
Non-Albanian communities in Kosovo are today living
in greater isolation than they have at any time in the
past three years. Like the Secretary-General, we are
seriously alarmed at the lack of desire on the part of
the Kosovo Assembly to focus on the urgent priorities
associated with ensuring progress in the province. We
are particularly puzzled by the failure of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to enact
the Implementation Plan's priority actions, especially
those aimed at investigating and punishing provincial
and municipal bodies and leaders of political
movements whose statements or actions condoned the
violence of last March. We are also puzzled at the
failure of the Provisional Institutions to condemn
inflammatory materials that appeared in the province's
media at the time of the violence, as well as at their
failure to support recommendations made by the
temporary Media Commissioner regarding
investigating incidents of violence.

We support the Secretary-General's appeal to the
Provisional Institutions to implement all priority
actions set out in the revised Standards Implementation
Plan, as well as to immediately translate into specific
actions the promises they made regarding the
commitment to create conditions for the sustainable
return and integration of all displaced persons. The
Provisional Institutions must demonstrate genuine
results in their work in all the priority areas of the
standards process, including by establishing an inter-
community dialogue and investigating the actions of
political leaders, administrative mechanisms and media
that may have contributed to the spread of violence in
March. Additional robust steps are also needed to
ensure equal security for all the inhabitants of the
province, as well as to guarantee freedom of movement
and to protect the rights of minorities.

Reforming local government will also have an
important role in normalizing the situation in Kosovo.
Not just in words but in actions, local government
should ensure the conditions for all communities in
Kosovo to be able to live together in a single multi-
ethnic and democratic society, as called for in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

We also take note of the framework document for
local government reform prepared by the joint
UNMIK-Provisional Institutions working groups. We
believe that document should further take into account
the interests and concerns of the non-Albanian
population, and of the Serbs in particular. We look
forward to the recommendations to be made by the
Secretary-General in accordance with the Security
Council's request regarding a balanced model for the
devolution of authority from the provincial level to
local communities in Kosovo.

Along with other proposals, it would also be
appropriate to consider the Serbian plan for a political
settlement of the current situation in Kosovo. That is
particularly important in the context of establishing
constructive interaction by UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government with Kosovo Serbs
and Belgrade.

We agree with the Secretary-General that much
remains to be done to build capacity and enhance the
effectiveness of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. At the same time, however, the practice
of involving them in activities within the framework of
reserved powers must be brought into full compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Transferring those powers
at this phase is unacceptable. At any rate, such a
transfer must be preceded by a decision of the Security
Council in that regard.

We also view as unacceptable attempts by certain
political forces in Kosovo to pressure UNMIK and to
view it as an impediment to realizing the ambitions of
the Albanian majority in the province. We share the
Secretary-General's concern that there continue to be
radical, extremist forces in the province preparing to
return to active political activities. We believe that it
would be useful once again to underscore that
premeditated attacks on UNMIK and KFOR are
unacceptable and that they must be condemned in the
strongest terms.

The forthcoming elections for the provincial
Assembly will be a serious test for the process of
implementing standards in Kosovo. In that regard, we
note in particular the conclusion of the Secretary-
General that it is the leaders of the Kosovo Albanian
majority who bear the primary responsibility to
establish a relationship with the minority communities
in the province, who were the ones subjected to
premeditated violence in March. Unless the Albanian
majority actually demonstrates genuine and
constructive interest, it is hard to anticipate Kosovo's
Serbian and other minority communities returning to
provincial political processes.

My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Chief of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo. Russia stands ready to cooperate
with him very closely in the context of existing
mechanisms, in the interest of quickly ending the
tragedy in the Balkans and bringing the situation in
line with resolution 1244 (1999), which continues to be
the sole legal basis for a settlement in Kosovo. We are
certain that only a coordinated effort by the
international community will contribute to bolstering
stability and security in the province. The
establishment of parallel tracks and outside efforts may
only send the wrong signal to the parties to the Kosovo
conflict.

We would also like to associate ourselves with
the kind words of gratitude conveyed to the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Harri Holkeri, in connection with his efforts to promote
the peace process in Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

