Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We are pleased to
welcome once again Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta to the Security Council,
especially at this critical juncture in East Timor's
political transition. We also endorse the wise words of
advice they have both given to members of the
Council.

Why are we at a critical juncture today? First, it
is midway through the current mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), which the Security Council decided in
resolution 1338 (2001) will last until 31 January 2002,
although we must bear in mind the possible need for
adjustments related to the timetable for independence.
This is therefore an opportune time for a mid-term
review on the progress of UNTAET and to hear more
about the political timetable for East Timor.

Secondly, the Secretary-General has provided us
with a very important progress report on UNTAET. We
are pleased to note the number of projects which
UNTAET has collaborated on with such bodies as the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank and the Asia Development Bank. More
importantly, the Secretary-General has provided us
with a concept of operations for the successor mission
following East Timor's independence. Using the
framework provided by the Secretary-General,
intensive discussions must now ensue within East
Timor and with the United Nations community.
Discussions should start here and now to build the best
possible foundation for the successor mission and not
because, as some have asserted, the Council is
anticipating a precipitous withdrawal from East Timor.
If I may borrow the words of Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke at the open debate on "no exit without
strategy" last year, the Council

"must be very careful, when we talk about exit
strategies, not to confuse them with exit
deadlines an exit strategy must be directed
towards a defining overall objective, not an
arbitrary, self-imposed, artificial deadline".
(S/PV4223, p. 4)

Thirdly, in exactly a month's time, East Timorese
will go to the ballot booth to democratically choose
their representatives to the 88-member Constituent
Assembly. The election is one of the most important
events in the calendar of East Timor's political
transition, but we must not forget that, while the
election is an important milestone in UNTAET's
mandate, it is not UNTAET's final destination, nor
should it be that of the United Nations. Given their
recent experience with elections, many East Timorese
believe that the potential for violence during and after
the elections may be even higher than before. Many
previous United Nations peacekeeping operations have
also shown elections to be a highly unstable time at
which to withdraw from an operation.

The United Nations should therefore learn its
lessons from past experience and not repeat these
mistakes in East Timor. Planning for a phase-down
before the elections take place assumes a best-case
scenario, which the Brahimi report opposed. The
Brahimi report also warned against forcing a situation
on the ground to fit political and other extraneous
criteria in New York. The Constituent Assembly
elections and the period immediately after that could be
a moment of vulnerability. As such, the Security
Council should view this period with vigilance rather
than as an opportunity for an early exit or drawdown
from East Timor. At the same time, to make plans for
the United Nations exit or substantial withdrawal from
East Timor at this juncture would send precisely the
wrong signal to the East Timorese.

UNTAET has certainly come a long way. The
dedication and devotion of the staff of UNTAET, not
least of the Transitional Administrator, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, are qualities which Council members
have repeatedly paid tribute to. We would be remiss if
we did not reaffirm that tribute again today, as it is
truly well deserved. We also remain impressed by the
determination and resolve demonstrated by the East
Timorese to maintain their road to independence. It is
in no way an indictment of the good work done by
UNTAET and that of the East Timorese people for us
to say that the tasks ahead remain large. The United
Nations still has a long way to go. Indeed, as Special
Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello said this
morning, we have come a long way but we have much
further to go.

Before it signed the 5 May 1999 agreement, East
Timor wanted five years of political transition to
prepare itself for independence. Given that it has been
barely two years since the popular consultations in East
Timor and the events that followed, it is only
understandable that more remains to be done. What
East Timor has achieved thus far remains fragile and
reversible. As the Secretary-General's report has
highlighted, some hard-line militia elements have plans
to resume operations designed to destabilize the
situation in East Timor in the lead-up to the elections
and independence. There is also concern that some
militia elements have adopted a strategy of lying low
until independence in the belief that the military
presence will then be removed from East Timor.

Therefore, although great strides have been taken
to Timorize the East Timor Transitional
Administration, it is clear that certain critical areas of
government will continue to need the support of the
United Nations. Should post-independence East Timor
unravel, the costs to the United Nations to again enter
and rebuild East Timor would be much higher than if
the international presence were sustained until East
Timor is able to stand on its own two feet. We believe
that the United Nations should not be penny-wise and
pound-foolish. We believe that it is not sufficient for us
to rely only on voluntary contributions to fund the
United Nations presence. Voluntary contribution on its
own is not enough. It would be better if the United
Nations presence were supported by a regular and
reliable source of funding that would give East Timor
the maximum chance of viability over the long term.
Indeed, again, as Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello said this
morning, speaking boldly and clearly, we will need to
retain funding from assessed contributions, not from
voluntary funding. We should heed his careful words of
advice and I believe that Mr. Ramos-Horta also made a
similar appeal to us.

During the Arria-formula meeting organized by
the Singapore mission on 26 July 2001, Council
members were briefed by four very distinguished
speakers: Mr. Shepard Forman from the Centre on
International Cooperation at New York University,
Ambassador Nancy Soderberg from the International
Crisis Group, Ms. Sidney Jones from Human Rights
Watch and Ambassador David Malone from the
International Peace Academy. The unanimous message
at that meeting was that East Timor is a half-finished
project. They reminded us that ensuring sustainable
peace and development in East Timor cannot be done
on the cheap or in accelerated time. A precipitous
withdrawal of either the civilian or military
components of UNTAET would entail serious risks by
heightening levels of uncertainty, both locally and
internationally, and by undermining stability in the
transitional period that really counts. No one wants two
years of investment to produce a failed State.

The success or failure of East Timor will either
bolster or undermine the United Nations credibility. At
the same time, the regional context must be borne in
mind, not least because of all the political transitions
which East Timor's neighbour Indonesia is currently
going through. The exit strategy from East Timor must
therefore be carefully worked out with the elected
representatives of East Timor, based not on past costs
or anticipated needs in other crises, but on the
continuing needs in East Timor. A continued United
Nations presence, albeit a scaled-down one 4 and we
agree with both Mr. Vieira de Mello and Mr. Ramos-
Horta when they say that it will have to be a scaled-
down own - is going to be crucial. Areas such as
defence, public safety, justice and governance are
critical areas which need international support even
after independence.

More specifically, the speakers at the Arria-
formula meeting felt that, first, the United Nations has
no other responsible choice but to stage its drawdown
with the gradual establishment of the East Timor
Defence Force and the East Timor police. There is a
real risk that militias would escalate violence
significantly if the United Nations security presence
were to be withdrawn. The international force should
therefore be scaled back only when the East Timor
Defence Force reaches critical strength and is fully
trained, equipped and deployed alongside the
international troops. The process should only begin
after independence is declared. The United Nations
civilian police should be replaced only when there are
adequate numbers of well-trained, well-equipped and
well-disciplined police acting within the established
rule of law.

The second point they made was that one of the
most urgent needs is for the international community to
assist the United Nations with basic law-and-order
functions, providing, for example, judges, prosecutors
and investigators. If the United Nations stops its
support for prosecutions, "that might be the end of
justice, period", to quote the words of one participant.

Thirdly, there are also ongoing needs for
capacity-building and technical assistance both in the
general area of civil administration and in specific
functional areas such as banking, finance, immigration
and customs, and air and seaports. International staff
will also be needed to perform functions with a high
technical content, since local expertise will be
unavailable in the beginning.

One point worth stressing is that these tasks were
indeed spelled out in resolution 1264 (1999), which
first established UNTAET.

Having just looked at the progress of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) last week, it might also be useful to draw
some comparisons between the two operations, given
their similarities in size and population. While UNMIK
is only one pillar of the international community's
commitment to Kosovo, United Nations members
spend roughly the same amount of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget on UNMIK as on UNTAET, and
will probably do so for a much longer period of time.

It is also important to bear in mind that no other
region in the world has replicated the security
architecture in Europe. The Security Council must
therefore factor in the broader political, social and
economic context and the regional dimension when
considering East Timor. Indeed, this is what our
European partners have often asked us to do when
looking at the complex interlinked problems in the
Balkans. At the recent meeting of the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) held in Hanoi, the ARF Chairman issued
a statement on 25 July which also

"reiterated the need for the support of the
international community, including ASEAN, to
play an active role in the nation-building efforts
of East Timor up to and beyond the territory's
independence".

ASEAN is clearly aware that it has to play its part in
helping East Timor, but it has its own limitations.

In addition, a new Government has recently been
installed in Indonesia, East Timor's closest neighbour.
We are pleased that this has been achieved smoothly.
Nevertheless, Indonesia has recently undergone a
difficult period of social, economic and political
change. President Megawati Soekarnoputri has to
address many pressing and diverse challenges
throughout the Indonesian archipelago. We are
therefore confident that Indonesia also sees it to be in
its own interest to have a successful and smooth
transition in East Timor. The international community
should therefore encourage goodwill and understanding
between East Timor and Indonesia.

We note with interest the results of the
registration process of the refugees remaining in West
Timor. We hope that the United Nations will continue
to work closely with Indonesia to repatriate and resettle
the refugees who have indicated their preferences,
while keeping in view that some might change their
mind after the political situation in East Timor
stabilizes. We also look forward to hearing the results
of the security assessment mission to West Timor. We
hope that the problem of East Timorese refugees in
East Nusa Tenggara province can be resolved in a
comprehensive manner.

There can be no doubt that at the end of the day,
as Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta emphasized a few minutes
ago, the East Timorese themselves will ultimately be
responsible for the success of their own nascent State.
They have demonstrated their clear commitment and
eagerness to take over once they are ready to do so.
The question for us in this Council is whether the
United Nations has the wherewithal to stay the course
and leave only when it has fulfilled its mandate of
providing the framework for self-government and
establishing conditions for sustainable developments.
This is the key question we have to answer. One way of
finding out what the answer is for the Security Council
to visit East Timor, as indeed was just proposed by
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. This is just a suggestion
that we support.

Finally, this morning at the informal consultations
a draft presidential statement on East Timor was
introduced. In principle, we believe that such a
presidential statement could be helpful. But, as we also
emphasized at the informal consultations, we have
grave reservations about rushing this statement. We
hope that all of us will deliberate carefully on this
presidential statement before we reach a final
agreement. It is vital that we send the correct signals at
this delicate phase of East Timor's transition.

