Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): ljoin other colleagues in
thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his
briefing on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Ukraine welcomes the efforts and commitments of
the parties to the Framework with regard to its further
implementation, which they demonstrated during the
reporting period. In addition, we commend the efforts
undertaken by regional organizations, in particular the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and the
African Union (AU).

Nevertheless, we are concerned that some of the
priority provisions remain unimplemented. On the
one hand, we have statements on the part of all parties
to the PSC Framework regarding their readiness to
implement those provisons. On the other, we see a lack
of meaningful action - and by that I mean collective
actions by all actors. Hence, the absence of a political
will to comply with the promises and obligations made
is a root cause of the delayed implementation of the
PSC Framework.

That factor creates distrust among all regional
members and provokes tensions among them. As a
result, at the beginning of the year, an incursion of
former Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) elements into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo led to an exchange
of accusations between the two neighbouring countries
regarding their alleged failure to uphold regional
commitments in the PSC Framework. To prevent the
repetition of that situation in the future, Ukraine urges
all signatories of the Nairobi Declarations to accelerate
their efforts to resolve the issue of the M-23 as soon
as possible.

The importance of such actions is highlighted by
the fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is currently preparing to conduct long-awaited
presidential, parliamentary and provincial elections in
2017. The challenges posed by the non-implementation
of all of the provisions of the PSC Framework should
not undermine or impede that process. In that regard,
we believe that all regional actors should make it a
priority to eliminate the threat of the Allied Democratic
Forces and the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

There is also an urgent need to resolve the issue of
the presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
combatants of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition. We commend the readiness of the
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, to host
those combatants who wish to relocate to Uganda, and
urge the Government of South Sudan to consider that
option as a possible way out of that situation.

We are also counting on the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to address, in a
proper way, the new threat that recently emerged
in the Kasai province, namely, the activities of the
Kamiuna Nsapu gang, which allegedly killed two
members of the United Nations Group of Experts on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, we
urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to spare no effort in investigating all human
rights violations and abuses in that region, committed
by both State and non-State actors, and to bring those
responsible to account.

Two weeks ago (see S/PV.7910), the Security
Council considered the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and adapted the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the current
realities and challenges in the country.

In the context of the political situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we want to express
our concern regarding the recent appointment of
Mr. Bruno Tshibala as Prime Minister of the country.
As was clearly stipulated in the political agreement of
31 December, the opposition was given the prerogative
of picking a candidate for the prime ministerial post.
Thus, that appointment may, in our view, further
exacerbate the political tensions among all stakeholders.
We urge all national stakeholders to comply with their
obligations under the agreement.

Another challenge in the region is the human rights
situation in Burundi and the influx of Burundians into
neighbouring countries. We are deeply disappointed that
serious human rights violations and abuses continue,
including killings, gender-based violence, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, particularly of children, torture
and ill-treatment, the intimidation of civil-society
organizations and journalists, as well as restrictions
on fundamental freedoms in that country. In our
View, the lack of serious efforts to investigate human
rights abuses and overcome the climate of impunity in
the country only encourages perpetrators to commit
new crimes. Ukraine also calls on the Government
of Burundi to follow the example of the Gambia and
South Africa, which reversed their previous decision to
withdraw from the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

The refugee crisis is a one of the main indicators
of the worsening political and security situation in
Burundi and in neighbouring countries. That situation
requires urgent action aimed at delivering adequate
assistance and at providing shelter and other necessary
support to the vulnerable, including basic social
services, ensuring child protection, the tackling of
sexual and gender-based violence and helping people
with special needs.

It is quite upsetting that the situation in Burundi is
worsening, while the implementation of key elements
of Security Council resolution 2303 (2016) has stalled.
We believe that increasing the human rights monitoring
capacity and establishing a police component, as
envisaged by resolution 2303 (2016), including the AU
deployment of human rights observers and military
experts, is urgently needed in order to reinforce
peace-restoration efforts in Burundi.

