The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.

At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the
progress of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda and the valuable observations contained therein,
which have provided the necessary framework for the
Council's discussion on the resolution.

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution before
us today, which decides that the restrictions imposed by
paragraph 13 of resolution 918 (1994) concerning the sale
or supply of arms and related mate'riel to the Government
of Rwanda shall be suspended, and terminated permanently
on 1 September 1996, unless the Security Council decides
otherwise. The arms embargo was imposed because the
uncontrollable circulation of arms was a major factor in the
destabilization of the country. In fact, the present
Government has made serious efforts towards stability and
a peaceful reconstruction of Rwanda, and it is therefore our
view that the decision which the Council has taken today
will in fact help prevent a recurrence of past violence.
Considering the recent history of Rwanda, it is
understandable that there may be some concern that an
increasing flow of arms may lead to disorder in the
country, but the resolution should be seen from a more
positive perspective. It marks an important step in the
development of Rwanda and represents the international
community' 5 adjusting views on its realities. Furthermore,
elements in the resolution, such as a review of the effects
of the resolution in six months and one year, as reflected
in paragraph 12, would help ensure the fulfilment of its
basic objectives.

It is essential that the Rwandan Government refrain
from the use of arms and related materiel for any but
legitimate purposes in accordance with international law,
such as self-defence. We expect that the resolution will
enable Rwanda to take primary responsibility for
maintaining its own security structure, independent of
United Nations forces, in order to ensure peace and
stability throughout the Great Lakes region. In this regard,
it is of paramount importance that the countries
surrounding Rwanda contribute to monitoring the arms
flow in the region in order to prevent civilians or
destabilizing forces in the region, especially refugees in
Rwandan camps within their territories, from acquiring
military materiel. Therefore, my delegation supports the
establishment of a commission to investigate the alleged
arms flow to former Rwandan government forces in the
region, as reflected in paragraph 2.

The lifting of the embargo on the Government of
Rwanda does not come without a measure of
responsibility. We are confident that Rwanda fully
recognizes the importance of continuing its efforts to
create an atmosphere of confidence and trust for the safe
return of refugees and that it will strive towards a solution
to the humanitarian problems regarding its prisons. To
that end, we also underline the need for increased efforts
to expedite the improvement of the prison and judicial
system.

The Indonesian delegation is pleased to note the
spirit of cooperation with which the Council has
responded to the resolution, which respects the sovereign
right of the Government of Rwanda to maintain peace and
security, while addressing concerns about a recurrence of
the tragedy that claimed the lives of so many innocent
civilians in Rwanda's terrible civil war.

 

Finally, my delegation would be remiss if we failed to There are no further speakers on my list, The
express our appreciation to all the military, police and Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
civilian personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
for Rwanda for their tireless efforts on our behalf in Council will remain seized of the matter.

working for peace and stability in Rwanda.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.
I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.
