Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, the Special Representative in Ukraine
of the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine for their briefings. It is important that they
were all able to speak today in order to give the Security
Council a complete picture of the developments in
the situation on the ground on all fronts - political,
security, humanitarian and human rights.

For France, a settlement of the crisis in eastern
Ukraine remains more vital than ever. Together with
Germany, we have continued to work uninterruptedly
on mediation within the Normandy format with the
aim of achieving a full settlement to the crisis between
Ukraine and Russia in accordance with the framework
outlined in the Minsk agreements. Our goal continues
to be to ensure the restoration of Ukraine's control
over all of its internationally recognized territory. That
also requires the re-establishment of its authority over
Crimea. On that point, our position is consistent with
international law and will not change.

Today, we are very concerned about the
deteriorating situation on the ground. The increased
pace of violations of the ceasefire, which have been
observed over several weeks, is accompanied by a
human toll that continues to increase, both among the
armed fighters and the civilian population. Since the
beginning of April, regrettably, there have been more
than 20 deaths and 130 wounded in the Donbas area.
That ongoing low-intensity conflict, marked by regular
clashes in several localities, is unacceptable. It threatens
to undermine the main progress that we had achieved
since August, which was the end of large-scale fighting
and a decrease in the number of victims. It undermines
the credibility of efforts towards ensuring a negotiated
settlement. We must therefore do everything to put an
end to it. Otherwise, there is a serious risk that we could
be heading towards a worsening of the conflict, which
would be detrimental to all parties, not just to Ukraine.

As to the substance, the most recent events on the
ground serve to further substantiate our conclusion
that the Minsk agreements are the sole valid terms of
reference for a peaceful, long-term settlement. There is
no other solution. We regret, therefore, the fragmentary
implementation of those agreements, although they
constitute an international commitment in which the
provisions must be implemented by all parties. That
includes effectively respecting the ceasefire, which is
the only possible basis for making progress, as well
as implementing other measures provided for under
the Minsk agreements, in particular for constitutional
reform when it comes to decentralization and a special
electoral law for Donbas. Setting out a political horizon
is the best way to ensure that the security situation
remains stable. Consolidating the security situation
and implementing the political dimension of the Minsk
agreements are two topics that are at the basis of any
lasting settlement, and cannot therefore be decoupled.

Against that disturbing backdrop, we remain more
than ever committed, alongside our German partners,
to relentlessly pursue our efforts within the Normandy
format for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements and to do so without delay. The solutions
for progress are well known to us all.

In terms of security, it consists of the effective
implementation of the mechanisms discussed at the
most recent ministerial meeting in the Normandy
format, held in Paris on 3 March, for a consolidation
of the ceasefire. Besides the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, those include strengthening the role of
the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination and
setting up a mechanism for preventing and resolving
incidents. Moreover, the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine should also be able to carry out
all of its mandate in an unimpeded and free manner.
Threats to its operations and the integrity of its staff
are unacceptable.
On the political front, the revival of a positive
dynamic depends first and foremost on the early
adoption of a law on local elections in Donbas, which
should be organized within the context of Ukrainian
law and according to OSCE standards. Holding those
elections can be envisaged only if there is a stable
security environment. In our view, that could be
maintained by a complementary international presence
on the ground under the auspices of the OSCE. We,
together with the German presidency of the OSCE, are
currently considering that.

In humanitarian and human rights terms, it is vital
that humanitarian organizations immediately enjoy full
access, including safe and unimpeded to all territories
under separatist control. Unfortunately, that is still not
the case. We also recall the commitment made in Paris
on 3 March by the parties for the release by 30 April of
all prisoners and illegally detained individuals, which
in our view includes the case of Nadiya Savchenko,
We are concerned about the frequent allegations of
violations of human rights in Crimea, especially against
the Tatars and pro-Ukrainian militants. In that regard,
the decision of the Russian courts to include the Mejlis,
the representative assembly of the Crimean Tatars, on
the list of extremist organizations is a flagrant violation
of the freedom of expression, association and assembly.
It is also important that the neutral observation and
objective monitoring work being carried out by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other human rights organizations
can continue unimpeded throughout Ukrainian
territory, including in Crimea.

We are now at a decisive moment. We hope that the
parties will assume their full responsibilities to allow
the full implementation of the provisions of the Minsk
agreements. The inauguration of a new Ukrainian
Government, which has publicly demonstrated its
intention to make progress on this point, is an important
step. Following that, we, together with our German
partners, have multiplied our high-level contacts with
all parties to revive a dynamic of trust. Those contacts
continue as we speak. We call upon all members of the
Council to support those efforts in order to collectively
speak with one voice. We hope that, at last, sufficient
progress will be made in the coming days in order
to permit the convening of a new Normandy format
ministerial meeting as soon as possible.

