Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Eliasson for
their briefings. At the outset, I wish to reaffirm the full
support of France for their efforts, as well as those of
the Secretary-General, in order to find with the African
Union a way out of the Darfur crisis.

The transfer of authority from the African Union
Mission in the Sudan to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is
today close at hand. The deadline was set by resolution
1769 (2007), adopted unanimously by the Security

Council. So it is our responsibility to assist the
Secretariat and the African Union in holding to that
deadline. We should also make sure that the new
operation will be sufficiently robust and deterrent, so
that the tragedy of Haskanita - which we have
condemned very firmly - cannot occur again.

The French delegation welcomes the countries
that have already accepted to send troops as part of the
list established by the United Nations and the African
Union. We would call on those countries capable of
providing needed specialized expertise to UNAMID to
do so.

We also wish to pay tribute to the Secretariat and
the African Union for their ongoing concern to consult
the authorities in the Sudan. The Under-Secretary-
General told us a few moments ago about the numerous
stages. We can no longer renegotiate agreements. Now
we must implement them transparently.

France calls for the full cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan with the United Nations and
the African Union to help deploy the UNAMID
mission. That agreement reached last June was a step
in the right direction and the Council applauded that.
Now it is time for the Sudanese authorities to translate
that agreement into action, because the United Nations
and the African Union did everything possible to bear
in the mind the concerns of the Government of the
Sudan, while maintaining a satisfactory degree of
effectiveness in the forces.

The terms of the debate are clear. They were
clearly set out in detail by the Under-Secretary-
General. Now the Government of the Sudan must take
on its responsibilities and demonstrate that they truly
accept, as they committed to in the Security Council,
the deployment of the hybrid force.

This is no longer the time for procrastination. We
are talking about the security and the well-being of
hundreds of thousands of men, women and children
whose only hope now lies in the United Nations and
the African Union. We are also talking about the
effectiveness and credibility of the Council in its
capacity to maintain international peace and security.

With regard to the political process, we welcome
the launching of the Sirte negotiations under the aegis
of the co-mediators from the African Union and the
United Nations, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim. It is the responsibility of all the parties to ensure
success by respecting a cessation of hostilities and by
participating in the talks.

Concerning the particular case of Abdul Wahid
Mohamed al-Nur, France will spare no effort in
persuading him to rejoin the process. We are fulfilling
our responsibilities and will continue to do so. We call
on all the parties to do likewise.

My delegation recognizes the significant
contribution made by the autonomous Government of
South Sudan and by regional actors to the process led
by the United Nations and the African Union. The
initial results achieved at Sirte and Juba are
encouraging. However, we hope that we can encourage
all actors to continue to work together in constant
contact with the co-mediators, who are directing the
entire process. Finally, I should like to express France's
support for the decision of the co-mediators to include
Darfur's civil society in the political process.

At the humanitarian level, we cannot accept
restrictions on free humanitarian access when more
than 4 million people - two thirds of Darfur's
population - need assistance. My delegation
welcomes the upcoming visit to the Sudan by
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, which will make it possible to
assess the implementation of the 28 March Joint
Communique. We received with great concern
information from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs concerning the forced relocation
of displaced persons to south Darfur. Here, we recall
our commitment to the voluntary nature of return, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. We
also call on all parties to respect the civilian nature of
camps for displaced persons.

In conclusion, I should like to recall the
importance that France attaches to the fight against
impunity, which cannot be neglected, given the gravity
of the crimes that have been committed in Darfur. The
Council will soon have occasion to revisit this issue
with the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. Then we shall recall our total commitment to
ensuring that justice follows its course.

