Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The current escalating situation in south-
eastern Ukraine is a direct consequence of Kyiv's
reckless policy of waging war on its own people. With
the support and under the influence of a number of
well-known States, the Kyiv authorities have torpedoed
all the political agreements for settling the crisis in
Ukraine arrived at in the Geneva declaration of 17 April
and the Berlin declaration of 2 July. Not to mention the
authorities' abandonment of their previous positions in
the agreement of 21 February, which opened the door
to a real possibility for a civilized way out of the crisis.

President Poroshenko's unilateral proposal for
a so-called peace plan was also merely another step
on the road to further escalation, since the truce was
predicated on capitulation on the part of the insurgents.
That is all against a backdrop with no real steps towards
launching a political process or negotiating with
representatives of the regions. Where is the inclusive
national dialogue promised by Kyiv, the constitutional
reform, the decentralization of authority and the special
status for the Russian language? All we are seeing is a
fight with dissenters and a situation in which political
parties and media that do not toe the line are banned.

President Poroshenko has frequently made
peaceful-sounding statements. Only yesterday he
commented on the results of the high-level meeting in
Minsk, saying that Kyiv's chief goal was peace, and
that they sought decisive action capable of bringing
peace to Ukraine. He also spoke of some new urgent
plan for resolving the crisis. Where is that plan? Or is
it yet another distracting manoeuvre while concealing
an attempt to resolve things by force? We hope that
the Kyiv leadership will not squander the positive
opportunities presented by the Minsk meeting.

Meanwhile, the Ukrainian armed forces, without
consideration for any standard of international
humanitarian law or simple moral precepts, have
been indiscriminately attacking cities, residential
neighbourhoods and infrastructure targets. They are
using artillery, machine guns and air attacks, using
phosphorous explosives banned under international
conventions and ballistic rockets. In the so-called
anti-terrorist operations area there are 4 million people.
Hundreds of thousands of them have been sitting in
cellars without water or electricity for weeks, and food
and medicines are practically unobtainable. The overall
number of deaths now exceeds 2,000, and it is growing
exponentially. The number of people, including
refugees, who have moved from Ukraine to Russia is
now more than 814,000.

The media are reporting horrendous losses in
the Ukrainian army, confirmed by mass protests in
Ukraine against mobilization. Hundreds of Ukrainian
servicemen are ending up on Russian territory for
various reasons. We give them food, water and medical
treatment and send them back to Ukraine. We hope
that the Kyiv authorities are treating the nine Russian
paratroopers we have heard so much about in the past
24 hours just as humanely. However, it is reported that
they were detained with their own documents and with
unloaded weapons, which hardly resembles a diversion
force in a conflict zone. Everyone knows that there are
Russian volunteers in eastern Ukraine; no one conceals
the fact. One could wish that there could be similar
transparency in certain other countries. Let us hear
what our American colleagues have to say about what
dozens of American advisers are doing in the Ukrainian
Defence Council building, or how many American
mercenaries from so-called private military contractors
are fighting thousands of kilometres from their shores.
How come American weapon systems have shown up in
the Ukrainian armed forces?

Our American colleague asked an eloquent
question - what message can Russia's neighbours
send? To my dear colleagues I say this. I would
suggest that they send a message to Washington, DC.
: stop interfering in the internal affairs of a sovereign
State. Stop stirring up objectionable regimes. Limit
your geopolitical ambitions. Then not only Russia's
neighbours but many other countries all over the world
would breathe more easily. And another thing: stop
speculating about the downed Malaysian plane. So far
Russia alone has made a contribution to the conduct of
a transparent and essential investigation of that tragedy.
From everyone else we have heard no information,
nothing but insinuations. For some reason, even the
question of how the Ukrainians obtained recordings of
their air traffic controllers' conversations is some kind
of dreadful secret. Stop that speculation.

Russia has been attempting to send humanitarian
aid to the residents of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
who so urgently need it. Not long ago, despite the
desperate opposition of various intrigue-mongering
members of the Security Council, the first Russian
humanitarian convoy arrived in Luhansk under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Preparations are now being finalized for
dispatching a second convoy. An agreement on that was
confirmed today in a telephone conversation between
Russia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, and Ukraine's Foreign Minister Klimkin.

We should remember that the Council does not exist
in order to spread conjecture and exchange accusations,
but to take decisions that might help to resolve crises.

Today we propose that Council members make the
following statement to the press:
"The members of the Security Council
expressed serious concern about the worsening
situation in south-eastern Ukraine and called for a
speedy and unconditional ceasefire. The members
of the Security Council called for an inclusive
political dialogue on Ukraine based on the Geneva
declaration of 17 April 2014 and the joint Berlin
declaration of 2 July 2014. In that context, the
Council noted the role of the contact group and
strongly urged that the process be resumed without
delay within the framework of the contact group.

"The members of the Security Council urged
the international community to step up its efforts
to provide humanitarian aid to the people of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine."

That is the end of the draft statement by the Security
Council to the press. We propose that we vote on this
statement here and now around this table.

