Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We express our appreciation to the
representative of the United States of America for his
masterly guidance of the work of the Security Council
in June.

Benin, which conducted the negotiations leading
to the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), welcomes
the remarkable progress made thus far in its
implementation. We pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy; to
the members of the Working Group of the Security
Council and its main leader, France, co-sponsor of the
resolution; and to all of those in the field who have
provided new impetus to the follow-up mechanism and
the communication of information on children in armed
conflict.

The performance of the mechanism is indeed
most commendable, in particular since the issuance of
the independent study that made it possible to consider
jointly the situations referred to in annex I of the
Secretary-General's report, those situations which are
on the Council's agenda, and those that are not the
Council's agenda listed in annex II, on the basis of the
mandate provided by resolution 1379 (2001). We
encourage the Working Group to continue to work in
the spirit of the universality of its mandate and the
equitable treatment of all of the violations reported to
it. We welcome the invaluable contribution of UNICEF
to that positive evolution of the mechanism.
Progress made in the protection of children
affected by conflict can be measured in the large
number of children who have been liberated or
demobilized in both categories. While we are delighted
by those developments, there remains a great deal to do
towards making a reality of our dream of a world

without child soldiers, without children who are
mutilated or killed, without schools that are bombed
and without sexual violence being perpetuated on
children; a world without war against children, who are
the future of humankind.

The Council must tirelessly pursue its actions by
maintaining pressure on parties to conflicts. Without
belittling the advantages of the dialogue that has been
advocated by the Working Group of the Security
Council, in our view it is intolerable that we still have
more than 15 parties to conflict that continue with full
impunity to violate the rights of children in various
ways, despite the ongoing efforts made by the
international community to persuade them to mend
their ways.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
begun to play an active part in combating impunity for
crimes committed against children in armed conflict.
The Court requires the cooperation of States to achieve
its goals. We congratulate the ICC on its tenth
anniversary.

For its part, the Security Council should no
longer tolerate challenges to its authority if it intends
to preserve the credibility of the mechanism and its
own credibility in exercising the powers entrusted to it
by the Charter. The effectiveness of the Council
depends to a large extent on its internal dynamics.

There may be differences in the interpretation of
resolution 1612 (2005) and of earlier resolutions, but at
the time that the resolution was being drafted, we could
not imagine that the Working Group would be deprived
of the capacity to impose measures targeting those
parties which violate the rights of children once
verification of criminal acts had taken place.

We find ourselves in a situation which, back in
2006, was already of interest to the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight, which, in the first
recommendation of its report, emphasized the disparity
between, on the one hand, the objectives and intentions
ascribed to the mechanism and its original intent and,
on the other hand, the fact that, in practice, there was
heavy emphasis on documenting verified violations
and that specific action by the Council was still not
forthcoming, despite the seriousness of the violations.

That is the case despite the relevant provisions of
resolution 1612 (2005). In paragraph 8 (a), the
resolution states that the Security Council decides,
inter alia, to entrust the Working Group with the
recommendation of measures to promote the protection
of children affected by armed conflict; in paragraph 9,
reaffirms that it intends to consider imposing, through
country-specific resolutions, targeted and graduated
measures against parties to armed conflict which are on
the Council's agenda and are in violation of applicable
international law relating to the rights and protection of
children in armed conflict.

Those paragraphs provide sufficient leeway for
the Working Group to propose measures against the
parties involved and for the Security Council to find
the appropriate formula for follow-up to those
proposals. It is our hope that the Council will be able
to mobilize the necessary political will to make full use
of the potential of resolution 1612 (2005).

If the general understanding is that the
aforementioned provisions deal only with situations on
the agenda of the Council, and if we conclude
therefrom that the mechanism lacks the ability to act
against parties in situations that are not on the
Council's agenda, it is then up to the Council to bridge
that gap. The earlier that is done the better, so as not to
perpetuate the practice of double standards in its efforts
to protect children in conflict situations.

We call on the members of the Council to work
vigorously to strengthen international measures for the
protection of children in conflict situations, both in
terms of mandates and in terms of resources allocated
to the various component parts.

At the same time, my delegation would like to
draw the Council's attention to the need to become
even further involved in the rehabilitation of child
victims abuse in conflict situations and to ensure that
poor communities are not left to deal alone with the
physical and psychological trauma inflicted on those
children.

The situation of children affected by armed
conflict should enjoy all due attention in the context of
peacebuilding efforts. The international community
should further contribute to the social reintegration of
those children by ensuring that they receive the
education and support they require and to which they
have a right if they are to grow and realize their full
human potential. At stake are the future stability of
their countries, the regions in which they are located,
and international peace and security.
