Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
recognize the work done by you and your team in
advancing the agenda this month. We also welcome the
holding of this public wrap-up meeting, in line with
the provisions of presidential concept note S/2010/507.
Similarly, we appreciate the concept paper prepared by
your delegation for this meeting. We have extracted two
points on which we wish to dwell. The first refers to
terrorism and the second to regional cooperation.

Vulnerability to terrorism and violent extremism
is now global in nature. It is manifested, inter alia,
in the existence of more than 30,000 foreign terrorist
fighters, including young people and women, from at
least 100 countries around the globe. Today, no single
region of the world can consider itself free of that
phenomenon, much less of the terrorist scourge. In that
regard, Venezuela has insisted that the joint role of the
Security Council and the international community will
be decisive in combating those threats, particularly
through the design, implementation and enhancement
of strategies that stop the growth of non-State actors.

My delegation underlines once again the importance
of prevention in that important and overarching combat;
the need to adopt initiatives to combat those groups
and extremist ideologies that have set themselves the
task of promoting violence and intolerance; to address
the root causes that fuel this scourge; and to develop
effective and innovative strategies to counter extremist
and terrorist narratives and generate critical thinking
in society.

For that reason, we welcome Egypt's support in
addressing that issue through the holding of an open
ministerial debate on countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism (S/PV.7690) on 11 May. That
meeting allowed us to address the threat of terrorism
from a comprehensive and non-selective perspective,
including responses to the scourge based on international
cooperation and bearing in mind the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, we welcome the adoption of the
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, which calls
on the Counter-Terrorism Committee to submit a
comprehensive international framework to include a
campaign to counter the narratives of terrorist groups,
and also to provide guidelines and good practices to
effectively counter, in compliance with international
law, the ways that ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities use their narratives to encourage, motivate, and
recruit others to commit terrorist acts. In that regard,
we call on States Members to actively participate in the
drafting of that report, particularly by presenting their
national contributions, taking into account the fact
that such a campaign should be adapted to the national
context of each country.

With regard to regional cooperation, Venezuela
considers it important to highlight the meetings held
with the League of Arab States, the African Union and
the European Union to address issues and challenges
of common concern. It is therefore of vital importance
to promote the role that regional and subregional
organizations can play in finding peaceful and political
solutions to conflicts, preventing such conflicts and
designing coordinated strategies for maintaining and
building peace, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

In that respect, and taking into account the fact
that the agenda of the Security Council continues to
be heavily concentrated on issues that threaten peace
and security on the African continent, the strategic
and complementary partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is even more relevant.
The debate on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union that was held on 24 May
(S/PV.7694), highlighted once again the importance of
cooperation between those two institutions in finding
peaceful solutions to the conflicts affecting the African
continent. We need to ensure that the African Union has
the predictable and sustainable logistical and financial
resources necessary to allow it to deal successfully
with its designated tasks assigned in deploying the
peacekeeping operations under its mandate. In that
regard, we stress the contribution of the African Union
Mission in Somalia to peacebuilding in that country.
The Mission requires adequate financial resources in
order to operate effectively in the context of its mandate.

Furthermore, in reiterating the premise that African
problems require African solutions, Venezuela believes
that a more active participation of the African Union
in Security Council briefings would be appropriate to
address issues related to that region, given its recognized
legitimacy and political authority in Africa, particularly
when considering the renewal, review or restructuring
of the mandates of peacekeeping operations that are
deployed on the continent.

We insist on the need for further progress in
consolidating and enhancing the relationship between
both multilateral forums on the basis of mutual respect
and in terms of developing common and integrated
strategies to tackle the emerging challenges in Africa,
on the basis of the comparative advantages of the
two organizations, with a view to ensuring improved
coordination and synergy between them.

To conclude, we reiterate our thanks for the work
undertaken by Egypt and wish every success to the dele
of France for the coming month.

