Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ambassadors Wittig, Singh Puri and
Sangqu for their briefings. I also wish to express my
appreciation for their leadership in contributing to the
progress of the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism (CTC) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), respectively.

The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee is an
important counter-terrorism tool of the Security
Council. Over the past period, the Committee has done
a lot of work in splitting the sanctions list, improving
the listing and de-listing procedures and updating its
work guidance, thus laying a good foundation for the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1989
(2011). China supports the Committee in carrying
forward the periodic review of the sanctions list as
planned and hopes that Member States will cooperate
with the work of the Committee in an active manner, in
a joint effort to preserve the authority and effectiveness
of the sanctions regime.

On 28 September, the CTC held a special meeting
in commemoration of its tenth anniversary. The
meeting once again demonstrated the firm resolve of
the international community to work together to
combat terrorism and injected new impetus to the work
of the Committee. China welcomes this turn of events.
China supports the CTC in taking measures, such as
holding regional symposiums and facilitating technical
assistance, to continue to maintain dialogue with
Member States and help them with capacity-building in
counter-terrorism.

Last April, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1977 (2011), which added a new
request to the work of the 1540 Committee. China
welcomes the Committee's submission of its work
report covering the period from 2008 to 2011, its
adoption of its tenth work plan and the achievement of
positive progress in promoting the implementation of
the resolution in carrying out assistance and outreach
activities.

China supports the Committee in continuing with
its sound and steady work in promoting the
achievement of the goals of resolution 1540 (2004) in a
comprehensive, balanced and effective manner and in
assisting countries in fulfilling their obligations under
the resolution.

China hopes that the Committee will successfully
complete its two important tasks in the coming period
and come up with recommendations on the
establishment of the panel of experts as soon as
possible and successfully hold the first annual review
of the implementation of the resolution. China is
willing to continue to work with others' support and
take an active part in the Committee's work in a joint
effort in favour of the continued progress of the
international non-proliferation process.

Terrorism is the common enemy of the
international community. As a victim of terrorism,
China is opposed to all forms of terrorism and to the
practice of double standards in counter-terrorism
efforts. We hope that the international community will
continue to strengthen cooperation in a joint effort to
defend against and combat terrorism. China supports
the United Nations and the Security Council in playing
a central role in international counter-terrorism
cooperation.
