Ms. Carroll: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to talk about an important subject - the
right of journalists around the world to work without
threat or peril.

Everyone who walks into the main newsroom at
the global headquarters of the Associated Press (AP)
here in New York passes our Wall of Honor, a softly
lit display of photographs and biographies of the
31 AP journalists who have died on assignment since
the organization was founded 167 years ago. I pass it
every morning, frequently pausing to look at the faces
of the five men killed on my watch as editor: Nazeh
Darwazeh, killed on 19 April 2003 while filming a
confrontation between Israeli soldiers and Palestinians
in the West Bank city of Nablus; Saleh Ibrahim, shot
to death on 23 April 2005 as he arrived to cover an
explosion in the Iraqi city of Mosul; Aswam Ahmed
Lutfallah, shot to death by insurgents as he filmed their
gunfight with police in Mosul on 12 December 2006;
Ahmed Hadi Naji, who left home astride his red-and-
white motorbike on the way to the AP Baghdad office
and disappeared - his body was found in a morgue six
days later, on 5 January 2007; he had been shot in the
back of the head; and Anthony Mitchell, headed home
to Kenya from a West Africa reporting trip when the
plane he was on crashed in Cameroon on 5 May 2007,
killing all aboard.

Like those five men, most of the 31 people on our
Wall died covering conflict, beginning with the 1876
Battle of the Little Big Horn in the United States.
They fell during the Spanish-American war in Cuba,
the Russo-Japanese War, the Korean conflict and the
Second World War, which claimed five AP journalists.
Another five died in Vietnam.

Many were shot to death - in an ambush, a riot or at
a checkpoint; captured, tortured and shot by the Nazis.
Two were attacked by mobs during civil unrest. Others
were mortally wounded by mortars or shells. One went
down on a warship, another on a refugee ship. Others
were lost in plane crashes or one of many helicopter
crashes, including the 1993 crash in Afghanistan that
took the life of the only woman on the Wall of Honor,
my friend Sharon Herbaugh.

We bring visitors to the Wall of Honor and it is
important to explain why this is such a special place
to us. These people are part of our professional family.
They are in my head and heart each time we send AP
journalists off into the world's many treacherous spots.

But more often, journalists are not heading off to
an assignment in a treacherous spot. That dangerous
assignment is the country they call home, and the
threat is not from war. Indeed, most journalists who die
today are not caught in some wartime cross-fire; they
are murdered just because of what they do. And those
murders are rarely ever solved; the killers rarely ever
punished.

The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ)
documents the attacks on journalists each year, and
its annual accounting is grim indeed. More than
30 journalists are murdered every year, and many
are abducted and tortured first. In the overwhelming
number of cases - 90 per cent - the killers go
unpunished, free to attack and kill again. CPJ has found
that most murderedjournalists - 5 in 6 - are killed in
their own hometowns covering local stories concerning
crime and corruption. They are attacked by people who
know their work, and often know them personally. The
journalists are menaced, arrested, beaten again and
again; their families or colleagues threatened.

The attacks frequently escalate and some
journalists flee their homeland for an exile's life.
Others are jailed, sometimes for years. Some disappear
off the face of the Earth. Many - too many - turn up
dead: 12 in Somalia last year alone, five in Pakistan,
four in Brazil, three in Syria, others in Russia, Nigeria,
Cambodia, Bangladesh, Thailand, Ecuador, India and
the Philippines.

So why should the world's leaders care about
threats against journalists? Many officials the world
over complain that journalists are headstrong and nosy.
They ask questions, they write stories and take pictures
that do not always sit well with the powerful people they
cover. They aim their cameras at things some people
do not want the world to see. Yet journalists represent
the ordinary citizen. They ask questions on behalf of
those people. They go to places the people cannot go
to, and they bear witness. An attack on ajournalist is a
proxy for an attack on the ordinary citizen - an attack
on that citizen's right to know information about their
communities and their institutions.

It is true that, today, a journalist's tools are
readily available to those average citizens. They have
smart phones, cameras and satellite transmissions,
and many make important contributions to news
coverage. Indeed, authenticated images and reports
from deep inside Syria - some by average citizens,
some by partisans - have contributed to the world's
understanding of the fighting in that country in the past
two years. Their work enriches what we learn about the
world every day; yet, the threat to them can be just as
great as the threat to professional journalists. Who will
protect them? And, closest to our hearts here, who will
protect the reporters and photographers and editors and
radio commentators and television hosts - the men and
women who swallow fear every day, who constantly
calculate the risks of simply doing their jobs, wondering
if the next breath will be their last?

The safety ofjournalists is not a political topic or a
professional rallying cry for me, it is deeply personal.
The journalists we have lost all left families behind,
often with young children who grow up with only
the faintest memory of a parent who will never come
home. As much as I want to, I know that I cannot
personally protect all the AP journalists at work in
every corner of the globe. But, every day, I try to do it
anyway - because there are 31 photos on the AP Wall
of Honor, and 31 pictures is enough.

