Mr. Christian (Ghana): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, Ambassador Kumalo,
for his comprehensive report on the mission that he led
to Timor-Leste towards the end of November. We
appreciate the additional light that has been shed on the
challenges facing the country and the crucial support of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) towards their resolution.

Allow me to also take this opportunity to
commend the mission for engaging with a broad
spectrum of stakeholders in relation to the future of the
country. The fulfilment of its terms of reference called
for nothing short of such extensive engagement by the
mission, and my delegation is hopeful that the visit will
serve to re-energize the process of national
reconciliation and democratization in Timor-Leste.

We welcome in that regard the assurances given
by the leadership of the country, especially President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmao, and the
opposition leader, former Prime Minister Alkatiri, that
they were fully committed to those goals.

We also support an enhanced role for civil society
in all aspects of national development, especially in
fostering social cohesion and a strong sense of
solidarity among the people of Timor-Leste. We trust
that the appropriate mechanisms would, in due course,
be put in place to enable civil society to play its role
effectively.
My delegation remains concerned about the
fragile security situation, the plight of the internally
displaced persons and the lack of employment
opportunities for an estimated 40 per cent of the youth.
We believe that the ongoing efforts to address the
institutional problems of the security sector and the
administration of justice ought to be accompanied by
meaningful programmes that aim at addressing the
underlying socio-economic problems that threaten the
stability of Timor-Leste. The Government and
opposition must work closely together to meet the
needs of their people.

The capacity-building requirements in policing,
public service and the judiciary deserve sustained
attention, as that would affect the pace at which the
Government of Timor-Leste would eventually take
over the functions that are currently being performed
by the international partners or with their assistance.
Therefore, it is important that the Government and
UNMIT follow through with initiatives such as the
Supplemental Arrangement on Policing and the
security sector reform process within the framework of
the proposed national security policy.

Finally, we remain concerned about the failure of
the authorities to apprehend and bring to trial the
fugitive Armed Forces of Timor-Leste military police
commander, Major Alfredo Reinado, who managed to
escape from prison in August 2006. Apart from its
negative implications for the justice and accountability
process initiated by the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry into crimes committed during
the 2006 crisis, Major Reinado's continuing evasion of
justice will inevitably add fuel to the perception of
bias, especially among those who have been held
accountable for their actions in last year's crisis. We
trust that the Government will use all available means
to resolve that issue.

Once again, we believe that the mission led by
Ambassador Kumalo was most timely and worthwhile,
and the recommendations contained in the report
deserve serious attention by all concerned.

