The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Liechtenstein, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by His Excellency Mr. Ranko Vilovie, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism;
His Excellency Mr. Jorge Urbina, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004); and myself, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and Taliban and associated individuals and
entities.

I shall first like to give the floor to Mr. Ranko
Vilovic', who will make a joint statement on behalf of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Thereafter,
he will give a briefing in his capacity as Chairman of
2
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism. I now give him the floor.


