Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome Mr. Jan Kubis and thank him for his
briefing on the Secretary-General's report, contained
in document S/2013/350. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. I wish
to make the following comments.

First, we take note of the recent developments
discussed in the report. The current situation in
Afghanistan is fraught with enormous challenges, and
its ability to overcome them will depend largely on the
success of the 2014 elections. We commend Afghans'
determination to hold the presidential elections in
accordance with their Constitution. We are also pleased
with the technical preparations for the elections and
the recent publication of a draft operational plan and
indicative budget.

However, considering that the elections are less
than a year away, we are concerned that no legislation
has been enacted creating an electoral framework,
particularly independent electoral institutions. The
international community will be evaluating the elections
not only based on who is elected but on how they are
elected, and on whether the Afghan people accept
the results as legitimate. We think that Afghanistan
should agree to international assistance and work with
UNAMA in order to strengthen the integrity of the
electoral process.

Secondly, the reconciliation process is also at a
crucial point. The Security Council has repeatedly
recognized the fact that there is no exclusively military
solution that can assure Afghanistan's stability; neither
have the military operations produced the decisive
results that were hoped for. In that regard, we believe
that Afghan-led reconciliation is the only way to end
the conflict and bring about lasting peace. We therefore
support the work of the High Peace Council. We hope
that all parties will take steps to eliminate the obstacles
to renewing the peace negotiations. The recent
establishment in Doha of an office for representatives
of the Taliban, on the terms explained by Ambassador
Tanin, should also facilitate that process.

The Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme and the regional dialogue are also important
elements for promoting a unified vision of the peaceful
future of the country among all Afghans.

Thirdly, we welcome the announcement made two
days ago on the fifth tranche completing the transfer of
security tasks to Afghans. That is a historic milestone,
and we trust that with unwavering international support,
the capacities of the Afghan forces will continue to
increase. Transition means a return of sovereignty to the
Afghan people. We have therefore noted with interest
the recent approval by NATO defence ministers of the
concept of a post-2014 mission. We await with interest
the details of that concept, in particular as concerns the
renewal of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force for Afghanistan in October.

Fourthly, we are concerned at the fact that with
respect to the protection of civilians, the current context
of the transition has been marked by a higher level
of significant incidents. We deplore the new figures
showing that the number of civilian casualties has
increased by 25 per cent over this quarter. We appeal to
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law. Moreover, measures must urgently be implemented
aimed at ensuring that internally displaced persons are
able to seek protection and access to humanitarian
assistance.

Fifthly, we must firmly defend human rights and
promote development. We strongly condemn all forms
of violence against women and girls. It is imperative to
safeguard the goals of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, in line with the international
commitments entered into by Afghanistan.

Lastly, Afghanistan has a special place on the
United Nations agenda. Now more than ever, the
role of the Organization is of paramount importance
given Afghanistan's chronic vulnerability and the
repercussions of the transition. We continue to support
a solid United Nations presence so as to ensure that
Afghanistan is prepared and able adequately to face up
to 2014 and its aftermath.

