Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to reiterate my delegation's
confidence in the work of the team led by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to thank him for his presentation
and for his valuable and tireless efforts.

The past six months have been dominated by
massive violence, marked, on the one hand, by
Palestinian-led revolts and uprisings, mainly from Gaza,
and, on the other, by forces of repression of the Israeli
border guards. A crucial event in this period was the
Great March of Return, which began on 30 March and
lasted until 15 May, during which more than a hundred
Palestinians lost their lives and thousands more were
injured. Noteworthy in that context of violence are the
incendiary devices and missiles that were occasionally
launched from the Gaza Strip, to which Israel has
always responded with strong attacks.

A peaceful demonstration is a point of arrival on
an open road, and not a point of departure. It appears
after other means for finding solutions have been
exhausted, during a prolonged period of time that has
exceeded the limits for waiting, because the problems
are stagnant or getting worse or because damage to
property or people is imminent. In compliance with
international humanitarian law, whenever a Palestinian
demonstration is peaceful, it must be respected by
Israel, which must not resort to measures of restraint
that threaten the life, integrity and freedom of
individuals. However, we would like to call on radical
Islamist movements to refrain from any intention to
coordinate Palestinian civilian marches, so as to avoid
disproportionate adverse reactions, as Israel also has
the right to guarantee the security of its citizens.

We urge the international community to endorse
the arrangement already initiated by Egypt for
sustainable intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which not
only recognizes the Palestinian Authority as the sole
legal representative of the Palestinians in the cause of
the self-determination and recognition of Palestine as a
State, but also ensures its return to and re-establishment
in the Gaza Strip, in order to join efforts to reorganize
the life of that populated enclave, especially in the
area of security and the development of means of
subsistence. In that regard, we applaud the presence
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which, despite its
funding difficulties, continues to work to resolve the
humanitarian difficulties of Gaza and the Palestinian
refugees in general.

As we said in our statement of 29 June, peace was
the main premise on which the United Nations was
created. It is for the maintenance of world peace and
stability that the Security Council has been working
over the nearly 73 years of the life of the Organization,
and it is also for peace and stability that we must be
cautious not to allow the Palestinian question to
discredit the work that this important body has done for
so long. We therefore urge the members of the Council,
especially those with influence in the area, to find a
formula that will bring the parties to the conflict back
to the negotiating table, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the subject and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
Palestine has the right to be recognized as a State, just
as Israel has the right to live in peace and harmony in
coexistence with Palestine and the other States of the
region. In short, we believe in the two-State solution.

