Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of India, Germany and South Africa
for their reports on the work of the Committees they
respectively head.
The Russian Federation views the stepping up of
efforts in the work of these Committees as an
important precondition to enhancing the effectiveness
of the Security Council's contribution to countering
global terrorism, which remains one of the main threats
to international peace and security. This fact is amply
demonstrated by regular reports of new terrorist acts in
various regions of the world. At the same time, there
are many examples of successful actions by the
participants in the counter-terrorist coalition of States.
In the Russian Federation, a number of successful
operations to neutralize underground groups in the
northern Caucuses were carried out. Clearly, a key
event was the elimination of Osama bin Laden.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities remains one of the
main participants in the Council's activity in the
counter-terrorist field.

We view as premature and unjustified the claims
that the link between the Taliban and Al-Qaida are
weakening and that flexible sanctions can serve to
isolate the unreconciled Taliban and adherents of
Al-Qaida. The idea that the Taliban might acquire a
nationalistic character does not bear scrutiny. It is
enough to recall that to date the Taliban have been
backed by motley international groups, including
foreign terrorist organizations. That is why it is
virtually impossible to draw a distinction between the
accomplices of Al-Qaida and purely Afghan Taliban.
Here, we view the initiative to split the sanctions list
into two, for Al-Qaida and for the Taliban, as
unwarranted and fraught with the risk of loss of focus
in the international antiterrorist track.

We back the policy of the Afghan leadership for
national reconciliation and the reintegration into
society of those members of illegal armed groups who
are not tainted by crimes against the Afghan people,
who have rejected violence and links with Al-Qaida
and who recognize the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. As before, we believe that
excluding former terrorists from the sanctions list is
possible only on an individual basis. Here we
considered groundless any proposals for the flexible or
simplified de-listing of the Taliban, including the
proposal for a sunset clause, which would lead to
weakened control by the 1267 Committee over this
process and to de facto automatic de-listing.
We back the Committee's efforts to ensure greater
transparency in the work without prejudice to its
effectiveness, and its efforts to update the sanctions list
to bring it in line with the current terrorist threat.

We consider the work of the Ombudsperson
useful and her present mandate as optimum.

We again urge States, pursuant to resolutions
1735 (2006) and 1904 (2009), to submit to the
Committee requests to include on the sanctions list
individuals and organizations linked to the Taliban and
Al-Qaida, including those financing their terrorist
activities from the proceeds of drug trafficking.

Resolution 1963 (2010), adopted last December,
directs the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) to pay greater attention
to issues of preventing and suppressing terrorism. We
actively contributed to adopting that approach, which,
in our view, secures wider support for and more
effective implementation of the Security Council's
antiterrorist decisions and organically fits into the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

We attach special importance to enhancing efforts
to counteract the radicalization of public opinion and
the ideologies of terrorism, violent extremism and
incitement to commit terrorist acts. To this end, the
Russian Federation initiated the CTC's adoption of a
plan of action to implement resolution 1624 (2005). It
provides for broader dialogue with States on all aspects
of the resolution and analysis of successful experiences
to disseminate it more broadly and prepare a
comprehensive report on the situation in this field. We
expect effective implementation of the plan and will
actively participate in that work.

To forge a robust network of antiterrorist
cooperation under the aegis of the United Nations, it is
important to bolster CTC contacts with international
and regional organizations. In that context we welcome
the outcome of the CTC's special meeting in
Strasbourg with international, regional and subregional
organizations on the topic of preventing terrorism. We
endorse the intention of the Chair of the CTC to
organize work on using the outcome of the special
meeting to strengthen cooperation with regional
organizations.

We note the close regular contacts of the CTC,
the 1267 Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) with the conference

11-3390]
of the heads of special services, security organs and
law enforcement agencies of partner States of the
Russian Federation's Federal Security Service on
terrorism. We welcome the assistance provided by the
CTC through CTED. We fully back the participation of
CTED pursuant to its existing mandate in the efforts of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force as
well as its cooperation with the panels of experts of
specialized Security Council committees.

Russia attaches great importance to the Security
Council's adoption last month of resolution 1977
(2011), which reaffirms the very large-scale tasks of
resolution 1540 (2004) and extends the mandate of the
1540 Committee for a further 10 years. We have used
resolution 1540 (2004) as one of the main international
instruments in preventing weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials from
falling into the hands of non-State actors, first and
foremost, terrorists. Resolution 1977 (2011) enshrines
the leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council in these fields and creates conditions
conducive to bolstering multilateral efforts in this area.

The 1540 Committee plays a key role in
coordinating and enhancing the effectiveness of such
efforts. We believe that the Committee and its Panel of
Experts worked fruitfully during the reporting period to
promote the further intensification of activities by the
international community to counter proliferation-
reIated risks and threats. We welcome the measures
aimed at making the Committee's work more regular
and systematic. It is important that these efforts
continue.

We believe that the Committee should continue to
devote priority attention to assisting States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and coordinating
the activities of the international community to that
end. We stand ready to continue to support such
measures, including within the framework of our
ongoing cooperation on issues related to resolution
1540 (2004) with participating States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States.

The Russian Federation will continue to
undertake focused efforts to fulfil the tasks set by the
Security Council to forge a reliable system under the
auspices of the United Nations to counter the black
market in weapons of mass destruction.

