Mr. Sareer (Maldives): The Maldives is a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, a cross-regional group comprised of 24
regional Member States, and we are honoured to speak
on its behalf.

ACT congratulates China on holding this open
debate. In the light of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, we have a unique opportunity to reflect
and reaffirm the purposes and principles of the Charter.
It was 70 years ago that the United Nations was founded
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war. Although this goal has been ambitious, the world
would have been in a far worse state without the work

of the United Nations. Yet, looking at the numerous
crises all around the world and their dreadful impact on
civilians on the ground, for instance in the Middle East,
Ukraine, Somalia, Nigeria or South Sudan, and with the
Syrian humanitarian catastrophe reaching proportions
not seen since the Second World War, there is indeed no
doubt that the United Nations has not yet come close to
fulfilling its mission.

Mr. Wang Min took the Chair.

The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
must be a time for action. Now is the time to take steps
to enhance the efficiency of the working methods of the
Council and ensure that the commitments taken by the
international community are effectively implemented.
That call was also already made in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
in which the improvement of the working methods of
the Security Council was recognized as a concern ofthe
international community. The seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, along with the tenth anniversary of
the World Summit, should remind us that, despite our
achievements, greater work needs to be done. In fact,
the overall discussion regarding the improvement of
the Council's working methods has now moved beyond
the United Nations conference rooms and is echoed by
the media and international civil society. The time has
come to make this step and ensure enhancements.

ACT is convinced that more inclusiveness and
accountability will contribute to a more efficient and
effective Council. We commend all the efforts the
Council has made thus far, such as last year's notable
7 per cent increase in the proportion of public and
private meetings as opposed to closed consultations.
We would also like to welcome Angola as the new chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, and ACT looks forward
to collaborating as a constructive partner with Angola
and the Working Group on issues of working methods.

I would also like here to remind the Security
Council of the letter sent by ACT to the President of
the Council on 28 January with concrete suggestions
in order to contribute to the enhancement of the
Council's transparency and accountability. Those
recommendations are based on ACT reflections and also
take into consideration the statements delivered by the
wider membership on related issues. In addition to the
ideas that will be developed further in this statement,
let me also highlight some of the elements presented by
our Group in the letter: the necessity for the Council
to sharpen its preventive role by fully implementing
resolution 2171 (2014); enhanced interaction with
the Peacebuilding Commission, which could assume
a greater prevention role; greater collaboration
between the Security Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries; greater consideration of
the membership's recommendations delivered at open
debates; more joint initiatives by Council members
regarding penholders, and so on.

That said, today we would like to outline three
ACT-supported topics with regard to adapting working
methods.

First, concerning implementation, while the
adoption of no less than six presidential notes in the past
two years specifying better working methods is highly
commendable, we note that often the implementation of
the adopted measures has proved to be unsatisfactory
or inconsistent. ACT encourages the Council to monitor
and report consistently on the implementation of the
measures through the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and in cooperation with the Secretariat.

Secondly, concerning the appointment of the
Secretary-General, in view of the approaching
appointment of the Organization's next Secretary-
General, we invite a discussion on how to improve the
appointment process. ACT calls for greater transparency
and involvement on the part of the wider membership
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions. This should include the following points:
a proper, formal, transparent nomination process; the
official publication of all candidatures; the possibility
of the General Assembly convening hearings with the
candidates on a voluntary basis; and an invitation to the
Security Council to consider including more than one
name in its recommendation to the General Assembly.

Thirdly, regarding the use of the veto, the ongoing
crisis in Syria has demonstrated the consequences of
a Council unable properly to fulfil its responsibilities.
ACT invites all members of the Security Council,
elected and permanent, to voluntarily commit to
refraining from voting against Council action aimed
at preventing or ending genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. Our Group has been pleased
that France, as a permanent member of the Council, has
taken up the advocacy of this idea and welcomes the
broad and supportive discussion on the proposal. We
also support the rapid finalization of a code of conduct,
as suggested by France, and will be submitting our
suggestions for such a code of conduct soon.

In closing, we believe that the propositions just
made are not only legitimate but also relevant; they
also are necessary to enhance the performance of the
Security Council, which today faces simultaneously an
unprecedented number of serious conflicts and complex
crises, amounting to immense human suffering.

