Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, I wish to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

I fully associate myself with the statements of the
Arab Group and of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The occupied Palestinian territories in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank witness constant Israeli acts of
aggression that target the innocent civilians and destroy
infrastructure and vital economic installations of the
Palestinian people. Those acts of aggression have not
spared a number of Palestinian officials. The Israeli
forces have arrested several cabinet ministers and
members of the Palestinian Legislative Assembly.

At the same time we are hearing, yet again,
Israeli claims that these military actions are just acts of
self defence. Once again, Israel is going far beyond
international standards of self-defence. Self-defence
usually takes place in the territory of the State
concerned, and not in territories under its occupation.

The Government and the people of Lebanon
denounce the Israeli occupation forces' military
campaign against the Palestinian people. Lebanon
views this aggression as one more example of State
terrorism - which is nothing new for Israel. In fact,
Israel has never had any qualms about violating the
sovereignty of other States, terrorizing innocent
civilians, carrying out wanton acts of aggression or
arresting innocent people.

Lebanon associates itself with the efforts of the
Arab Group to compel the international community to
take decisive steps to put an end to Israel's State
terrorism against the entire Palestinian people. We
believe it is necessary to promptly take the following
steps. First, the Security Council should swiftly take
decisive steps to achieve a ceasefire and to restore
security in the occupied Palestinian territories. It
should guarantee international protection in accordance
with the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
of 1949, and other relevant instruments of international
law.

Secondly, the Quartet must shoulder its political
responsibilities and must accelerate the establishment
of a mechanism to channel the assistance that has been
pledged and to permit the distribution of humanitarian
assistance.

Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority must
immediately be permitted to restore the security
situation, thereby enabling the Israeli and Palestinian
parties to return to the negotiating table in order to deal
with the current situation.

Israel's actions in the occupied Palestinian
territories constitute a flagrant violation of human
rights, an act of aggression against the safety and
security of the Palestinian people and against their
right to a decent, dignified life in liberty. They also
pose a challenge to the desire for peace in the region.

Israel's aggression is not confined to the occupied
Palestinian territories. Israel has also heightened the
readiness of its military forces along the Blue Line,
again on the pretext of self-defence. Its air force has
violated Syria's airspace and Israel continues to violate
the airspace and territorial waters of Lebanon. Those
repeated messages express Israel's aggressive
intentions against the entire region. Israel continues to
carry out acts of aggression against States that have
consistently expressed their wish for the establishment
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace on the basis
of the relevant United Nations resolutions.

Lebanon, while condemning Israel's wanton acts
of aggression, joins in the call for a ceasefire, for a
return to calm, for a resumption of negotiations, for the
release of prisoners, and for an end to this round of
bloody violence.
