Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): Thank
you, Sir, for the extraordinarily effective way you have
presided over the Security Council. You said at the end of
January that you would work with the United States, which
had the honour of being in the presidency last month, in a
seamless transition. We pledged to our friends who are
concerned with the Congo that the resolution, which many
of them had hoped would be adopted in January, would be
adopted under the Argentine presidency. You have fulfilled
your commitment and we are proud to be associated with
you and with our immediate predecessor, the United
Kingdom, in what has amounted to not a month of Africa,
but three consecutive months of Africa, with much more to
come.

I also thank Ambassador Chowdhury for his very
generous comments about our efforts and join him in
praising my deputy, Nancy Soderberg, for her round-the-
clock efforts here while I have spent much of the month,
including this morning - and I apologize for being late -
on the phone to members of Congress who I feel still
needed to be persuaded more fully of the necessity of what
we are undertaking. I want to be clear that the American
vote here in the United Nations is the exclusive province of
the executive branch and we do not need Congress's
approval for it. But we do need its approval on the funding
and that is why I have been, unfortunately, less of a
physical presence with you, Sir, than I wished to. With
Nancy as my deputy, however, I do not feel any concern.

Thirty days ago in this Chamber, we convened a
historic summit to galvanize international action for peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Seven African
presidents sat with us at this historic horseshoe and other
leaders joined us to discuss the urgent need for action. The
time has now arrived to act.

The second phase of the Lusaka peace process
begins - perhaps today, with this important vote; perhaps
yesterday, in Lusaka but, in any case, let the record
show that it has begun. Today, with this resolution, the
Security Council has taken a critical step towards helping
the Congo and the region come to the peace that their
people so desperately need.

My Government's introducing of this Security
Council resolution, its unanimous support and approval
today have been made possible by the commitments made
in Lusaka and reaffirmed in New York by the heads of
the States parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It

 
is not conceivable to me that we would have been able to
adopt such an important and strong resolution if we had
not been joined in New York by the presidents of the
Lusaka process, by President Chissano of Mozambique,
by the representative of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), by the Secretary General of the OAU and by the
facilitator, former President Masire,

The results reached in Maputo, Harare, here in New
York and elsewhere have helped move this process along.
At the same time, however, the United States remains
deeply concerned by reports of resumed military
offensives in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council and the Secretary-General have made
clear, in one of the most important sections of this
resolution, that deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping observer mission in phase II - the
5,537 - is contingent on the cooperation of the parties,
their commitment in firm and credible assurances to the
Secretary-General that they will assist full access, and
their adherence to the Lusaka process.

We call on all parties to realize the opportunity for
peace provided by the Lusaka Agreement. We strongly
endorse Lusaka as the best and only viable process
leading to a durable resolution of the Congo conflict. It is
more, much more than a ceasefire; it is a blueprint for
peace, democratization and lasting reconciliation. The full
and unambiguous commitment of the parties to Lusaka is
essential in order for the international community to
continue to support the peace process.

The crisis in the region has been described as
Africa's first world war. As President Clinton reminded us
last week in a speech before the historic national summit
on Africa held in Washington, we must remember that the
central lesson of the First World War is the need for
strong, stable peace backed up by institutions that enforce
it. That is why the parties must do all they can to see that
Lusaka works and why we, the Security Council and the
nations Members of the United Nations, must support the
process.

One necessary element is to ensure that a joint
structure for the Joint Military Commission (JMC) and
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is

 

established in accordance with today's resolution. This
represents extensive work on behalf of all the parties and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to devise an
effective organizational structure to ensure the coordination
of the two, and more than coordination - the co-location
and integration of certain parts of their processes. This is
essential to the success of both the JMC and MONUC.
Formalizing this co-located structure and making it
effective is essential as well to the personal physical safety
of the United Nations, OAU and JMC personnel, to
reducing duplication of effort, to improving
communications and to economizing on resources which
will be scarce. Getting the JMC-MONUC connection
right - and we all had agreed in our discussions here in
December under the British presidency that it was not right
at that time - is critical to successful peacekeeping.

It is very important that yesterday's summit in Lusaka
endorsed the principle of the joint structure for the
MONUC-JMC. The United States is fully committed to the
JMC's continued role in bringing the parties to the Lusaka
Agreement together with the United Nations in a joint effort
to implement the ceasefire. As a means of strengthening the
JMC, we are ready to provide full United Nations support
for the joint logistics and administrative structures of the
co-located JMC-MONUC headquarters.

In this regard, I am very deeply impressed by the fact,
and I hope the world's media will report this, that already
every member of the Security Council has either made a
commitment to the effort - small and symbolic in some
cases, but symbolism is important - or has said that it is
open to the possibility. Several major contributions have
been announced today and recently, and I am delighted that
other members of the Security Council have told us today
that they will make commitments of amounts to be
determined or that they are now seriously looking at doing
so.

Sir, if the Security Council could under your
presidency be able to state that all 15 members had made
a contribution, even if it is small, to this Mission, that
would be a first in the history of the United Nations and
would set exactly the right tone for future efforts. I am very
pleased, Mr. President, that we have made so much
progress in that direction under your strong leadership.

Another key element for lasting peace in the Congo
remains the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
or resettlement of the irregular armed forces and armed
groups identified in the Lusaka Agreement, including the
ex-Rwandan Armed Forces, the Rwandan Interahamwe
militia and the Angolan UNITA rebels. A comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or
resettlement process that maximizes voluntary and
peaceful options and commands the full commitment of
the Lusaka signatories and the full support of the
international community is central to the ultimate success
of the Lusaka peace process.

The region has an important and central role to play
in this respect. At the same time, the international
community should make all means available to support
and make secure the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration or resettlement effort, as well as provide any
assistance necessary to the JMC and MONUC as they
produce an action plan for effective and complete
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or
resettlement.

In the days ahead, all States must increase their
efforts to uphold and enforce international law against
genocide. All those recruiting or providing support or
sanctuary to those forces should immediately cease that
support, and all States should uphold the Security Council
resolutions - this one and previous ones - imposing
arms embargoes against the ex-Rwandan Armed Forces,
the Interahamwe and UNITA, and to provide information
to the Council about re-supply of other armed groups. We
believe the Security Council should now consider
additional ways to enforce the existing sanctions.

These steps will help the parties control and
terminate the widest conflict in the history of modern
Africa. But we recognize that however important, this
resolution is only an interim step towards a full and
lasting peace in the Congo. The United States support for
establishing the phase II United Nations observer mission
at this time does not constitute prior approval for any
future deployment. If the United Nations, after developing
plans for proceeding to the next phase of peacekeeping,
as called for in this resolution, recommends establishment
of a larger United Nations peacekeeping mission, the
United States will certainly consider such
recommendations on their merits, based on the
achievements and the situation in phase II. I want to
stress that, because so many people wanted an open-
ended commitment to phase III. I think that the Security
Council has acted wisely in saying that each phase should
be taken based on the prevailing situation at the end of
each phase.

Phase III implementation operations should not begin
until the parties have accomplished specific military and

 

political objectives. These include full observance of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, initiation of disengagement
and redeployment, and substantial progress in the national
dialogue. Here I would like to report that our Ambassador
in Kinshasa, Ambassador Swing, has reported to
Washington his deep respect and admiration for the way in
which former President Masire conducted his colloquy and
his dialogue last week in Kinshasa. He has given us a
detailed report, and I am sure that many here have received
similar reports. We would be happy to share our
information with any members outside this Chamber.

I would like to state that Ambassador Swing, whom
most members know - he is our most seasoned veteran
diplomat serving in the world today - has told us that he
thought that President Masire's initial actions in
Kinshasa - his meeting with President Kabila and his
meeting with other groups - was, and I quote Ambassador
Swing, "wise and effective and actually puts President
Masire somewhat ahead of the timetable". I am sharing that
with the Council because we always focus on the problems,
and this sounded to me like a little bit of good news to
offer people.

Over the past few months, many have spoken
eloquently about the Congo and what the United Nations
should do to help. Today we must begin to match the
words with deeds. The opportunity beckons for restoring
international cooperation in Central Africa. Any effort
towards peace will not be easy. Perhaps no African nation
has had a harder time coming out of the shadow of its past,
from the darkness and horror with which it was brought
into the modern world, through a series of leaders, going
back over the last century and a half, whose performance
will not look very satisfactory before the verdicts of history.

This opportunity must be seized by all of us, and
especially by the signatories to the Lusaka Agreement. We
cannot promise the people of the Congo immediate peace.
We can, however, say that without strong United Nations
and OAU leadership, there is a high probability - in fact,
a virtual certainty - of a catastrophic disaster in Central
Africa.

Today we in the Security Council have taken a critical
step to establish the architecture for peace. I hope that
history will record it as a major step away from the brink
of the abyss. But as the resolution states, implementation
depends first and foremost on the parties. After today's
vote, we now need the full engagement of the international
community to encourage that implementation, the actions of
the parties in the region, and efforts through every
available channel to bring peace to the Congo.

