The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council warmly welcomes
the agreement reached on 21 March 2008 by the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders and
commends them for the political leadership they
have shown.

"The Security Council is encouraged by the
launch of the Working Groups and the Technical
Committees that will prepare the ground for the
start of fully fledged negotiations, in a spirit of
good faith, on a comprehensive and durable
settlement under the auspices of the Secretary-
General's good offices mission. The Security
Council looks forward to the results of this
preparatory process within the three-month
timeline agreed by the two leaders, which it is
hoped will build trust, momentum and a sense of
common interest in the search for a just and
lasting solution.
"The Security Council further welcomes the
opening of the Ledra Street crossing, as an
indication of political will to tackle issues that
have obstructed progress and an important signal
that both sides seek to improve the lives of all
Cypriots. The Security Council looks forward to
further such confidence-building measures.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the reunification of Cyprus based
on a bicommunal, bizonal federation and political
equality, as set out in the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and its willingness to
support the efforts of the Secretary-General to
this end. In this context, the Security Council
welcomes the readiness of the Secretary-General
to assist the parties in Cyprus, and further
welcomes the prospect of the appointment, after
the completion of the preparatory period and
based on progress, of a Special Adviser to
facilitate movement towards a comprehensive
settlement.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Taye-Brook Zerihoun as the
Secretary-General's new Special Representative
to Cyprus, and expresses its appreciation for the
work of the previous Special Representative,
Michael Moller."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
08-30937
