Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The chief task of peacebuilding is to
eliminate the root causes of conflicts and preventing
their resurgence. All of that must be primarily based
on States' internal efforts, since in that area the role of
the United Nations and regional organizations is one of
support for national efforts. Peacebuilding assistance,
given its long-term nature, should provide incentives
for national Governments to rely on their own strengths.
In that context, aid can be multidimensional and can
extend to diverse areas: reaching and implementing
peace agreements; stabilizing security; strengthening
Government institutions, human rights, the rule of law
and national reconciliation; and aid to development. The
mobilization of international aid must be coordinated,
so that it deals with the principal problems and
supplements national efforts.

As far as the United Nations is concerned, we are
obliged, unfortunately, to conclude that, despite all
the efforts of peacekeeping missions, peacebuilding
offices and Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country
configurations, aid to post-conflict countries remains
fragmentary. The importance of improving coordination
and the division of labour between participants in
the process, and of systematizing the peacebuilding
processes, is obvious. The existing architecture's
potential is far from being fully realized.

In our view, therefore, the relevant United Nations
entities should implement their peacebuilding activities
on the basis of their mandates in order to ensure the
necessary legal basis for their own actions. Complying
with the principles ofrespect for the sovereignty ofpost-
conflict States and recognizing national responsibility
and national priorities for peacebuilding should be
absolute imperatives. The Government of the country
concerned, representing the interests of the whole
of society, must play a leading role in providing that
responsibility.

In our support for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission as one of the central intergovernmental
bodies for coordinating peacebuilding assistance,
we note the added value represented by the valuable
consultative assistance it gives to the Security Council,
when requested, concerning countries on the Council's
agenda. Within its existing mandate, the Commission
should contribute to dealing with important crosscutting
issues relating to peacebuilding that are relevant to
the entire United Nations system and that require
comprehensive discussion with Member States within
the framework of United Nations specialized entities.

Russia is an active participant in the activity of the
PBC and is committed to improving its effectiveness.
We are convinced that the Commission is a unique
intergovernmental body and that we should. therefore,
make full use ofits potential. In that regard, it is essential
that the Commission find solutions that are acceptable
and supported by all its members. The key to that is
to improve its standing and increase, commensurately,
the interest in its work by the broader international
community.
Much remains to be done to optimize and improve
the results of the Commission's activity. In a number of
countries on its agenda, significant results have been
achieved in terms of alleviating the causes of conflicts,
strengthening State institutions and coordinating and
mobilizing resources. However, there are also the
examples of Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, where we see a drastic deterioration of the
situation. In those cases, peacebuilding was clearly
insufficient. It is clear that formulas that work well in
some contexts do not always work well in others.

In that connection, we would like to underscore
once again the importance of the responsibility of
national Governments for the peacebuilding process
and in determining priorities, as well as the need to
precisely determine peacebuilding assistance, tailoring
it to the needs of individual States during the specific
time frame. It is counterproductive to promote the most
recent trends in peacebuilding, especially those based
on a universal model, at the expense of the pressing
needs of States.

There is no doubt that peacebuilding is a political
process. However, it is also clear that assistance for
economic development, addressing pressing social
problems and job creation can mitigate political
conflicts. The United Nations funds and programmes
play a key role in that regard.

In taking stock of the activity of the Commission
in 2012, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Mr. Abulkalam Momen, for his work as Chair ofthe PBC.
The past year has been eventful for the Commission,
and we welcome the results it has achieved.

A number of challenges for the future were
identified in the Commission's report (S/2013/63). The
programme is ambitious and aimed at enhancing the
effectiveness of the Commission's work in coordinating
international peacebuilding efforts and in formulating
recommendations to ensure continuous coordinated
international assistance to the countries on its agenda,
as well as the streamlining of its working methods.

We are convinced that the current Chair of the
Commission, the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Mr. Ranko Vilovic', will continue to move forward
those endeavours.

