Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We are honoured to
participate in this meeting of the Security Council. We
commend your able stewardship of the Council, Mr.
President, during this eventful and critical time. It is
indeed important for us during this wrap-up meeting to
thoroughly reflect on the work of the Council,
particularly in the context of promoting peace and
security in Africa.

Over the years, the Security Council has
remained actively seized of matters of conflict on the
African continent. The Security Council has sought to
utilize all the different mechanisms at its disposal in
seeking to fulfil its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

The fact-finding trips that the Security Council is
about to undertake will add to the practical experience
of the Council as it continues to grapple with complex
conflicts in West and Central Africa. The African
Union is intensely aware of those problems and has
actively involved itself in the area of conflict
prevention and resolution. The Council's missions will
come across conflict situations that have a common
denominator: underdevelopment and the scramble for
natural resources. There is also the difficult issue of
armed groups from neighbouring countries that cross
borders to foment violence and defy appeals to return
to their countries of origin. These are people who are
not refugees and who do not even accept voluntary
disarmament and repatriation. There are also
indigenous armed groups that refuse to join in
negotiated ceasefire agreements, which makes it
impossible for their fellow citizens who have embraced
peace to rebuild their lives.

The Council's role in these complex challenges
remains important, because Article 39 of the Charter
confers on the Council the responsibility to decide
whether a particular breach of the peace or act of
aggression constitutes a threat to international peace
and security, and whether to take appropriate steps to
maintain or restore peace. Absent that provision, the
role of the Security Council in resolving conflicts in
Africa would always be challenged. Questions are
raised more sharply as recent events have added to the
perception that the Security Council may be distracted
from conflicts in places such as Ituri, which is located
in a remote corner of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The Council must remain central to the universal
search for peace. The Council has to remain focused in
taking effective collective measures to prevent or
remove threats to the peace, in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law. In that
context we should, however, ask if the mechanisms in
the Council are adequate to deal with such complex
issues of conflict resolution.

The Security Council is the only body that has the
global mandate to maintain international peace and
security. As such, the Council cannot afford to be seen
as either selective or hesitant in becoming engaged in
bringing about peace. For the people of Africa, it is not
how the Council remains actively seized of their plight
that matters, but how effective it is in bringing about
peace.

The States members of the African Union have
already learned, through their own bitter experience,
the vital linkage between peace and security and the
broader objectives of sustainable development.
Through the Constitutive Act of the African Union and
the New Partnership for Africa's Development, African
leaders have forged a common vision and a shared
commitment to a path of sustainable growth and
development. They have called on the world
community to complement their efforts and to
implement the Millennium Declaration's pledge to
Africa, which emphasized support for the prevention of
conflict. For us in Africa, the Security Council remains
an important partner in this noble endeavour.

An encouraging development towards meeting
these challenges is the working relationship that is
developing between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. The creation by the
Security Council of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa and the
formation under the auspices of the Economic and
Social Council of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
African Countries Emerging from Conflict have
created a new mechanism that will potentially lead to a
more comprehensive approach to addressing conflict
situations.

Through such an inclusive process, the Council
has the potential to develop a greater sense of the
complexities of certain conflict situations and
contribute to comprehensive and integrated strategies
for peace-building.

The Council also has to consider the availability
of resources, both financial and political, in backing up
its decisions. United Nations Members have repeatedly
noted that the Council has best succeeded when its
decisions have been accompanied by unity of purpose
and political will. The combination of political will and
the requisite resources was perhaps best exemplified by
the Council's resolve in the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee under the leadership of
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union is growing. That relationship centres
on numerous practicalities, based on the determining
principle that multilateralism remains the only suitable
path to global peace and security. The United Nations
is the beacon of our belief in fundamental human
rights, the dignity and worth of every person and the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small. Through the Charter, we are resolved to
unite our strength against the enemies of peace. For
that reason, the many people who continue to suffer the
brutality of war and conflict in Africa and elsewhere
continue to ask, "If not to the Security Council, then to
whom should we turn during our hour of need?"

