Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We welcome the Security
Council's adoption this morning of resolution 2274
(2016), which extends the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for another year.

We appreciate the welcome accorded in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/218) to the
progress that has been made in initiating the peace
and reconciliation process in Afghanistan, which has
"reinvigorated prospects" for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict. That is the course my country has
consistently advocated for in order to end the decades
of war and suffering endured by the Afghan people.

Unfortunately, the long war in Afghanistan
continues. Over the past year, the security situation
has deteriorated further. Insurgent groups have exerted
intense pressure on Government forces. Civilian
casualties continue to increase, with violent attacks
in Kabul and across the country, including on the
Pakistan Consulate in Jalalabad in January. Pakistan
condemns all terrorism. There can be no justification
for indiscriminate attacks on innocent children, women
and men. The prolonged conflict in Afghanistan has
not only imposed epic suffering on its people, it has
also prevented Afghanistan and the entire region from
realizing its immense economic potential. A peaceful
and stable Afghanistan is essential to regional stability
and economic progress. As Pakistan has repeatedly
affirmed, peace in Afghanistan is in our vital interest.

Pakistan is gratified that the international
community has reached a firm consensus on the belief
that a negotiated peace, promoted through an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process, is the
best, indeed the only, hope for securing durable peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan. That has been
Pakistan's long-standing position and recommendation.
A promising beginning has been made in fostering such
a negotiation process in the last couple of months.

Following the positive momentum generated by
the successful Ministerial Conference of the Heart of
Asia Process hosted in Islamabad in December and
jointly inaugurated by President Ashraf Ghani and
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, Afghanistan, China,
Pakistan and the United States reached a decision to
create the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, aimed
at giving decisive impetus to Afghanistan's peace
efforts. The new mechanism's success is predicated on
the shared commitment and responsibility of each of
its four members. Each must undertake to play its part
in moving the process forward towards our common
objective. The Coordination Group has met four times
and has created a detailed road map for a workable
peace and reconciliation process. The implementation
of the road map was initiated through the undertaking
of a realistic assessment of opportunities as well as
likely obstacles to reconciliation, and will culminate
in implementing the framework and modalities for an
eventual peace settlement. Despite delays, Pakistan
remains hopeful that direct talks between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban groups will be resumed in
the near future, in accordance with the road map.

The task ahead is complex and arduous. Our
expectations should be realistic. We must exercise
strategic patience. Unrealistic targets and deadlines
must be avoided, especially now that we have a clear
road map. What is vital now is to create an enabling
environment conducive to operationalizing and
sustaining a peace process. To that end, the following
factors will be critical.

First, we need consistent and unified positions and
declarations from the Afghan Government affirming
its commitment to working for a negotiated peace.
In that regard, we welcome recent statements by the
Afghan leadership and the revamping of the High Peace
Council as steps in the right direction.

Secondly, we need a demonstrated capacity of the
Afghan security forces to hold their ground. Their
ability to do that will obviously help to create the
necessary conditions for the Taliban to return to the
negotiating table.

Thirdly, all four members of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, having committed to sharing
responsibilities, must use their respective influence
and political capital to contribute to the success of
the process. In that regard, the ability of the Afghan
Government to craft a set of incentives to engage the
Taliban in sustained talks will be essential. It would be
wise to avoid imposing preconditions, since that could
abort the negotiations even before they get under way.
As I said, that process is our best hope for lasting peace
in Afghanistan. Pakistan will play its due part. As a
first step, we have offered to host direct talks between
the Afghan Government and the Afghan Taliban.

Cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
will be a vital component of the endeavour to realize
peace and security within Afghanistan and the
entire region. What we urgently need now is greater
cooperation on border management in order to stop the
movement of terrorists. We have a long border that is
not easy to control. There are incursions by terrorist
members of Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan across the
international border from Afghanistan. Pakistan has
repeatedly called for cooperation in monitoring and
controlling the border but, sadly, Kabul has not been
forthcoming so far. Indeed, there has been opposition
to Pakistan's creation ofborder barriers. We urge Kabul
to step forward and respond positively to our efforts to
manage the border.

I would like to say here that the combined potential
of Pakistan and Afghanistan is considerable. Expanded
trade, energy cooperation and the implementation of
the various trans-regional economic projects already
identified can greatly enhance peace and prosperity in
and for the entire region. We must actively promote the
realization of the immense opportunities that can flow
from our bilateral cooperation.

Pakistan looks forward to a relationship with
Afghanistan based on shared values and interests
and respect for each other's sensitivities. We stand
committed to working with Afghanistan for the
improvement of this relationship for the mutual benefit
of our peoples.

