Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Turkey, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

Madam President, may I join you in extending to
the people and the Government of the Republic of
Korea our deepest condolences on the violent death of
a Korean citizen, Mr. Kim Sun-il.

Madam President, the European Union is
honoured by your presence in presiding over the
Council's deliberations today. We also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General, the President of
the Economic and Social Council and representatives
from CARE International and the International Centre
for Transitional Justice in this open debate.

The EU is grateful for the opportunity to debate
this important topic today. The role of civil society in
conflict prevention was discussed at an open meeting
of the General Assembly last September. I am
confident that our debate today will complement those
fruitful discussions.

The EU firmly believes that strategic partnerships
forged between government and civil society are
essential to successful post-conflict reconstruction.
While Governments may have a comparative advantage
over civil society organizations in certain areas, those
organizations can play a pivotal role, in particular
where functioning governmental institutions are
ineffective or absent. Respective areas of expertise
should be mapped out, and mutual responsibilities and
accountabilities should be more clearly understood by
the two actors.

Post-conflict societies are often polarized
societies. It is crucial that bridges of communication
are rebuilt between social groups. Post-conflict peace-
building must seek to foster the re-emergence of civil
society. The process of post-conflict peace-building
requires both knowledge and information. Local and
national civil society organizations are often invaluable
sources in that regard. Even if it is government that
must necessarily take the lead, a policy of inclusion
and partnership is a sine qua non in effective post-
conflict peace-building. Because it is ordinary citizens
themselves who are the main targets of peace-building
activities, input provided on their behalf by civil
society actors is key to the success of that peace-
building. Having said that, we also stress the
importance of having a good knowledge of one's
collaborating partners. In some instances, civil society
actors may be part of the same polarization equation
that peace-building efforts are trying to break down.

Civil society organizations are often uniquely
well-placed to furnish vital grass-roots early-warning
facilities such as where a particular peace-building
measure being pursued may inadvertently cause a
disturbance or impact in some other unintended,
negative way. The capacity of civil society
organizations as funding sources in peace-building
initiatives must also be highlighted in the context of the
Council's discussions today.

The European Union has consistently recognized
the vital role played by civil society in post-conflict
peace-building operations. The European Initiative for
Democracy and Human Rights has funded civil society
initiatives that contribute to preventing the outbreak or
continuation of conflict. I will mention a few examples.

In Angola, the European Centre for Common
Ground has helped to promote the liberalization of the
media, over a period of 12 months, through the training
of journalists in the principles of human rights and
common-ground reporting and programming, the
creation of appropriate radio and television
programmes and by engaging civil society actors in
radio discussion sessions.

In Mozambique, we have a project which intends
to strengthen the capacity of grass-roots civil society in
the fields of human rights and democratic action in
Zambesia Province, supporting the forum of the
Zambesian non-governmental organizations through
specific capacity-building activities, the reinforcement
of information collection skills and the training of civic
educators.

One project in Sierra Leone takes a broad
approach to the subject of capacity-building for civil
society organizations. The focus is to put non-
governmental organizations on a new footing with
government so as to help promote and protect human
rights in a post-conflict environment. A special focus is
given to women and children. The project has three
objectives: first, to improve the professionalism of
human rights non-governmental organizations;
secondly, to enhance their watchdog role by developing
their knowledge base; and thirdly, to strengthen their
advocacy capacity in order to improve inputs into
national human rights policies.

In Georgia, the European Union has a confidence-
building project in place to promote an environment
conducive to a political resolution of the conflict there.
The purpose of the project is to contribute to ongoing
capacity-building among both wider and more focused
networks of committed peace-building non-
governmental organizations and other civil society
organizations and structures. Target groups include
young and potential leaders from across Georgia and
the Caucasus region, women in positions of leadership,
ex-combatants and Georgian regional civil society
organizations.

I cannot speak of engagement with civil society
in post-conflict peace-building without making specific
reference to the extensive cooperation between the
European Union and certain non-governmental
organizations in promoting fuller participation in, and
the effective functioning of, the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Impunity for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes poses a serious obstacle in
the way of the lasting restoration of peace. In tackling
impunity for crimes of this nature, where Governments
are unwilling or unable to do so, the ICC can play a
key supportive and supplementary role in future peace-
building operations.

The European Union also attaches considerable
importance to the full and equal participation of
women in post-conflict peace-building operations and,
in that regard, wishes to recall the Agreed Conclusions
adopted during the session of the Commission on the
Status of Women held earlier this year. As the
Secretary-General recently remarked,

a;

. women, who know the price of conflict so
well, are also often better equipped than men to
prevent or resolve it. For generations, women
have served as peace educators, both in their
families and in their societies. They have proved
instrumental in building bridges rather than
walls." (S/PV.4208, p. 3)

In recent years, Governments have discovered the
real benefits that accrue from cooperating with civil
society actors in post-conflict societies. The Security
Council is also aware of the important role that non-
State actors can play in the process. The European
Union encourages the Security Council to reflect
further on how it can encourage greater interaction and
synergies between these important actors. Future
resolutions, for example, might more specifically urge,
call upon or encourage newly emerging Governments
to cooperate closely with civil society organizations.
The European Union also encourages civil society to
continue to provide Security Council members with
prompt relevant information and to seek to identify
innovative ways in which the Council could develop or
encourage closer cooperation between government and
civil society.

Suspicions of old between Governments and civil
society organizations have, in very large measure,
receded in many parts of the world, giving way to
genuine and meaningful interaction. The European
Union believes that the Security Council is in a strong
position to adopt resolutions which preserve and indeed
enhance this improved climate. Our debate today
should help to crystallise new ideas on how the Council
can act as a catalyst in securing even greater
integration between these two constituencies.

