The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Iraq, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zebari
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council's
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, Special Adviser on the International Compact
with Iraq and Other Political Issues.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Gambari to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, to Mr. Warren Sach, Assistant Secretary-
General, Controller, Office of Programme Planning,
Budget and Accounts.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Sach to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2008/350 and document S/2008/380, which contain
two letters dated 29 May and 10 June 2008,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of
Iraq addressed to the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Adviser on
the International Compact with Iraq and Other Political
Issues, Mr. Warren Sach, Assistant Secretary-General,
Controller, Office of Programme Planning, Budget and
Accounts, and myself speaking in my capacity as
representative of the United States of America on
behalf of the Multinational Force.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of the United States of America on
behalf of the Multinational Force.

It is my honour to report to the Council today on
behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq, or MNF-I. I
would like to begin by warmly welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Foreign Minister of
Iraq, to the Council. I also want to welcome Under-
Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari and Assistant
Secretary-General and Controller Warren Sach and
thank them for their participation in today's discussion.
We also remember our colleagues in the field,
particularly United Nations colleagues, and on behalf
of the Council I extend our appreciation to Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura and the staff of
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for their dedication and hard work.

I am pleased to report that the security
environment in Iraq continues to improve thanks to the
efforts and sacrifices of the Iraqi security forces and
MNF-I. All major violence indicators are markedly
lower compared to pre-surge levels. The Iraqi security
forces have made important strides in capability and
proficiency and have now assumed command and
control of all divisions of Iraq's army. The Iraqi and
coalition forces achieved these security gains even as
the coalition forces have been drawing down from
surge levels.

While that progress is encouraging, challenges
remain. For many Iraqi families, the effects and threats
of violence continue to be a daily concern.
Advancements in the security field must be expanded
08-38029
and consolidated and must be complemented by
commensurate gains in national reconciliation and
governance. We commend the Government and the
people of Iraq for their commitment to build upon this
hard-won progress in order to achieve a secure, federal,
democratic, pluralistic and unified Iraq that can
govern, defend and sustain itself.

Today, on behalf of MNF-I, I would like to
discuss four points.

First, let me address the decrease in security
incidents and violence. Total security incidents have
now fallen to their lowest level in over four years,
notwithstanding a temporary increase in Violence
associated with recent Iraqi military operations in
Basra, Sadr City and Mosul.

The number of civilian deaths due to violence has
fallen by 75 per cent since July 2007. Monthly high-
profile attacks in Iraq, such as car bombs, decreased in
May 2008, falling below the previous two-year low
reached in December 2007. Yet, the use of suicide
bombers, including female suicide bombers, remains a
threat, especially as population security measures and
local opposition to insurgents in some provinces make
it difficult to employ vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices, or IEDs.

The number of incidences of suicide bombers
increased from October 2007 to February 2008 before
declining in March and April of 2008. High-profile
attack explosions for May 2008 are down more than
70 per cent from the peak in March 2007. Nonetheless,
Al-Qaida in Iraq and other extremists still have the
intent and the capability of carrying out high-profile
atrocities, as they did on 15 April when 150 civilians
were killed in a series of attacks throughout Iraq.

However, the number of deaths due to ethno-
sectarian violence is now at its lowest level in the past
several years, illustrating the growing inability of the
terrorists to reignite the cycle of ethno-sectarian
violence. During the last two weeks of May 2008, there
were no confirmed ethno-sectarian deaths in Baghdad.
In April and May 2008, there were 38 deaths in
Baghdad attributed to ethno-sectarian causes. This is a
remarkable improvement when compared to the
incidence of more than 1,600 ethno-sectarian deaths in
December 2006.

At the same time, we remain concerned by the
presence of foreign fighters in Iraq. The Government
08-38029
of Syria must do more to halt the operation of foreign-
fighter networks within its territory that continue to
supply the overwhelming majority of suicide bombers
responsible for the deaths of innocent Iraqis.

The Government of Iran must also cease the
training, equipping and financing by the Iranian
Republican Guards Corps-Quds Force of Violent Iraqi
elements who have challenged the security of Iraq and
the authority of the Iraqi Government and security
forces. In this regard, we call on the Government of
Iran to follow through on its pledge to respect the
sovereignty of Iraq and the integrity of its borders,
which to date it has not done.

Secondly, I would like to describe the welcome
increase in the capability and proficiency of the Iraqi
security forces.

More than 559,000 personnel now serve in the
Iraqi security forces. This number represents an
increase of more than 19,000 personnel since I last
reported to you in April. Since 1 May 2008, 147 Iraqi
army combat battalions have been conducting
operations, which represent an increase of 24 combat
battalions since my last report. Another eight battalions
are currently in force generation, and MNF-I plans an
additional 14 for force generation in 2008. Four special
operations battalions are now capable of conducting
operations with minimal coalition support, and another
two are in force generation.

Among the formed Iraqi army combat battalions,
65 per cent are rated as not only being able to take the
lead in operations, but also being able to plan, execute
and sustain operations with minimal or no assistance
from coalition forces. Since March 2008, an additional
nine battalions have improved their proficiency and
can now conduct counterinsurgency operations with
coalition support.

Both the Iraqi air force and the Iraqi navy are
gaining proficiency as well. Over the past nine months,
the Iraqi air force sortie rate has increased by almost
750 per cent, with the Iraqi Air Force flying over 5,000
sorties so far this year. In that same nine-month period,
the number of Iraqi navy patrols has grown by
approximately 250 per cent, with an average of 35
patrols per week now conducted in Iraqi territorial
waters.

The Iraqi national police also continues to
increase its proficiency. There are now 44 national
3
police battalions authorized, including the National
Emergency Response Unit. And of those, 11 battalions
are capable of planning, executing and sustaining
operations with coalition support.

Moreover, during the last three months, there has
been a significant increase in Iraqi-led operations. In
March 2008, the Iraqi Government launched the
operation Saulat al-Fursan to restore law and order in
Basra. In April and May 2008, the Government of Iraq
planned and executed similar operations in Sadr City
and Mosul. With these operations, the Iraqi security
forces demonstrated their capability to conduct
simultaneous, extensive operations in three parts of the
country.

Overall, Iraqi security forces continue to grow
and improve, but at varying rates. In many areas
throughout Iraq, Iraqi special operations forces, army
battalions, national police and special police units
operate independently of, or side by side with,
coalition forces. These units consistently demonstrate a
high level of proficiency in counter-insurgency
operations against Al-Qaida in Iraq and other extremist
groups. In many cities, such as Ramadi and Kirkuk, the
Iraqi police are in the lead for population security,
where they are performing well and earning the trust of
the local population.

Thirdly, I would like to provide an update on the
coalition role. I want to remind the Council that more
than 30 countries currently play a critical role in
enhancing security in Iraq, whether by participating as
a coalition member, supporting the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) Training Mission or
contributing to UNAMI operations.

Coalition members other than the United States
contribute some 10,000 forces to the Multinational
Force (MNF) and another 450 personnel to support
UNAMI. Every contributor - from the British in the
south-east, to the Italian police trainers providing
paramilitary expertise to the Iraqi national police; from
the Mongolians who are providing camp security, to
the Georgians whose many missions include protecting
UNAMI staff members - plays a vital role in enabling
the Government of Iraq to assume full responsibility
for the defence and security of its people.

Fourthly, I want to emphasize that MNF-I
continues to progressively transfer responsibility for
security to the Government of Iraq.
At the outset, it is important to recognize that
Iraqi and coalition forces have achieved the security
gains I have described even as MNF-I is down from
surge levels. By the end of May 2008, three United
States Brigade combat teams, two United States Marine
battalions and a Marine expeditionary unit had left Iraq
without replacement. Additionally, Australia withdrew
its forces from Dhi Qar province in early June.

As of mid-May 2008, the Iraqi ground forces
command had assumed command and control of the 12
Iraqi army divisions, including 50 brigade headquarters
and 164 battalions. In addition, the sixth and ninth
divisions are now subordinate to the Baghdad
Operations Command of the Ministry of Defence for
tactical control, with the Iraqi Ground Forces
Command retaining administrative control.

Operational commands have expanded to include
the provinces of Nineveh, Karbala, Samarra, Basra and
Diyala.

Likewise, the Government of Iraq continues to
assume greater provincial security responsibility
through the Provincial Iraqi Control, or PIC, process.
Nine of 18 provinces have assumed PIC and the
remaining provinces are progressing well. For
example, the provinces of Al Anbar and Al-Qadisiyah
are expected to transition to Iraqi control in the early
summer of 2008.

Finally, I want to highlight that the United States
and Iraqi Governments are now in the process of
negotiating a long-term relationship which will
recognize this transition and the increasing ability of
Iraqi security forces to assume greater responsibility
for security and stability.

In conclusion, it is clear that the recent
improvements in the security situation throughout Iraq
are significant. Nonetheless, the Government of Iraq
must intensify the implementation of complementary
measures to sustain these gains.

These measures include: actions to support the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and essential
services to all the citizens of Iraq, including Iraqi
refugees; continued improvement in budget execution
to advance Iraqi responsibility for reconstruction and
development; the generation of sustainable
employment; and continuing progress on political
reconciliation. Credible provincial elections will also
08-38029
play an important role in facilitating reconciliation and
the formation of representative provincial governments.

We can, and we must, help Iraq succeed. I want to
take a moment to recognize and thank the MNF in Iraq
and all its members for what they are doing to help the
Iraqi people continue their historic struggle to build a
stable and secure nation. This struggle for the future of
Iraq is vital, for it will shape the future of the broader
Middle East and the future of the broader Middle East,
will affect the stability and security of us all.

As we have seen, tremendous progress has been
made, but these hard-won gains are vulnerable and the
Government and people of Iraq still have some
distance to go. We urge Iraq's neighbours and the
entire international community to pitch in and help the
Iraqis finish the job.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special
Adviser on the International Compact with Iraq and
Other Political Issues.


