Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to join my colleagues in thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council, which will allow members not only
to assess the results of the Security Council mission to
the Great Lakes regions, but also to consider practical
measures aimed at an early settlement of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
region as a whole.

I would also like to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Levitte for introducing the mission's
report and to pay vibrant tribute to him for his skilful
and wise leadership of the mission and for his
perseverance, courage and tolerance, which greatly
contributed to the success of the mission. The Security
Council mission was very well prepared and organized.
The retreat of the Council members of 5-6 May 2001,
which was entirely devoted to the situation in the Great
Lakes region, gave additional impetus to the
preparation of the mission.

My delegation has always favoured the Security
Council's missions to conflict areas. The timely and
fruitful visit of the Council Members to the Great
Lakes region has entirely proved that this is the right
approach. The Security Council missions have passed
the test of time. They have become an effective means
of conflict settlement and will undoubtedly enhance the
authority of the Council as a major body responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

The mission to the Great Lakes region has
received a clear picture of the situation on the ground
and grasped a better understanding of the problems
existing in the region. The delegation members are
convinced there is a window of opportunity that should
be extensively used to settle the conflict in this area.

There is a common understanding by the parties
that the Lusaka peace Agreement remains the only
viable key to restoring peace and democracy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The inter-
Congolese dialogue has received a strong impetus, the
process of the disengagement of forces is moving
forward, and the plans were confirmed for
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR), as well as for
the total withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's territory. These
are some of the results of the visit by the mission.

These developments give us good reason for
optimism, but I would agree with my colleagues that it
should be a very cautious optimism, because many
problems still persist.

As for the plans for DDRRR of the negative
forces and the plans for the total withdrawal of all
foreign forces adopted by the Political Committee,
many details remain to be worked out. It seems that the
countries of the region have now gathered sufficient
political will to advance the peace process. Still, it is
essential that they prove their will by taking the
necessary practical steps in the spirit of compromise.

The United Nations support for this process is, of
course, indispensable, but it is imperative that the
parties themselves realize that the process should be
carried out against the background of close contacts
and cooperation between themselves, in particular
between Presidents, specifically between President
Kabila and President Kagame. United Nations
assistance would be provided taking into account the
level of commitment demonstrated by the parties. We
call upon all the actors and all the parties to the conflict
to again revitalize their bilateral contacts to ensure the
necessary level of cooperation.

As was already noted by my colleagues, the issue
of safety and security of the civilian population in the
areas to be evacuated after the withdrawal of foreign
forces is becoming extremely critical. This is not an
easy and simple task. We believe that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should take
responsibility for establishing in those areas the
necessary civilian administration, including a police
presence.

As for the set of economic issues, we think that
one of the important results of the mission is the
reopening of the River Congo for commercial
navigation and the imminent arrival of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) riverine unit, which
will permit the re-establishment of links between
Kinshasa, Mbandaka and Kisangani. It will also have a
positive effect on confidence-building and on the
strengthening of a sense of national unity.

Among the most urgent issues to be resolved is
the problem of demilitarization of the city of
Kisangani, as was mentioned by many delegates. The
continuous presence of the armed elements of the
Rassemblement congolais pour la de'mocratie (RCD) is
a violation of Security Council resolution 1304 (2000).
We urge the RCD leaders to implement fully the
provisions of the disengagement plan and to withdraw
immediately from Kisangani.
Without delay, we believe there should be an end
to the looting of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is closely linked to
continuation of the conflict. We again call upon all the
countries concerned to cooperate with the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources as it continues its inquiries and completes its
final report.

Solving these and other important problems in
this context is absolutely indispensable in terms of the
Security Council's consideration of the concept of
phase III of the MONUC deployment. Phase III is all-
important for advancing the settlement process not only
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in
Burundi and in the region as a whole.

We believe that the Security Council should
closely watch how the arrangements made and the
results achieved are implemented, paying special
attention to the pace of their implementation and
ensuring the necessary follow-up actions. Thus, the
window of opportunity welcomed by all the parties of
the Lusaka peace process will, hopefully, open even
wider.

