Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me start by thanking Under Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing. We would like to emphasize that the issue of small arms and light weapons remains an important one for the African continent, as it exacerbates conflict situations and enables threats to international peace and security. We also thank Mr. Spleeters for his comprehensive briefing. South Africa supports the approach of the Security Council in including consideration of the issue of small arms and light weapons within the various United Nations peacekeeping mandates, as well as with regard to the imposition of arms embargoes. South Africa also welcomes and emphasizes the importance of supporting countries in implementing the provisions of resolution 2220 (2015). To that end, we commend the efforts of the Secretary-General in prioritizing disarmament that saves lives and his commitment to establish a trust facility in the form of the Saving Lives Entity, which is being established in conjunction with the Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations Development Programme and the Office for Disarmament Affairs. South A frica believes that support for peacebuilding efforts, especially those related to security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, are vital to curtailing the flow of illicit arms. Effectively combating the illicit flow of arms is also critical to efforts to create a better enabling environment for the protection of civilians by United Nations peacekeepers. South Africa supports the need to address the linkages between curtailing the illicit flow of small arms and light weapons and the women and peace and security agenda, particularly with regard to the development of national action plans, security sector reform and the broader peacebuilding and policy spheres. In that regard, we support the Secretary- General's call for the Security Council to consider how women can be actively engaged in efforts to prevent the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. The African Union Peace and Security Council has also been seized of the issue of the illicit proliferation, circulation and trafficking in small arms and light weapons on the African continent at both regional and subregional levels, as Mrs. Nakamitsu ably informed us. The Peace and Security Council has reaffirmed that the elimination of the threat posed by the illicit transfer, circulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons is a critical component of realizing the goals of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative and Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU). The Peace and Security Council requires AU member States to enact appropriate regulations and administrative procedures to ensure effective control over the production, export, import, transit or retransfer of small arms and light weapons, as well as related brokering activities, in order to prevent the illegal manufacture of, and illicit trafficking in, small arms and light weapons or their diversion to unauthorized actors. Those steps are required to curb the illicit flow of arms on the African continent. South A frica's National Conventional Arms Control Act is the cornerstone of the country's conventional arms control legislation and contains specific guiding principles and criteria to be considered when arms transfer applications are assessed. Those provisions include the principle of adherence to international law, norms and practices and the international obligations and commitments of the Republic of South Africa, including Security Council arms embargoes. South Africa will therefore continue to take the necessary steps to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
