Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/189), and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and Ms. Samar for their briefings this morning.

We reject the baseless allegations made against
us by Afghanistan's representative this morning. His
Government would do better to deal with its vast
challenges than to externalize internal problems. The
Government of Afghanistan [NOTE: speaker said
"Pakistan" but appears to have meant "Afghanistan" has
consumed hundreds of billions of dollars of international
assistance, and what it has to show for it is reflected
in the Secretary-General's report. The report observes
that there has been no significant improvement in the
political, security or economic situation in Afghanistan;
attacks by insurgent groups have intensified; economic
opportunity remains absent; the reconciliation process
has stalled; and the confluence of these factors has
magnified the suffering of the people of Afghanistan
and threatens regional peace and security. It is indeed
threatening the peace and security of my own country.

Shifting the blame to my country will not help
the Afghan Government shroud its own failures. It is
Afghanistan that has failed to end its wars and internal
strife and, as a result, has undermined the security of
the entire region. This forum should not be misused for
gratuitous sermons; it should be utilized for problem-
solving and finding solutions. Peace in Afghanistan
is in Pakistan's own vital interest. It is one of my
Government's top priorities, but we wonder if this
aspiration is shared by some of our regional partners.

Pakistan has paid a staggering human and financial
cost for the conflict in Afghanistan, yet the resilience
of our proud people and the remarkable success of
our military and law-enforcement measures have
successfully broken the back of terrorist outfits. It
was only possible due to indiscriminate targeting of
all terrorist groups. But instead of cooperation and
appreciation and applying a similar squeeze on its side
of the border, we have heard complaints that our strong
action was pushing terrorists into Afghanistan. The
fact is that terrorists found safe haven in Aghanistan
because of conducive conditions and weak border
management. But instead of blaming Afghanistan,
Pakistan invited Afghanistan time and again to talk
about border management. We proposed a number of
border standard operating procedures two years ago.
They are still awaiting finalization.

Afghanistan's only response thus far has been
sheer indifference and in some cases facilitation of
the continued use of Afghan territory for launching
attacks in Pakistan, killing and maming hundreds of
innocent civilians, including women and children.
Yet we prefered restraint over escalation, cooperation
over confrontation and dialogue over conflict. And we
have been exercising maximum restraint in the face
of provocations by terrorists from across the Pakistan
border. We were forced to close our border temporarily to
secure our territory from the terrorists who reorganized
in Afghanistan and launched terrorism against us.
Yet, on purely humanitarian grounds, we reopened
the border temporarily, risking our own security to
alleviate the sufferings of the Afghan people.

There are multiple factors, both military and
non-military, that have contributed to the existing
stalemate in Afghanistan. Singling out Pakistan and
pinning the blame on it for everything that goes wrong
in Afghanistan is neither fair nor accurate. Pakistan
has consistently called for a negotiated settlement
in Afghanistan, but such a settlement remains the
responsibility of the parties to the conflict. There has
been strong international consensus supporting this
solution. We engaged sincerely in the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, which as a mechanism can still
be utilized, but we should remembered who sabotaged
this process not once but twice. Therefore, if one wants
to blame someone for not being sincere, it is definitely
not us.

Pakistan remains fully committed to voluntary
repatriation of Afghan refugees. Today, as countries
close their borders to refugees, the international
community, and in particular Afghanistan itself,
should be able to fathom the depths of our generosity in
hosting more than 3 million Afghan refugees for almost
40 years.

Last week in Islamabad, Pakistan hosted the
thirteenth Summit of the Economic Cooperation
Organization in a reiteration of our commitment to
a peaceful neighbourhood. In Islamabad we jointly
recommitted to transforming the region into a zone of
peace and collective prosperity, and to facing regional
challenges, including terrorism and drug-trafficking,
together. One Belt, One Road is an example of other
such initiatives that can have positive effects on
promoting development and prosperity, and therefore
peace, in the region. Pakistan remains committed to
those ideals, and we hope that our partners will share
in them with the same zeal. We can make the region
a centre of peace, progress and prosperity, but we can
only do it together.

