Mr. Lubbers: In the last round of statements, the
representative of Cameroon brought up three points,
the first relating to what I would call the rather tragic
decision that we had to take in relation to the office in
Cameroon. I promised his compatriots that we would
take a fresh look at that, because it was based very
much on an absolute shortage of funds. I have
promised to look into the situation.

Secondly, I confirm, indeed - we spoke earlier
about this 4 that very serious, even criminal, acts took
place in Nairobi related to resettlement. We went to the
judiciary and the overseers, as well as the competent
authorities in Kenya. Beyond that, of course, we have
our own responsibilities to take the measures needed
and to improve the system.

The third question asked by the representative of
Cameroon related to Afghanistan. His point was also
put forward by others - for example by the
representative of Mauritius. I will try to be brief in
explaining what developed. As soon as the situation in
Afghanistan changed to the extent that one could begin
managed remigration, we made ourselves available to
do that job, because our mandate is not only to provide
protection and assistance to refugees, but to find
solutions for them. That is the first point.

Before we started to do that, we had been asked
by the United Nations system 4 via the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs 4 to take care of internally displaced persons
in the eastern part of Afghanistan. This was a relatively
new flow of internally displaced persons resulting from
the air attacks on cities in the eastern part of
Afghanistan. People had to flee, but the borders were
closed, so they went to the countryside and hills, and
we were asked to go there. We were able to do so
because, since we were preparing ourselves for a larger
outflow, we had available the logistics and the material
requirements. So that was the first phase.

The next step related to what to do with the
internally displaced persons who wanted to go home.
We came to the conclusion that in terms of repatriation,
it had to be a seamless operation. In the villages to
which the people were going - which we had to
prepare for people to return - we could not make a
distinction based on whether someone was a refugee
from outside the country or an internally displaced
person. So we did that together. I came to the point of
view, of course, that, in situations of partnership, if the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) had a
capacity and used it for internally displaced persons in
the western part of the country, while the Red Cross
was being very positive in assisting internally
displaced persons in, for example, the northern part of
the country, it would be rather stupid if we did not
make use of those capacities. So our plan for
repatriation is to work together with them, while
continuing to give assistance to refugees remaining in
the surrounding countries and to internally displaced
persons who have still not returned home.

So it is a partnership operation. Perhaps the
simplest way to describe our role is to use the term
"lead agency". We cannot do it ourselves, though; we
have to do it in partnership. By the way, what I said
makes it clear: this is not only partnership within the
United Nations system; it is also partnership beyond
the United Nations system. I mentioned IOM; I
mentioned the Red Cross. I could mention relevant
non-governmental organizations as well. But it is, of
course, very important for the new Interim
Administration in Kabul that there be one address. So
we sit there at the table and invite the others, and we
share our insights and compare notes and numbers on
what has to be done. We profile the people and
determine what sort of capacities they have, and
discuss what it means to bring people back.

That is the way we approach it. And - in
response to one of the other questions 4 as far as I can
see, there are no problems with that. The system still
has to be formalized. The Council will hear about that,
of course, from the Secretary-General and Lakhdar
Brahimi 4 whose deputy, Mr. Fisher, has been chosen.
I have full trust in him. He will look into the
cooperation that is also needed with development
agencies, so that when we have, as it were, done our
job, we can hand it over with trust and confidence. So
he is responsible. We speak to him about not only our
efforts, undertaken together with others, in the process
of assisting returnees but, later on, development and
reconstruction efforts, as put on the table first in
Tokyo. As the Council knows, the Interim
Administration itself said, "It's fine; it's nice. But
please, we are now the Interim Administration. Give us
time to have a look ourselves". So our people
discipline themselves to go to the Minister. I think that
that is good. It is still an interim Administration, but
we consider it to be in charge of governance for the
Afghans today.

So those are a few elements of the inclusive way
in which we approach this matter 4 in partnership
with others. It is very clear, too, that there has to be one
address with which the Minister for Repatriation can
link up. We do this in the United Nations under the
leadership of Lakhdar Brahimi, with his deputy for this
segment, Mr. Fisher, who is dealing with returnees and
reconstruction. That is the additional information on
Afghanistan.

The representative of Bulgaria reflected once
again on Macedonia. I am a bit jealous: my instructions
have always been to speak of "the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia", but he can allow himself to
speak about "Macedonia". However, we are speaking
of the same people.

We are very aware that the very generous
Macedonians received an enormous influx of
Albanians from Kosovo when the Albanians were in
danger. These refugees have now returned to Kosovo.
We now ask our Albanian friends to behave in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to give
the Macedonians who were obliged to flee a number of
villages every opportunity to return. This forms part of
our confidence-building strategy. At the same time, we
find it gratifying that the Government and political
parties of Macedonia have agreed to a system in which
there are also full rights for Albanians, some of whom
are already citizens or will soon obtain citizenship.
That is a different story, but it is important that this
coexistence be strengthened further, and we at UNHCR
are there to do a job of confidence-building. I am
positive that this is going to be a success.

The representative of Mauritius pointed out the
need for an integrated approach and asked me about
Afghanistan. I have already answered the latter
question.

I now turn to you, Mr. President, in your capacity
as representative of Mexico. You very capably echoed
the main points of your colleagues here, and I am
prepared to answer you more thoroughly in a note
concerning what is needed in order to go forward in
our strategy.
I should like to thank you, Sir, in your capacities
as representative of Mexico and President of the
Council, and all of your colleagues here as well. I am
aware that I took too much of the Council's time, but I
think the 21 million people who are my concern
deserve it.

