Mr. Wapakhabulo (Uganda): It is both a
pleasure and an honour for me to address the Security
Council on the addendum to the report of the United
Nations Panel on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I am particularly happy to see you, Mr.
President, from the sister African Republic of Mali,
presiding over the Security Council in its search for
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. I can
assure you of Uganda's continued commitment to full
cooperation so as to enable you and the Council to
attain these very noble goals.

Allow me also to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Patricia Durrant, Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, and to thank her for the
excellent manner in which she guided the work of the
Council in November. Uganda was touched by the fact
that The Right Honourable P. J. Patterson, Prime
Minister of Jamaica, personally presided over the
Security Council meeting with the Political Committee
of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 9 November 2001. That was
a clear testimony that Jamaica truly has a special
affinity for the plight of Africa and the search for
durable peace in the Great Lakes region.

I particularly welcome the presence also of the
Assistant Secretary-General at this very important
meeting on the Great Lakes region. His presence
confirms the importance the Secretary-General and the
Security Council attach to addressing the political
crisis and the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as to bringing stability to the Great Lakes region.

My Government welcomes the release of the
addendum to the report of the United Nations Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resource
and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. My delegation is particularly gratified
that the Security Council has afforded us the
opportunity to respond to the addendum report of the
Panel, which was chaired by Ambassador Kassem of
Egypt.

It is my wish to formally present to the Council
the Government of Uganda's response to the addendum
to the report of the United Nations Panel on the Illegal
Exploitation of the Natural Resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That response has
already been circulated. The response covers Uganda's
observations on the addendum to the report, responds

Sll'V.4437

 

to the allegations regarding the involvement of
Ugandan individuals and private companies and
outlines Uganda's views on the way forward and the
need to focus on the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. I wish, therefore, to utilize the
short time available to highlight the key elements of
this response.

The Council will recall that in early 2000,
Uganda, and President Yoweri Museveni personally,
supported the proposal to establish a panel of experts
to investigate allegations of illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since then, Uganda has extended maximum
cooperation to the two investigative United Nations
Panels of Experts that Visited Kampala in November
2000 and August 2001.

In compliance with the request made by the
Security Council, Uganda established, under legal
notice 5/2001, dated 25 May 2001, an independent
judicial Commission of Inquiry into the allegations
against Uganda of illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
under the chairmanship of Justice Porter, a
distinguished Judge from the United Kingdom. I
should point out that under the Commission of Inquiry
Act of 1914 - which was put in place in 1914, not by
us but by our bosses then - the Porter Commission
has the powers of the High Court of Uganda, including
the power to summon witnesses, compel production of
documents and cause police, as servants of the
Commission, to search premises. The Commission also
has powers to mete out punishment for contempt and
perjury. Indeed, the witnesses that have appeared
before the Porter Commission include President
Museveni, top Ugandan People's Defence Force
(UPDF) officers, senior Government officers and
various executives of private companies. A number of
rebel leaders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other Congolese have also given sworn evidence to
the Porter Commission on a voluntary basis. The Porter
Commission published its interim report in document
S/2001/1080. Its mandate has been extended to
February 2002 to allow for any new corroborative
evidence that Ambassador Kassem's team may be able
to share with Justice Porter.

Consistent with our position on the principle of
investigation of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Government of Uganda is committed to the

implementation of the recommendations of the Porter
Commission. We are convinced that, in the interest of
resolving the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and promoting peace in the region, all the
activities of the parties involved in that country should
be above board.

I would like to make a few comments on the
addendum report. I will start with the positive
improvements in that report, as Uganda sees it.

Uganda has carefully studied the addendum to the
report. We believe that the Kassem report reflects a
more balanced approach to, and an improved analysis
of, the political crisis and the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The addendum covers all parties involved in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
transit and destination countries for the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We think that this is very positive.

We note that the addendum acknowledges the
fundamental reasons for Uganda's involvement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It recognizes
Uganda's legitimate security interests relating to the
threat from terrorist groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which include the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), West Nile Bank Front, the Uganda
National Rescue Front II and the more recently created
People's Redemption Army. The addendum also
recognizes the fact that the intervention by Uganda in
pursuit of the perpetrators of terrorist activities
followed the signing of a bilateral protocol on security
between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in Kinshasa in April 1998.

The Government of Uganda notes with
satisfaction and appreciation that since 5 December
2001 the ADF and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
have been placed on the list of terrorist organizations
by a number of countries, including the United States
of America and the United Kingdom. Indeed, this is a
confirmation of what the Uganda Government has been
saying all along. We sincerely hope that countries
which have been praising the ADF and LRA as
freedom fighters will now reconsider their support for
these terrorist organizations and join the efforts to
build peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region.
The addendum confirms that neither the Uganda
Government nor any of its companies are involved in
the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the

S/l'VA437

 

Democratic Republic of the Congo. The addendum
clearly shows, for example, that the Dara Forest case
study, which was central to the old United Nations
Panel's allegation of Uganda's systematic and systemic
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was based on false
evidence. The reconstituted Panel was able to establish
that Dara Forest is not a Ugandan-Thai company but a
Kinshasa registered Congolese-Thai logging company;
that President Museveni and his family members are
not shareholders in the company; and that the
Department of Forestry in Kampala was never involved
in the falsification of timber certificates to export
timber said to be of Ugandan origin when, in fact, it is
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Another positive part of the addendum is that it
recognizes Uganda's compliance with, and
commitment to, the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and decisions. It specifically reflects the
fact that Uganda has withdrawn 12 of the 14 UPDF
battalions it had sent to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It also appreciates that Uganda is the only
country which has complied with the request of the
Security Council by establishing an independent
judicial Commission of Inquiry on the allegations of
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I wish to reiterate my call to the Security Council
of 9 November 2001 for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) to deploy adequate forces in
Buta and Bunia to enable the immediate withdrawal of
the two remaining UPDF battalions from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The UPDF would
remain only on the western slopes on the Rwenzori
Mountains on the border. In this context, I wish to
inform the Council that MONUC officials recently
visited Uganda - they met with me personally - and
that the MONUC office in Kampala is currently
working with Uganda's Ministry of Defence to finalize
compilation of the required technical information for
implementation of paragraph 12 (i) of Security Council
resolution 1376 (2001).

The reconstituted Panel makes two very
significant and pertinent points. First, the fundamental
reason for the continuing exploitation by various
States, business mafias and individuals is the vacuum
created by the effective collapse of all State institutions

and structures of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Secondly, the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and the start of rebuilding State
institutions under a new political dispensation is the
only viable way to guard against the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

It is also significant to note that this collapse of
State structures explains why the Democratic Republic
of the Congo territory has served as a base for the
various terrorist groups against Uganda and other
regional neighbours. In our View, this is the main cause
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We have some areas of concern with regard to the
addendum. We are concerned about a number of very
serious allegations, errors, omissions and weaknesses
in the analysis contained in the addendum to the
Panels' report.

There are, for example, persistent allegations
without corroborative evidence. The Panel alleges that,
in spite of the significant withdrawal of Uganda troops
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, some
senior officers continue to have networks for illegal
exploitation of natural resources in that country. The
Government of Uganda views this as a serious
allegation. We hope that the Panel will be able to share
corroborated evidence and key materials with Justice
Porter so as to prove the existence of such networks by
senior UPDF officers. I have spoken to Ambassador
Kassem and expressed this concern in person. I wish to
reiterate the commitment of the Government of Uganda
to implementing the recommendations of the Porter
Commission.

It is important to point out that evidence was
given to the United Nations Panel to demonstrate that
UPDF is a disciplined force, both in its track record
and the administrative codes. The UPDF is governed
by a code of conduct and is subject to the law and other
relevant conventions. The statute under which it
operates and the attached regulations and standing
orders constitute the military code of the UPDF under
which it is disciplined.

Our army is subject to parliamentary oversight of
its functions. Indeed, President Museveni sent out a
strict radio message in December 1998 instructing the
UPDF in the Democratic Republic of the Congo not to
engage in business. The President also instructed the

Sll'V.4437

 

UPDF, however, to facilitate ordinary, private
businesspeople to do business there in order to
alleviate the supply of acute needs, such as medicine
and essential commodities. But, importantly, our
officers are subject to commissions of inquiry and are
tried under the law if they commit offences. For
example, a number of UPDF officers who deviated
while in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
since been tried and punished.

Uganda is thus concerned that the Panel makes an
oblique allegation that UPDF military culture condones
illegal activities. This is a very serious allegation
without corroborative evidence. Uganda, therefore,
hopes that corroborative evidence will be given to
substantiate or remove this allegation so that Justice
Porter can also get to the root of the matter.

There are some errors in the addendum. In
paragraph 48, the Panel alleges that, contrary to
evidence, the Uganda Government has denied transit of
timber from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through Uganda since 1998. This is not true. I think
that this allegation was either made as a technical error
or was based on false information. Uganda has always
stated that the transit of cargo to and from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken place
since time immemorial. Detailed data on transit goods
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 1993
to 2001 and copies of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo customs documentation were provided in
response to the United Nations Panel's questionnaire by
the Uganda Revenue Authority in August and
September 2001.

I also wish to point out that there is an agreement
establishing what is called the Transit Transport
Authority for the Northern Corridor, which was signed
in 1985 by Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Kenya. The mandate for
this Transit Transport Authority is to ensure efficient
flow of traffic between Bujumbura, Kigali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kampala, Nairobi
and the port of Mombasa -in other words, a
hinterland Mombasa port. A number of infrastructure
projects under this Authority are supported by the
World Bank, the European Union and other donor
agencies. At the fourteenth ministerial meeting of this
Northern Corridor, in Kampala on 23 November 2001,
Uganda reiterated its commitment to ensuring smooth
traffic flows through Uganda to strengthen regional
initiatives for infrastructure development and to

harmonize customs documentation and procedures
along that Corridor.

In paragraphs 28 and 44, the addendum refers to
the continued mining operations by UPDF of gold in
the Kilo-moto area and diamonds in the North
Kisangani area. The withdrawals of UPDF from North
Kisangani and Kilomoto which took place in May/June
2001 have been verified by MONUC. It is, therefore,
gross prejudice to allege that UPDF is still involved in
gold and diamond mining in areas it vacated six
months ago.

Mr. President, there is also what we consider a
serious omission. You will recall that in May 2001,
Uganda strongly objected to the old Panel's
unwarranted attack on the person of President
Museveni. As corroborated evidence contradicting the
DARA case study demonstrates, allegations by the old
Panel against President Museveni's family and the
Department of Forestry's involvement in illegal
exploitation were based on false information. That is
why we feel that it was a serious omission for the
addendum to ignore the need to acknowledge the fact
that a serious mistake had been made and that it was
unjustifiably damaging to the integrity of President
Museveni and the Forestry Department.

Uganda, therefore, supports the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Panel to address
outstanding issues relating to corroboration of
evidence, gross omissions and obvious technical errors.
In this connection, Uganda would like to request the
Security Council to seriously consider setting up a
mechanism that would encourage and enable the
United Nations Panel to share information with the
Porter Commission of Inquiry.

I will conclude with discussing the way forward.
There is the question of an international conference on
the Great Lakes. Uganda has welcomed the Panel's
proposal to convene an international conference on
peace and development in the Great Lakes region. We
believe, however, that such an international conference
should be held after the implementation of both the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement on Burundi. Convening an
international conference on the Great Lakes region
before the conclusion of the inter-Congolese dialogue
would definitely divert attention from the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. We are convinced that it should

S/l'V.4437

 

be the responsibility of the transitional government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to undertake the
formulation of a plan of action to rebuild State
institutions and to participate in international
conferences focused on the reconstruction and
development of the Great Lakes region.

Mention was made of a moratorium on a number
of key commodities. The panel recommends in
paragraph 156 that a moratorium should be declared
banning the purchase and importing of certain
products, including gold, coltan, diamonds, coffee and
timber originating in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While the desire to undertake such definitive
action to address the issue of illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo could be understandable, the Security Council
needs to move very cautiously on the issue of a
moratorium. A moratorium would definitely have the
effect of sanctions against the small farmers and artisan
miners in the Democratic Republic of the Congo who
earn their living and access to medicines and other
essential commodities through traditional cross-border
trade. It would also cripple the capacity of missionary
groups and other non-governmental organizations,
which are the only organized institutions to deliver
humanitarian services in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Let me make a small correction here on the
statement made by Minister Okitundu that Uganda
produces hardly any coffee. The biggest crime we have
in Uganda is that we produce too much coffee. Uganda
is the leading coffee producer on the African continent.
We complete only with cote d'Ivoire. Sometimes we
beat them, sometimes they beat us. But I can assure
you that we are within the range of four or five million
bags a year, and we do so every year from our own
very fertile soil.

Secondly, I know that Uganda has been hit by
HIV/AIDS, but we are definitely one country that has,
through concerted action, reduced our rate of
replication from 30 per cent to 6 per cent, and, as we
speak it is still falling. Hence, we should not be
condemned for something over which we had no
control, but at least we have tried to assert control.

On the question of renegotiation of concessions
that is recommended by the Panel, in our View, these
should be negotiated under the auspices of the Security
Council. However, in our view this would be putting

the cart before the horse. We feel that the transitional
government that will be established as a result of the
inter-Congolese dialogue should have the sovereign
responsibility to handle all matters relating to the
review of contractual obligations, regulation of
revenues from the country's resources and the
formulation of a plan of action for rebuilding the
country's institutions and structures.

We think that there should be a focus on the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
We strongly agree with the Kassem Panel that it is the
urgent implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the creation of institutions of a viable
State under the new political dispensation that can
guarantee against the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The successful implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement will, first, put in place a transitional
government to ensure the rebuilding of the collapsed
State and its institutions and fill the vacuum created by
the absence of authority to regulate the exploitation of
the country's wealth. Secondly, it will address the
security concerns generated by the presence of armed
terrorist groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to destabilize her neighbours.

In our view the Security Council should stay
focused on playing a leadership role in ensuring
accelerated disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement or reintegration of the negative forces
based in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
successful outcome of the inter-Congolese dialogue
scheduled to start in South Africa in January next year.
In this context, Uganda feels that a summit meeting
between the Security Council and the Political
Committee should be convened early next year to
ensure sustained momentum for the inter-Congolese
dialogue and to agree on an enforceable timetable for
the establishment of a transitional government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, any
specific measures by the Security Council should, in
our View, be focused on creating incentives for all
parties to implement the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

