Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
should like to offer a particular word of thanks to the
Secretary-General. The United States joins other
Council members in reiterating our strong support for
him and his good offices mission, as well as for his
Special Adviser, Ibrahim Gambari. We appreciate the
Secretary-General's briefing today. We are especially
grateful that he was able to convey critical messages
directly to the Burmese Government. We also
appreciate the presence today of the Permanent
Representative of Burma. We hope that the Burmese
Government will implement all of the Secretary-
General's recommendations.

We note that the Secretary-General was able to
meet with Senior General Than Shwe, several members
of the National League for Democracy's central
executive committee and representatives of other
registered political parties. But we are very
disappointed that Burmese authorities refused the
Secretary-General's request to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. By turning down that simple,
straightforward request, the Burmese Government
missed a critical opportunity, in the words of the
Secretary-General, to show its commitment to a new
era of political openness.

We await the regime's response to the important
challenges that the Secretary-General presented to it
during his visit. If the authorities fail to credibly
address those challenges, they will miss yet another
chance to make meaningful progress on concerns
repeatedly uttered by the Council. The path the
authorities are pursuing leads to neither democracy nor
stability. It is the Burmese people who will suffer
further if this opportunity to change course is not
taken.

As 2010 approaches, the Government has
repeatedly assured us that next year's elections will be
free and fair. But there can be no free and fair elections
while key leaders of Burma's democratic opposition,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and more than 2,000
other political prisoners, languish in Burma's prisons.
We do not seek to dictate Burma's political future. We
merely seek to ensure that the will of all the Burmese
people can be heard and respected.

The authorities are clearly not respecting that
popular will by putting the leader of the country's
democratic opposition on trial for spurious charges of
violating a house arrest that was illegitimate to begin
with. We are deeply concerned about those
proceedings. We call on the regime to cease its actions
against Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and to free her
immediately and unconditionally.

We are also troubled that the authorities continue
to resist addressing the grave human rights challenges
facing the country. For example, recent attacks by the
Burmese army and its proxies have forced more than
3,000 ethnic Karen to flee across the border into
Thailand. That violence against ethnic minorities
destabilizes the area around the international border
and raises a red flag about the Government's treatment
of Burma's ethnic groups. National reconciliation can
never be achieved so long as the army continues to
attack citizens of its own country. Such problems
cannot be resolved by imposing plans on the citizens of
Burma that lack democratic legitimacy. A democratic
transition to legitimate civilian rule can be achieved
only through genuine dialogue and a vision for the
future that is shared by all, including the democratic
opposition and all ethnic groups.

We welcome the progress that has been made in
the Ayeyarwaddy Delta after the devastation wrought
by Cyclone Nargis, and we recognize the crucial
contribution that the Tripartite Core Group has made to
facilitate that progress. We strongly support the
Secretary-General's request to grant outstanding visas
to humanitarian aid workers and to broaden
humanitarian support beyond the Delta. Advancement
towards democracy and stability cannot be made when
citizens are struggling to survive.

The Secretary-General has called for immediate
action from the Burmese Government to avoid more
wasted lives, lost opportunities and prolonged
isolation. We could not agree more. The Secretary-
General has noted that Burma cannot face its many
challenges alone. Burma's generals should understand
that those of us around this table are ready to help
Burma ensure its future stability and restore its past
prosperity. The international community has shown
that it is willing to help the people of Burma. Now it is
up to the Burmese authorities to show they are ready to
do the same.

The Burmese Government has called cooperation
with the United Nations the cornerstone of the
country's foreign policy. The Secretary-General echoed
this statement in his recent speech. Now is the time for
Burma to match its words with deeds. We strongly
encourage the authorities to seize this opportunity to
engage credibly with the international community.
When Burma demonstrates its willingness to respond
to the international community's demands and to
commit to genuine progress towards reform, the United
States stands ready to respond.

