Mr. Zerihoun: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to introduce the Secretary-
General's report on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country (UNIOGBIS)
(S/2013/26).

The progress report that is before the Security
Council provides an update on major developments in
the country and on the progress made by UNIOGBIS
in the implementation of its mandate. There have been
some political developments since the report was issued,
on 11 January, and I would like to take this opportunity
to update the Council on some of them. Following a
meeting of its Central Committee on 13 January, the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC) decided to sign the political transition
pact and the political agreement signed between
the junta and 17 political parties on 16 and 18 May.
Subsequently, on 17 January, the PAIGC and four
other political parties - the Democratic Alliance, the
Democratic Convergence Party, the New Democracy
Party and the United Social Democratic Party - also
signed those transitional instruments, which, it will
be recalled, they had rejected the previous May. Since
then, the PAIGC has appealed to the Transitional
President, Serifo Nhamadjo, and the international
community to rapidly facilitate the formation of an
inclusive transitional Government emanating from the
Parliament.

The signing should facilitate the Parliamentary
Commission's review of the political transition pact
and the political agreement, as well as the drafting of
a new transitional regime pact. It is also expected to
facilitate consensus on a transitional road map that
would, inter alia, clarify the revised modalities for the
transition, including its duration, as well as the timeline
for the presidential and legislative elections and the
voter registration system. It is also important for the
people of Guinea-Bissau to arrive at a consensus on
the remaining national priorities during the transition
and to create an environment conducive to peaceful
elections and long-term stability after the elections are
completed.

The Central Committee of the PAIGC, which
remains the major political party in Parliament, also
agreed on 13 January that the party's ordinary congress
should be convened in May 2013 to elect new leadership.
The former Executive Secretary of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), Mr. Domingos
Simoes Pereira, and the former Minister of Public
Administration and Civil Service in the deposed
Government, Mr. Aristides Ocante da Silva, have since
officially announced their candidatures. The deposed
Prime Minister, Mr. Carlos Gomes Junior, has also
hinted at his intention to run for leadership of the party.
Notwithstanding the positive efforts to ensure
inclusiveness in the transition process, impunity
remains a major problem. There is a general atmosphere
of fear within the population arising from the recent
cases ofbeatings, torture and intimidation that continue
to restrict freedom of assembly and of information. So
far, none of the individuals involved in the killings and
beatings that followed the attack on the Bissalanca air
force base in Bissau on 21 October have been brought to
justice, although investigations into the alleged counter-
coup have reportedly been concluded and submitted to
the Military Court. Visits by UNIOGBIS to prisons and
detention centres have confirmed inadequate detention
conditions and detainees' lack of access to medical care,
food and water. The mission has advised the Ministry
of Justice of the situation.

At the regional level, following their extraordinary
summit on 19 January in Abidjan, the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) expressed their commitment
to accompanying Guinea-Bissau in accomplishing
the tasks of the transition process, including urgent
multisectoral reforms and the holding of inclusive,
free, fair and transparent elections in the course of the
transition. They directed the President of the ECOWAS
Commission to take all the appropriate measures to
expedite action to commence the implementation of
the defence and security sector reform programme.
They also reiterated their call on the African Union
to urgently consider the recognition of the ongoing
transition and the lifting of sanctions against Guinea-
Bissau, and urged the United Nations, the CPLP, the
European Union (EU) and other international partners
to resume cooperation with Guinea-Bissau and support
efforts aimed at ensuring a more inclusive transition in
the country.

Council members will recall that a joint African
Union-CPLP-ECOWAS-EU-United Nations assessment
mission visited Bissau between 16 and 21 December.
At a consultative meeting on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau held in Addis Ababa on 26 January, on the
margins of the African Union Summit, senior officials
representing the five organizations agreed that the
report of the mission should be submitted to the
relevant organs of their respective organizations, in
order to promote convergence in their appreciation
of the progress made, and to enhance prospects for
coordinated contributions to the resolution of the
crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The Secretary-General looks
forward to receiving the mission's recommendations,
and the United Nations stands ready to cooperate with
its partners in implementing initiatives conducive
to sustainable solutions to the crisis, consistent with
international standards and principles.

The new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS,
Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, will arrive in Bissau to assume
his duties in the next few days. He has commenced
consultations with the relevant international
stakeholders, including the CPLP and ECOWAS
member States. The conclusions of the review exercise
being carried out by the United Nations family to help
address the key drivers of instability in Guinea-Bissau
will inform the work of the new Special Representative
as he continues his consultations with national and
international stakeholders. As recommended by
the Secretary-General in his report to the Council,
Mr. Ramos-Horta will also conduct an assessment of
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and, together with the
United Nations country team and other relevant actors,
will formulate proposals for the mandate of UNIOGBIS.
That exercise should be finalized by the completion of
the three-month extension of UNIOGBIS's mandate
requested by the Secretary-General.

The continued lack of civilian control and oversight
over the defence and security forces and the continuing
attempts by some politicians to manipulate the military
for sectarian benefit remain matters of grave concern.
They hamper the effective functioning of State
institutions and highlight the urgent need to radically
change the way in which politics is conducted in the
country, as well as the imperative need for fundamental
reform of the defence, security and judicial sectors.

Moving forward, stakeholders must make progress,
through the Parliamentary Commission, on developing
consensus on a national road map for the transition. That
should entail the formation of an inclusive transitional
Government and the steps necessary to ensure a
peaceful transition, fair and transparent presidential
and legislative elections and stability during the post-
election period. Progress will further depend on the
sustained political will of national stakeholders and
a spirit of compromise and genuine inclusion. The
finalization of such a road map will undoubtedly
encourage international partners to support national
efforts.

While the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau through credible elections remains the
key priority for the country, it is also essential that
the international community support efforts aimed
at combating impunity during the transition period
and in the medium and longer terms if stability is to
be sustainable. UNIOGBIS and its leadership are
committed to assisting Guinea-Bissau both in those
efforts and in the long-term reconciliation process.

In support of national efforts to address the key
drivers of instability, the United Nations system has
initiated a review of its work in the country with the
aim of realigning its interventions in the areas of
State-building and peacebuilding. That exercise will
be informed by the final recommendations of the joint
AU-CPLP-ECOWAS-EU-United Nations assessment
mission, especially with respect to the implementation
of security sector reform, the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime, and addressing
impunity, human rights violations and the deteriorating
socioeconomic situation.

The joint assessment mission has facilitated the
way for Guinea-Bissau's regional and international
partners to enhance mutual cooperation and to work
together in support of the country's stability. It is our
hope that that momentum will yield positive results
as the international community pursues its efforts to
contribute to the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau, the promotion of inclusive dialogue
and civilian oversight of the security and defence
institutions, as well as the functioning of legitimate
State institutions and an end to impunity. Only then can
Guinea-Bissau have an opportunity to reverse decades
of instability, unconstitutional change of Government,
gross human rights abuses and impunity - and
hopefully usher in a new era where there will be respect
for the rule of law and for human and political rights,
as well as opportunities for social and economic
development.

