Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
for his briefing and to welcome Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin to our meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.

The Bonn Conference on 5 December was a
significant international event in Afghanistan's current
period of transition. Its results were positive and
decided that at the conclusion of transition in 2014,
Afghanistan would enter the Transformation Decade of
2015-2024 and the international community would
continue to help and support it. We welcome that
decision.

Achieving comprehensive stability and
reconstruction in Afghanistan is a long-term process
that will require the unremitting efforts of the Afghan
people and their Government, as well as the continued
support and help of the international community. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize the following
five points.

First, China supports the peaceful reconstruction
of an Afghanistan run and owned by Afghans.
Afghanistan's gradual takeover of the responsibility for
maintaining national security conforms to that
principle. However, when drawing down troops, the
parties concerned must ensure Afghanistan's security
and proceed responsibly, while making efforts to help
Afghanistan build capacity in the security area.

Secondly, China supports the peace and
reintegration process led by the Afghan Government.
We welcome the decision of the Loya Jirga in that
regard, and hope that Afghanistan will continue to
work towards promoting national reconciliation and
creating an environment favourable to it, in order to
make progress with the peace and reintegration
programme.

Thirdly, China supports Afghanistan in
continuing with the Kabul process. The international
community's efforts to improve the security situation
in Afghanistan and the living standards of the Afghan
people should complement each other. The parties
concerned should effectively fulfil their commitment to
assisting Afghanistan, support the country in
developing its economy and enhance its capacity for
sustainable development.
Fourthly, China firmly supports Afghanistan's
developing external relations on the basis of mutual
respect, equality and mutual benefit, especially in
strengthening good-neighbourly relations with
countries of its region. Relevant regional cooperation
initiatives should fully respect the sovereignty and
autonomy of Afghanistan, involve the wide
participation of countries of its region, respect the
legitimate concerns of such countries and proceed on
the basis of agreements reached after full consultations
among all sides.

Fifthly, China appreciates the positive efforts
made by the United Nations to advance the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We hope that the review
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will help to
strengthen the central role of the United Nations in
coordinating the efforts of the international community
to assist Afghanistan. In the review process, we hope
that the United Nations will strengthen coordination
with Afghanistan and listen to and respect its views.

China wishes to express its appreciation and
gratitude to Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his outstanding
work as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

China has been committed to the development of
a good-neighbourly relationship with Afghanistan. We
attach importance to and take an active part in Afghan
reconstruction. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Yang Jiechi, led the Chinese delegation to the
Bonn Conference, where he comprehensively
elaborated on China's views and proposals regarding
the situation in the country and announced an
additional ¥150 million in gratis assistance to
Afghanistan. We will continue to provide help to
Afghanistan as our capacities permit, and we are
willing to work together with the international
community to contribute to the early realization of
peace, stability and development of the country.

