Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): The South African
Government has joined the international community in
expressing its outrage at and condemnation of the
assassination of Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi, the leader of
Hamas, in Gaza on Saturday, 17 April 2004. This
extrajudicial execution, which stands in direct
contravention of international law and relevant United
Nations conventions, is only the latest in the series of
provocations committed by the occupying Power
against the Palestinian people. As such, it serves to
further fuel the cycle of violence and counter-violence
in the Middle East.

Less than a month ago, the Security Council
convened to discuss the assassination of Sheikh Yassin,
the spiritual leader of Hamas. We meet again today
with peace more elusive than ever and call once again
on the Security Council to intervene in the Middle
East. Otherwise, the Security Council may be seen to
be sending a disturbing message that it may tolerate
extrajudicial killings and other violent actions that are
in direct contravention of international law and
relevant United Nations conventions.

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's recently
announced unilateral disengagement plan would also
weaken any possibility of a negotiated settlement of the
conflict because it would fundamentally compromise
the inherent rights of the Palestinian people. The
withdrawal from Gaza, welcome as it may be, cannot
be linked to issues such as the right of Palestinian
refugees to return home and the status of settlements in
the West Bank.

The South African Government reiterates its
condemnation of suicide bombings, extrajudicial
executions, collective punishment and all other forms
of violence in the Middle East. We do not believe that
the vision of a two-State solution can be achieved
through violence or that the aspirations of an occupied
people to freedom can be suppressed through coercive
measures and intimidation. We therefore call on the
United Nations, members of the Quartet and the
international community to ensure that Israel complies
with international law and that it ceases all activities
that are not conducive to creating a climate where
negotiations for a lasting peace can occur.

