Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia thanks Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs John Holmes for their
presentations this morning on this very important topic.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's recent report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643), which is an important and valuable tool
in our collective consideration of this issue.

The protection of civilians must remain an
essential objective for the Security Council in the
context of contemporary armed conflicts. The death
and displacement of innocent men, women and
children is an appalling aspect of all conflicts.
However, the deliberate targeting of civilians is a
particularly heinous aspect of so many contemporary
conflicts, including in Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Somalia and the Sudan.
Boys and girls recruited as child soldiers, civilians as
unwitting targets of suicide bombers, families
displaced from their homes, and sexual violence as a
deliberate weapon of war are all an offence to
humanity. The international community must condemn
those atrocities and recommit to defeating them in all
circumstances. Australia is committed to making every
effort to ensure that civilian life is protected and that
international humanitarian law and human rights law
are upheld.

Beyond our efforts to avoid those atrocities, the
international community must demand that parties to
conflict allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need. In
that regard, we welcome the strong mandates provided
by the Council to both the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad to ensure the freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel and to protect civilian
populations.

We must also do more to implement the principle
of the responsibility to protect, as endorsed at the 2005
World Summit. That was an important affirmation of
the responsibility of the international community to
take action to prevent large-scale gross human rights
abuses and genocide, and a clear and suitably
constrained statement on the limits of sovereignty.
Now we must develop a practical approach to
implement the responsibility to protect.

To that end, Australia will become a founding
donor of the new Global Centre for the Responsibility
to Protect. The Centre will build a worldwide research
network, develop strategy and help to coordinate
advocacy to identify, prevent or respond to
circumstances where populations are threatened. We
also welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
appoint Mr. Edward Luck as his special adviser for the
responsibility to protect.

Australia would like to reaffirm the Secretary-
General's call for Member States to cooperate fully
with the International Criminal Court (ICC). If we are
to ensure that the perpetrators of the world's most
egregious crimes are denied safe haven, we must step
up our collective efforts to promote the universality of
the Rome Statute. In that regard, Australia urges those
States which have not ratified or acceded to the Rome
Statute to do so.

The ICC plays a crucial role in ending impunity
for serious crimes. In January this year, the Court
confirmed charges of war crimes against Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo, a former Congolese militia leader. We
await his trial, the first ever before the Court, which is
due to start in March 2008.
Australia welcomes and commends the recent
action by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to surrender Germain Katanga to the ICC.
That provides a good example of the results that can be
achieved with the cooperation of the situation country.

Australia joins the international community in
calling upon the Government of the Sudan to cooperate
with the Court. In particular, we urge the Government
of the Sudan to take all steps necessary to arrest
Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs Ahmad
Harun and militia leader Ali Kushayb, and to transfer
them to the Court for trial.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his
report, a further key challenge is the need to eliminate
the unacceptable humanitarian impact of certain types
of cluster munitions. Explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded cluster munitions, pose a serious
humanitarian danger to civilians who must live among
them long after the end of armed conflict. Australia
welcomes the entry into force of Protocol V - which
deals with explosive remnants of war - of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.
Australia joined the Protocol earlier this year, and we
urge all States to join and implement this important
instrument as soon as possible.

Australia also recognizes the pressing need to
negotiate an international ban on those cluster
munitions that cause unacceptable harm to civilians. In
this regard, we are active and constructive participants
in the Oslo process and the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons. We believe that these
processes can be complementary, with the same aim of
negotiating a strong, viable instrument that includes the
major producers and users of cluster munitions and that
will make a real difference in protecting civilians in
post-conflict situations.

We must build on the Secretary-General's recent
report and maintain the momentum to keep these issues
at the front and centre of our work. Collectively, we
must ensure that populations at risk have access at all
times to the greatest protection possible, that
perpetrators of abuse are held accountable for their
actions and that advocacy, monitoring and capacity-
building deliver real results and make a positive
difference in people's lives. The Council, and indeed
the international community as a whole, will be judged
on our ability to protect the most vulnerable. It is a
challenge that we simply must meet.

