Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me thank you, Sir, for organizing this very important
debate and Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
important and impressive presentation. It was
impressive, if I may say so, in its general thrust and
important in particular in what you said about ongoing
conflict situations, such as that in Gaza and southern
Israel.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union later in this meeting. I
should like to make a number of specific points.

First of all, we have seen an increasing focus on
efforts to integrate protection concerns into
peacekeeping mandates, increased efforts to fight
impunity at the national and international levels, as
well as the acceptance of the responsibility to protect.
Those are developments in our debate that we
welcome.

The Secretary-General has rightly stated that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict must remain
an absolute priority. He called for more systematic
attention to protection concerns in the daily
deliberations of the Council. Austria therefore
welcomes the revised aide-memoire on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and would like to
commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its excellent work, which
represents a comprehensive tool of real practical
relevance to the work of the Council.
We further welcome the establishment of a
Security Council expert group on the protection of
civilians, which should permit the Council to receive
detailed information from humanitarian, human rights
and other experts. In a lessons-learned process, it
should also enable the Council to address specific
protection concerns in the establishment or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates.

The Security Council should further contribute to
strengthening the rule of law and international law by
supporting criminal justice mechanisms. Where
necessary, the Council should consider appropriate
measures to encourage or compel prosecution of those
responsible for international crimes, including referrals
to the International Criminal Court or other appropriate
accountability mechanisms. This is particularly true for
sexual and gender-based violence or serious violations
of child rights. In this area an accountability
mechanism similar to the one on recruitment and use of
child soldiers under resolution 1612 (2005) should be
considered. The Council has to send a clear message to
all parties to armed conflicts reminding them of their
obligations and condemning violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

With regard to the ongoing conflict in and around
Gaza, Austria calls upon all parties to fully abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
This includes the obligation by parties to an armed
conflict to refrain from targeting civilians, to facilitate
humanitarian operations and to allow rapid and
unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment
and personnel. One point that should be underlined
particularly these days is that the protection of
organizations and institutions providing humanitarian
assistance, as well as humanitarian workers, must be
ensured at all times. We agree with the Under-
Secretary-General that the incidents that have occurred
should be investigated, and we are happy that the
Secretary-General has made this one of the messages
of his current trip to the region.

We are also deeply concerned about conflict
situations such as those in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur, in
particular the deliberate targeting of civilians,
including through the use of sexual and gender-based
violence as a tactic of war aimed at destroying and
dehumanizing entire communities.
Austria strongly supports the strengthening of
protection mandates in peacekeeping operations. We
are aware of the challenges of peacekeeping operations
in implementing ambitious mandates on the ground.
We thank the Under-Secretary-General for his analysis
as to the challenges in this regard.

Important progress has already been made, as
demonstrated, for example, by the new mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
resolution 1856 (2008), which makes the protection of
civilians the key priority for the Mission. The United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) and the European Union military
operation in Chad and the Central African Republic
(EUFOR) may serve as a good example of peace
operations in support of humanitarian activities. In that
context, Austria attaches great importance to the
Secretary-General's upcoming report on protection of
civilians. Austria is also pleased to support the study
commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and OCHA, which will serve as a basis for
that review. At next week's Security Council debate on
peacekeeping operations we will have a chance to
discuss this issue in a broader context.

We also strongly agree with the Under-Secretary-
General's positive assessment of the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, signed by 95 States in December
2008. We join in his appeal to all States to sign and
ratify that Convention as soon as possible.

In closing, let me once again stress that the
Council needs to continue and further intensify its
work on the protection of those who are most
vulnerable in conflict situations: civilians, particularly
women and children. Austria will do everything it can
to move this matter forward during its tenure on the
Council.

