Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to warmly thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
and Mr. Sma'il Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for their important briefings.
France welcomes the close coordination between the
United Nations and the African Union on Darfur.

I would like join others in welcoming the turning
of an important page in the history of the Sudan. The
signing of the constitutional document on 17 August,
which the Council welcomed in a press statement
(SC/13927) and which defines the transitional
framework, was a significant step. We call on the
parties to respect the declaration in the same spirit of
compromise and reconciliation that prevailed when it
was signed.
France extends its wishes for success to the new
authorities, in particular the Prime Minister and the
Sovereign Council, in the essential tasks they will
have to fulfil - concluding a peace agreement with
the armed groups, organizing free and democratic
elections in 2022, reviving the economy and building
the rule of law. France reiterates its readiness to support
the Sudanese people in this new chapter of their history.

Francewelcomesthesuccessfulmediationconducted
by the African Union and the Ethiopian Prime Minister
and hopes that this diplomatic investment continues
with the ongoing mobilization of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the United Nations and all friends of the
Sudan, which is essential during this transitional phase.

The women and the young people of the Sudan have
been remarkable in their mobilization, initiative and
courage, sometimes even sacrificing their lives. They
have been the driving force behind this revolution. We
owe it to them to ensure that they are fully involved
in the transition. In that regard, we welcome the
constitutional document's quota of 40 per cent women
in the composition of the transitional legislative council.

Lastly, we all recall the victims, particularly those
who fell on 3 June. The crimes committed must not go
unpunished and their perpetrators must be prosecuted
and tried in accordance with the rule of law.

Secondly, in that context, we have an unprecedented
opportunity to build lasting peace in Darfur. One of the
major challenges of the transition will be to negotiate
a comprehensive peace agreement in Darfur. France
welcomes the commitment undertaken by the new
Sudanese authorities in the constitutional document to
resolving the conflict in Darfur within six months, and
we call on all armed groups and the new authorities to
commit in good faith to building that lasting peace.

We know that Darfur remains a fragile region.
Civilians continue to suffer from residual clashes in
Jebel Marra. Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are
regularly subject to abuses, including sexual violence.
In addition, the root causes of the conflict, including
access to land and the future ofthe 2 million IDPs, have
not been fully addressed.
Beyond that, I would like to recall the importance
of combating impunity in Darfur. Grave violations,
as well as against children, including sexual violence,
have been committed for a long time and continue
to be committed. All parties to the conflict have an
obligation to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court and its Prosecutor, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005).

Finally, it is time to engage in a dialogue with the
new authorities on the United Nations presence in the
Sudan. In June, we decided to suspend the withdrawal
process of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for four months (see S/PV.8566) because we had no reliable or internationally
recognized interlocutor. We also had real concerns
about the use of UNAMID camps, once transferred to
the Sudanese authorities.

We now have new legitimate and credible
authorities, with whom we can work, pending the
formation of a Government at the end of the month. We
need to have a frank and constructive dialogue with
them on the timetable and conditions for UNAMID's
withdrawal. It is imperative that we have the assurance
that transferred sites will be used for civilian purposes,
in accordance with the agreements concluded between
the United Nations and the Sudan.

The main question we must ask ourselves today
pertains to the presence of the United Nations after
UNAMID's departure. The political strategy of the
United Nations and the African Union on the follow-up
mechanism, which will be submitted to us in a month's
time, will be essential in that regard.

As Jean-Pierre Lacroix underscored, we are
entering the peacebuilding phase and we all know
the challenges that brings. France believes that we
must continue to support peace in Darfur after the
departure of the peacekeepers, as has been the case
in other countries. The country team will not be able
to do it all. We therefore support the establishment of
a special political mission, whose mandate would be
defined by taking fully into account the priorities of the
Sudanese people. The political mission could support
the implementation of the peace agreement, the return
of displaced persons and the resolution of land issues
and intercommunity conflicts, as well as the protection
of women and children. It could also continue to
strengthen the capacity of the administration and
security forces in Darfur.

We also support a substantial presence ofthe Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Darfur
following UNAMID's departure. After a peacekeeping
operation that will have lasted for more than a decade,
it is essential to ensure the continued support of the
United Nations to assist the country in the area of
human rights. We have that moral responsibility to the
people who live there.

