Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
public discussion of Darfur in recent weeks and months
has centred on three terms: hibernation, exit strategy
and non-cooperation. In each case, however, there is
a deeper story to tell, and with respect to all three the
discussion would benefit from a renewed focus on
those men, women and children in Darfur who have
suffered greatly from the fighting and violence. That
is especially noteworthy now, since the violence and
suffering are approaching levels that have not been
seen since 2004.

In December 2014, the Prosecutor announced that
she would hibernate investigative activities in Darfur.
We welcome her clarification that this does not mean
the end of her work on the situation in Darfur, but we
were and are alarmed that the Sudan's non-cooperation
has pushed her to such a point, and we must highlight,
in response to those who see this as in some way a
victory over the International Criminal Court, that,
as the Prosecutor also emphasizes in her report, arrest
warrants remain outstanding and prosecutors are
continuing to work on the cases as much as possible.
We think it is serious cause for concern and an affront
to the victims of atrocities in Darfur that the individuals
subject to outstanding arrest warrants related to the
Darfur situation remain at large.

We have also heard considerable discussion of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) exit strategy at a time when
we need a greater focus on conditions inside Darfur,
where the situation is deadly and deteriorating. The
reported events of the past year have been alarming.
Aerial bombardments, the number of which the
Prosecutor described as having significantly increased,
kill children and destroy hospitals and humanitarian
facilities; sexual violence is wielded against women
and girls with impunity, including, reportedly, in
Thabit, where an investigation into alleged mass rapes
remains incomplete, stymied by the Sudan's systematic
denial of independent access to UNAMID personnel.
Villages have been burned and communities" very
means of survival are destroyed. Increased fighting
among the armed groups and intercommunal violence
have driven the displacement of over 573,000 people
since the beginning of 2014.

The need for UNAMID, and the need for it to have
full and unfettered access to conduct its work, are more
acute than ever across all of Darfur, including in the
light of the Prosecutor's decision to hibernate her new
investigative work. It is important for UNAMID not
just to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian
work, but also to continue to document the ongoing
violations and abuses. That is reiterated in the latest
communique' of the African Union Peace and Security
Council of 22 June.

Finally, with regard to the issue of non-cooperation,
while members of the international community do
not see eye to eye on many aspects of the Darfur
crisis, we believe that there is abundant common
ground among the members of the Council on the
fact that States Members of the United Nations have
obligations under the Charter to accept and carry out
the Security Council's decisions. The Government of
the Sudan continues to disregard the Council's decision
in resolution 1593 (2005) that it must cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor. Surely we can agree that the
Council has an interest in ensuring compliance with its
own decisions. We continue to urge the international
community to ensure compliance by the Sudan with its
international obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).

The Council must also continue to focus on the need
for accountability in Darfur, because it was us who sent
peacekeepers into harm's way, and we owe them our
support. Attacks on peacekeepers in Darfur have killed

citizens ofNigeria, Mali, Senegal, Tanzania and Rwanda,
among others. Often lost in the debates about President
Al-Bashir is the fact that one of the areas of focus of
the International Criminal Court's investigations has
been the 2007 attack on the brave soldiers who served
in the African Union's peacekeeping mission there.
In the absence of any national proceedings in Darfur
to investigate and provide accountability for those
crimes, we must be able to come together and express
support for efforts to prosecute deliberate attacks on
peacekeepers - attacks that very much continue to
this day, as described in the Prosecutor's report. For
example, on 26 April, the Government of the Sudan
denied a flight request for the emergency medical
evacuation of an Ethiopian peacekeeper, injured while
performing his duties in Mukjar, Western Darfur.
The evacuation flight clearance was denied and the
peacekeeper died hours later.

Finally, in the light of recent events, I would like to
reiterate that the United States opposes invitations to
and facilitation of travel by those subject to outstanding
International Criminal Court arrest warrants related
to the situation in Darfur, and we are not alone in
stressing the continued need for accountability. Voices
from South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya have been clear
and unequivocal. It was a South African organization
that approached its own courts to seek enforcement of
the ICC arrest warrant. It was Nigerian activists who
discouraged a prolonged stay in their country, and it
was a Kenyan court that ruled that the Government
there must arrest Al-Bashir should he ever set foot
there.

All that said, the discussion of hibernation, exit
strategy and non-cooperation too often loses sight ofthe
men, women and children who have been suffering from
the ongoing conflict and violence in Darfur. It is their
plight that makes the need for accountability so acute,
and we must not turn our backs on them. The United
States will continue to work with the Security Council
and other partners in the international community to
promote an end to the Sudan's many conflicts, and a
just and sustainable peace.

