Mr. Benitez Versen (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have asked for the floor to respond to the statement
that has just been made by the representative of the
United States. Given that the Council's debate today
has been lengthy and at times intense, I shall be brief.

We understand that it is not pleasant for the
delegation of the United States for uncomfortable
truths about the behaviour of its Government to be
introduced in the Security Council. However, that
cannot prevent those truths from being stated and
repeated. It is to no avail for them to attempt
repeatedly to cover up the obvious. The reality evident
to everyone is that the Government of the United States
has gone to truly shameful extremes to protect the most
famous terrorist in the Western Hemisphere.

The decision to allow Posada Carriles to go free,
who continues to maintain contacts in Miami with
terrorist elements and the extreme right, is the clearest
illustration of the duplistic morality of the current
Government of the United States. It is also a complete
refutation of its supposed fight against terrorism. The
Government of the United States expects us passively
to accept its hypocritical call to do as it says and not as
it does.

The case of Luis Posada Carriles is undoubtedly
the best known example, but of course it is hardly the
only one. In Miami and other cities of the United
States, funds are provided and used to finance terrorist
activities with complete impunity. Bank accounts are
openly and regularly used to finance terrorism.
Terrorists are recruited, while weapons are purchased
and territory is provided to those who finance, plan and
commit terrorist acts against Cuba.

Cuba once again asks the Security Council to
assess the ample and detailed information provided by
our country and to take appropriate action. That would
contribute to the efforts to end the impunity enjoyed by
those who plan and commit terrorist activities against
Cuba from the territory of the United States. Cuba
hopes that justice will be done sooner rather than later.

