The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

After consultations among members of the Security

Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
2107 (2013) on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait and all its previous resolutions and
presidential statements addressing the issues
of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and the return of Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, and takes note of the reports of
the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
resolution 2107 (2013).

"The Security Council commends the ongoing
efforts by the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in the implementation of resolution
2107 (2013). The Security Council expresses its
full support for the Special Representative and
Head of UNAMI Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
for UNAMI Alice Walpole in their efforts to
resolve outstanding issues related to Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and the return of Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives, and urges
them to continue engagement on these issues.
The Security Council expresses deep gratitude
to former UNAMI Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his tireless efforts
to fully implement resolution 2107 (2013).

The Security Council welcomes the strong
bilateral relations between Iraq and Kuwait and
commends the Government of Kuwait's continued
support for Iraq in its efforts to achieve stability,
and welcomes Iraq's efforts to fulfil all remaining
obligations in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
ongoing cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait in
the search of missing Kuwaiti and third-country

nationals, and the positive efforts by the Iraqi
Ministry of Defence on this important humanitarian
endeavour, and encourages the Iraqi Government
to continue with these efforts in the same
constructive vein and to ensure that all appropriate
institutional, financial and technical support is
made available to facilitate future activities, and
further encourages the international community
to provide the necessary advanced and innovative
technical equipment to Iraqi authorities to assist
in identifying burial locations in accordance with
best practices.

"The Security Council shared the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his reports
that ascertaining the fate of missing persons and
providing answers to their grieving families
depend on steadfast commitment, action and the
adoption of new and innovative ways to push the
issue forward.

'The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the perseverance of the members
of the Tripartite Mechanism and its Chair, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
in their effort to locate the remains of the missing
persons. The Security Council notes the latest
meeting of the Technical Subcommittee of the
Tripartite Mechanism on 11 December 2018 and
the Tripartite Commission on 13 December, and
welcomes in this regard the additional information
provided to the ICRC by France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and the United States of America that might help
to identify potential burial locations, as well as the
formal adoption by the Technical Subcommittee
of the ICRC's Review Project Report, as an
important contribution towards progress on the
issue. The Security Council encourages the two
countries, consistent with resolution 2107 (2013),
to collaborate closely through the Tripartite
Mechanism to achieve further concrete results.

"The Security Council notes with regret that
there remain 369 cases of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals still unresolved and that
no human remains have been exhumed since
2004. The Council reiterates its deepest sympathy
to the families of the missing and expresses its
condolences for the lives lost.
"The Security Council welcomes the sustained
commitment of the Government of Iraq to returning
all remaining Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, and acknowledges the important
steps taken recently by the Governments of Iraq
and Kuwait to reinvigorate this file and welcomes
in particular the handing over of a consignment of
Kuwaiti property by His Excellency Mr. Barham
Salih, President of the Republic of Iraq, during his
recent visit to Kuwait on 11 November 2018 to meet
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, the Amir of the State of Kuwait.

"The Security Council encourages the Iraqi
Government to continue its search for the missing
property, in particular to reinvigorate its search for
the missing Kuwaiti national archives.

"The Security Council expresses its intention
to remain engaged on these important issues."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2019/1.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

