The President: I thank Ambassador Wronecka for
her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I thank Special Representative Shearer and
Ambassador Wronecka for their briefings. Allow me to
congratulate Ambassador Wronecka and her team for
their leadership of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan,
over the past two years. Their expertise and dedication
have been a great help to the Security Council.

As I have said before, this month is about a clear-
eyed assessment of Security Council portfolios.
Let me therefore be clear: the United States and the
international community are losing confidence that
South Sudan's leaders have the will to guide their
country to genuine peace and security. We are losing
confidence that they share the best interests of their
people, who are calling for peace amid a devastating
conflict-induced humanitarian crisis.

The Council visited Juba to support the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, but South
Sudan's leaders blamed each other for hindering
progress and failed to publicly affirm their commitment
to the ceasefire. The parties agreed to again extend the
pre-transitional phase of the peace agreement, but in
the months since progress has been limited. While the
parties have committed to security arrangements and
the unification of the military, there are credible reports
of recruitment by the Government and the opposition.
Civilian buildings remain occupied primarily by
Government forces. Juba remains militarized.

In response to the call for consultations on the
number of states and their boundaries, the Government
has flatly refused to compromise. In response to
calls for accountability, the Government promotes
and reappoints officials accused of serious human
rights abuses, and armed forces continue to conduct
egregious acts of sexual and gender-based violence,
including violations against children. In response to
calls for transparent funding for the peace agreement,
financial opacity reigns and expert advice is ignored.
South Sudan's legislature recently approved a budget
that could allow a higher expenditure on health-care
alliances for members of Parliament than the health-
care budget for the entire country.

Despite provisions to ensure the full participation of
women in the formation of a transitional Government,
the parties continue to prevent women from effectively
and meaningfully participating in the peace process, and
the ability of humanitarian actors to reach those in need
is increasingly limited. Their safety is threatened, and
bureaucratic impediments remain in place, all at a time
when massive flooding is compounding food insecurity.
That lack of progress is nearly comprehensive.

However, South Sudan's leaders can still form an
inclusive transitional Government by the end of the
100-day extension. We note today's statement from
South Sudan's leaders recommitting to form a unity
Government by mid-February. We and the people of
South Sudan look forward to such statements translating
into tangible results. If implemented in full, the current
agreement can provide the peace and stability for which
the people of South Sudan have so clearly called.

Regional engagement will also be essential.
I want to recognize the efforts of South Africa,
working in collaboration with the Special Envoys of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
Kenya, as well as the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, to convene the parties
over the issue of the number and boundaries of states.
Nevertheless, for real progress, Member States in
the region must also hold South Sudan's leaders
accountable for failing to take further steps towards
peace. After all, the entire region will suffer if the
current process collapses.

Silencing the guns in South Sudan will take more
than lofty rhetoric. Moreover, violence in the Equatorias,
Upper Nile and the Lakes regions demonstrates the
continued need for the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to protect civilians and undertake
patrols in all areas of the country. The parties must
grant UNMISS and humanitarian agencies full access
without delay.

Along with easy access to weapons and continued
violence, the willingness of armed groups and security
forces to injure, and even kill, civilians justifies both a
robust arms embargo and a sanctions regime targeting
actors and entities that threaten peace and stability
in South Sudan. If South Sudan's leaders cannot
implement basic provisions of their own agreement,
the Council should consider a stronger and expanded
sanctions regime. Indeed, the threat of sanctions and
their implementation appear to be among the only
actions that convince the parties to make progress.

While we are focused this month on the Council's
credibility, today it is the leaders of South Sudan whose
credibility is on the line - the credibility of their
political will and this peace process. At this time, the
United States offers its full support to the people of
South Sudan. We hope that the country's leaders do not
let them down.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

