Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General, Director-General
Daccord and Ms. Edwar for briefing the Security
Council today. I would like to thank Ms. Edwar in
particular for reminding us of the human suffering and
the human tragedy of war. I salute her determination to
focus on people, not on stones.

The core mandate of the Security Council is
to maintain international peace and security. As
recognized by the Council, large-scale human suffering
can fuel conflict and threaten security. Aside from the
clear moral reasons for doing so, the fact that the Council
should act to protect civilian populations affected by
conflict is therefore within its core mandate.

However, despite our many efforts, attacks on
innocent civilians and civilian infrastructure continue
to take place. The Secretary-General raised the issue
of the bombings in Syria. The harrowing images from
eastern Ghouta of homes bombed to rubble and of
innocent civilians, many of whom are children, killed
indiscriminately by the Syrian regime and its backers
should shock and appal all of us. Attacks on civilians
and the preventing of humanitarian and medical
supplies from reaching them have been a weapon used
by the regime.

In Ukraine, despite repeated calls by the European
Union and others to immediately stop ceasefire
violations near critical civilian infrastructure, notably
the Donetsk water filtration station, the indiscriminate
shelling continues. The Education Cluster, co-led
by UNICEF and Save the Children, reported that the
parties to the conflict damaged 42 schools in Ukraine in
2017, representing an increase from 26 schools during
the previous year. Those attacks damaged the very
foundations of the systems that are essential to sustain
some of the most vulnerable societies throughout
periods of conflict and reconstruction.

Sadly, around the world, health-care workers are
threatened and killed. Their facilities are looted and
destroyed, affecting the access of communities to
health care for years to come. Schools also face attacks
and the teachers, boys and girls within them are the
target of recruitment, sexual violence and other abuses.
Those who dedicate their lives to providing essential
aid to civilians affected by conflict are also targeted.
In South Sudan, more than 100 humanitarian workers
have been killed since the conflict began five years ago.

As the members of the Security Council and the
international community, we must do more to protect
civilians who are affected by conflict. The intentional
targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure is
a war crime. International humanitarian law is our
framework. As Mr. Yves Daccord said, it is our
fundamental principle of humanity. We must ensure
that it is enforced and that perpetrators of crimes
against such law are held to account.

Allow me to highlight three areas where the
protection of civilians could be improved through
the application and enforcement of international
humanitarian law.

First, concrete steps must be taken to integrate the
protections provided by international humanitarian law
into national policies and programmes. We urge States
to engage constructively in the intergovernmental
initiative on strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law, which can help States to share best
practices and to overcome challenges to the practical
implementation of international humanitarian law. The
United Kingdom recently endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration. In line with that and with international
humanitarian law, we will continue to take all feasible
measures to ensure the protection of schools, teachers
and students, including particularly girls, whose access
to education is disproportionately affected by attacks.
We urge others to likewise endorse the declaration and
to take such action. In order to strengthen national
compliance with international humanitarian law by
the United Kingdom, we ensure that all our military
personnel receive robust training throughout their
careers. We are proud to share our expertise with
other countries to strengthen compliance, including by
developing more effective military justice systems.

Secondly, the effective monitoring and reporting
of compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law in situations of conflict is
critical to raising awareness of protection issues and
can provide the necessary evidence base for timely
political and legal action.

The United Kingdom strongly supports technological
advancements for the monitoring and reporting of
violations, including the World Health Organization's
real-time surveillance system of attacks on health care.
We also support effective international criminal-justice
systems, which have an important role to play in
bringing the perpetrators of atrocities to justice when
States are either unable or unwilling to do so. As the
Secretary-General said, we must end the climate
of impunity.

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
play a vital role in protecting civilians in some of the
most fragile regions in the world, where the application
of international humanitarian law is critical. We
welcome efforts to support the strengthening of human
rights components in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as well as the deployment of United Nations
civilian human rights monitors to countries affected
by conflict. Worryingly, we see at times the General
Assembly seeking to weaken mandates agreed by the
Council and the Fifth Committee by defunding human
rights posts. This must stop.

We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to mobilize all partners and stakeholders in support of
more effective United Nations peacekeeping through
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping missions,
including through better long-term planning, the right
troops and equipment, the increased participation
of women and a clear framework for monitoring and
evaluating performance within missions, will further
improve their ability to protect civilians.

Today millions of innocent civilians are suffering,
owing to appalling violations of international
humanitarian law. This leads to enormous suffering
and destroys the social fabric of communities, which in
turn threatens peace and security. We must ensure that
such violations are not ignored, that perpetrators are
held to account and that we make it ever more difficult
in future for would-be violators to get away with such
actions unseen.

