Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by thanking you for convening this
debate on the efforts to suppress piracy, to which my
country attaches great importance.

The impact of piracy extends far beyond economic
and commercial dimensions, as it undermines security
and good order at sea and threatens State and regional
stability. That, along with its wide geography, calls for
an integrated, multidimensional approach to combating
piracy.

The experience of countering piracy in Somalia
and in the Gulf of Guinea points to a number of critical
elements, as referred to in relevant Security Council
resolutions, such as cooperation, implementation and
a comprehensive approach. Complementarity and
interaction in global, regional and national counter-
piracy efforts are essential. In particular, maritime
security mechanisms, law enforcement coordination
and intelligence-sharing merit continued support by the
United Nations and regional organizations. Successful
examples are the adoption of the Djibouti Code of
Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed
Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and
the Gulf of Aden, operational coordination among the
States of the Gulf of Guinea, and implementation of the
Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia.

Lithuania is participating in the work of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which involves more than 60 States and organizations.
The Group's mandate is limited to Somalia, but its
work has been instrumental in improving the overall
understanding of the phenomenon of piracy and ways to
counter it. Some of its accomplishments, especially in
complex legal matters, may well be used as a reference
source in other situations.

Bringing to justice those responsible for acts
of piracy is a cornerstone of the whole framework
of anti-piracy efforts. We note the continuing gap
between the obligations of Member States and their
implementation. Lithuania believes that increased
support is required for programmes and initiatives
that would speed up the criminalization of piracy,
prosecution and imprisonment and would impede
the ability of pirates to operate from land and at sea.
Furthermore, countering piracy requires concerted
efforts to prosecute its financiers and organizers.

Lithuania supports counter-piracy efforts that
integrate deterrence by naval forces, strengthening the
rule of law, building regional and national capabilities,
providing for economic development and coordinating
law enforcement. At the national level, the Lithuanian
Parliament is to adopt amendments to the Criminal
Code that will address piracy in a comprehensive
manner and will establish the universal jurisdiction
over such crimes.

Besides current participation in the European
Union naval Operation Atalanta, mandated by the
Security Council, and a national element in the
Operational Headquarters in the United Kingdom,
Lithuania intends in the second half of 2013 to
deploy off the coast of Somalia an autonomous vessel
protection detachment, mandated to provide protection
to World Food Programme vessels delivering food aid
to displaced persons in Somalia.

Finally, I wish to briefly refer to the issue of
hostages, raised in the Indian presidency's concept
note (S/2012/814,annex). Like many others countries,
Lithuania had to deal with the situation,when in
2009 and 2010 its ships were hijacked in the Gulf of
Guinea. We need to pay more attention to the situation
of hostages and to sharing relevant best practices and
lessons learned.

