Mr. Sial (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the excellent work of the Security
Council done under your leadership this month. I
would like to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Uganda and his team for a successful
presidency of the Council during the month of October.

I would like to thank the Chairpersons of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their briefings today. We support the efforts
of all three Committees in promoting greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States
concerning their respective areas of activity.

Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
No religious tradition or doctrine could be depicted as
encouraging or inspiring acts of terrorism.

The international community needs to promote
economic and social development as the means to arrest
and eliminate extremism and terrorism. Socio-economic
marginalization is one of the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism. The promotion of socio-economic
development in regions where extremism exists should
be a high priority for the international community.

I would like to underline that the important thing
is that countries should take action against terrorism
and should be provided with the resources and ability
to do so. We should follow procedures but must not get
caught up in procedures, processes and reporting
requirements, which should be secondary to the actual
action on the ground undertaken by States. Pakistan
has deployed 160,000 troops on its border with
Afghanistan and has set up 822 border posts to
intercept Al-Qaida and Taliban members. As a result of
terrorist acts and our efforts to root out terrorism, the
death total for Pakistan's law-enforcement personnel
stands at 2,549, with 7,185 civilian casualties, while
6,790 law-enforcement personnel and 15,502 civilians
have been injured.

We have noted the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism, contained in document A/65/258. Mr. Martin
Scheinin has raised many fundamental questions on the
role of Security Council Committees in the area of
counter-terrorism, which we have carefully noted.

Pakistan has made considerable progress since
the last report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) on countering the
financing of terrorism. Pakistan has become a party to
the United Nations Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism and has enacted a landmark
anti-money-laundering bill. A financial monitoring unit
has been established in the State Bank of Pakistan to
monitor suspicious financial transactions. Recently, 64
additional bank accounts and 750.8 million Pakistan
rupees have been frozen. CTED also organized a
workshop for Pakistani parliamentarians in Islamabad
in November 2009. Such workshops and visits are
helpful in human resource development.
A large number of Pakistan's security personnel
have sacrificed their lives in counter-terrorism
operations. We need to enhance their capacity too. We
need counter-terrorist equipment, including safety
vests for police officers, night-vision equipment,
wireless interceptors and monitors. So far, the narrative
of capacity-building has not included the most obvious
requirements of States in concrete situations of
counter-terrorist operations. We trust that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and CTED, under its capable
leadership, will soon be able to deliver in this area.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and its Monitoring Team have a difficult task to
perform. We have noted the efforts of the 1267
Sanctions Committee to bring clarity to its working
methods, and that the Committee has made an effort to
improve its guidelines. We appreciate the
improvements in information-gathering and the flow of
information between various actors, as well as the
introduction of a timetable for the de-listing procedure.
We hope that the Committee will continue to bring
greater transparency to its work.

We are of the view that much needs to be done to
improve the revised procedures and meet the standards
required to ensure a fair hearing for listing or de-listing
individuals and entities. We welcome the appointment
of the Ombudsperson under resolution 1904 (2009), as
it improves compliance with one element of due
process, that is, accessibility. The institution of the
Ombudsperson can earn credibility if it is mandated to
make recommendations, if not decisions, to the
Committee, and if its recommendations can lead to
binding obligations for Member States.

We are not surprised that the decisions of
domestic and international courts and tribunals on the
1267 sanctions regime have garnered worldwide
attention. The preventive nature of the sanctions makes
the listings very simple and enforcement-friendly.
However, the legal community is more inclined to
verifiable evidence that might be acceptable in a court
of law. The questions of due process and effective
remedy are at the heart of courts' deliberations. We
should consider the possibility of exclusive sharing of
verifiable evidence with courts, and of fixing a time
limit on a listing's being in effect.

Pakistan was a member of the Security Council
when resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. We agreed
that it was a timely measure for addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery to non-State actors. We also
identified the need to make the resolution's follow-up
mechanism more inclusive, transparent and balanced in
terms of the responsibilities of States and the
international cooperation available to them to achieve
its objectives.
Finally, I would once again underscore the
evolving nature of the counter-terrorism challenges we
are facing and the usefulness of these briefings.

