Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): Let me thank Belgium for organizing this very timely debate, and the briefers for their presentations. Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the European Union and wishes to add some points in its national capacity. I wish to start by emphasizing the importance of preventive action. On many occasions, including in this Chamber, my country has expressed its conviction that preventing conflict through the many available instruments is always the best option. We believe that the Security Council should be at the forefront of preventive diplomacy and wish to encourage the more frequent use of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. Transitional justice and reconciliation in all forms are essential elements of building long-lasting sustainable peace in post-conflict societies. If we want them to be successful, the ownership of those inclusive processes must clearly be vested in the affected societies. All stakeholders, including women and girls, children, young people, older persons and civil society, must participate if we want the processes to be truly effective. Therefore, in order to achieve sustainable peace and build resilient societies, inclusive cooperation and a comprehensive, gender-transformative approach must be the building block for effective transitional justice. Fighting impunity, in particular for the most serious crimes, such as genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, is the basis for justice and lasting peace. Peace and justice are not mutually exclusive; they are complementary. That is why Slovenia was actively involved in the establishment of the first permanent International Criminal Court (ICC). We continue tostrongly support its work and promote its universality, integrity and efficiency. We also support other mechanisms with the aim of preventing impunity for those crimes, including the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. Victims and affected societies must be at the centre of post-conflict endeavours that are broad and comprehensive, from the acknowledgment of victims to reparations, economic assistance and incentives and social reintegration assistance. To that end, Slovenia supports the ICC's Trust Fund for Victims, to which we regularly contribute. Slovenia believes that the current international legal framework on mutual legal assistance and extradition for the most serious international crimes remains inadequate to achieve effective justice. That is why Slovenia, together with like-minded countries - the Netherlands, Belgium, Argentina, Senegal and Mongolia - launched an initiative for the adoption of a multilateral treaty that would provide inter-State cooperation mechanisms for the investigation and prosecution of the most serious crimes. The Mutual Legal Assistance (MLA) initiative addresses the primary responsibility of States to prosecute and try atrocity crimes and the need to improve the effectiveness of the investigation and prosecution of those crimes at the national level. We are pleased to inform the Council that Slovenia will host a diplomatic conference in Ljubljana from 8 to 19 June with the aim of adopting a convention on international cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, to be known as the MLA convention. Let me conclude by emphasizing one particular element of post-conflict societies. Among the tools and instruments available, we see education as one of the most important. Only through continued education can we expect peace to last and a society to truly transform. Education must be continued because those societies are very fragile and at a difficult juncture and the horrors that they have experienced could be repeated at any time. That is why we believe that everything must be done to avoid a return to rhetoric and the incitement to hatred. Education is indeed the best prevention and investment, with the greatest return.
