Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): 1, too,
should like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Mr. Stephen
O'Brien and Mr. Cappelaere for their tireless work.

Let me be slightly cynical today and say that we have
come to this meeting and have heard more of the same,
just worse. We are continuing our discussions as bombs
continue to rain down on hospitals, schools and civilian

infrastructure. Staffan de Mistura said, and several of
us have taken note of his comments, that the logic of
war prevails today on both sides, as both have clearly
decided to continue to pursue the military option. What
he did not say is that this war is utterly barbaric and
does not even respect those incomprehensible things
known as the rules of war.

Using this military logic, the strategic importance
ofAleppo to both sides has swept everything aside - all
human and humanitarian values. When we came to the
Council, the primary concerns were the horrors taking
place in the medieval cities of the Kefraya, Madaya
and Fo'ah. But these fell away from our consideration
at the same time as Aleppo started to gain strategic
importance, and then we started to consider the horrors
of Aleppo, which, at another meeting, we referred to as
carnage and a massacre. Today all of those fighting in
Aleppo are guided by the barbaric logic of war and are
indiscriminately bombing civilian structures, homes,
schools and hospitals.

All of them claim to be fighting terrorists. But we
see the bodies of children being pulled from the rubble
of schools; they presumably were not terrorists. We see
the bodies of patients being pulled from the rubble of
hospitals; they presumably were not terrorists. We see
the bodies of women and elderly people being pulled
from the ruins of homes and buildings; they presumably
were not terrorists either. But apparently it is widely
believed that there are terrorists on all sides. And
therefore from east to west, from west to east, from the
air or from whatever provenance, the bombs continue to
fall and people continue to die.

Some time ago, in this very Chamber, we quoted
the lyrics of a song by Bob Dylan, that notable North
American poet, in which he asks, "How many deaths
will it take until [a man] knows that too many people
have died?" There is a very simple formula to stop the
massacre: an immediate, unconditional ceasefire. That
would put an end to it. We deem the draft resolution
that Egypt, New Zealand and Spain have been working
on to be a useful instrument and therefore stress that
we should give the people of Syria a chance through an
immediate, unconditional ceasefire.

