Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
today and for their service.

As President Obama has said, "Preventing mass
atrocities and genocide is a core national security
interest and a core moral responsibility of the United
States of America". A key element of that endeavour is
our commitment to seeking justice for the perpetrators
of heinous crimes regardless of where or when they were
committed. The system of international tribunals, which
now includes the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals as its newest member, is a critical
institution in that process.

Since the last reports, much progress has been made.
The Residual Mechanism has passed down its first
decision - to transfer a case for trial in Rwanda - and
opened its Arusha branch on schedule on 1 July 2012.
The Hague branch of the Mechanism is slated to open
in July 2013. As we commend the Tribunals for their
historic contribution to justice and accountability,
including the apprehension of all International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) fugitives, we also
recognize the substantial work that remains at both
Tribunals in concluding trials, downsizing staff and
transferring remaining functions to the Mechanism.

The Tribunals still face significant challenges in
completing their mandates, and we recognize the need
for flexibility in assigning cases and determining the
appeal and trial schedules.

In light of those tasks, we appreciate the ongoing
efforts by the Tribunals to improve efficiency, share
resources and economize on costs. Efficiencies
instituted by the Mechanism, including having a
single set of Principals - President, Prosecutor and
Registrar - for both the Arusha branch and the branch
in The Hague and having the Mechanism President
preside over the Mechanism Appeals Chamber will
ensure a more efficient use of resources.

We also welcome other cost-saving measures,
such as allowing Judges to carry out their functions
remotely where possible and the common use of certain
administrative support services and other best practices.
We look forward to other measures that economize on
costs while maintaining the highest standards ofjustice.

Turning to the ICTY, we note the recent judgements
of the Appeals and Trial Chambers and fully support
the Tribunal and respect its rulings. The pace of work at
the ICTY remains high, with 18 individuals on trial and
15 in appeal proceedings at the close of the reporting
period. The last of the ICTY trials has begun, that of
Goran HadZie. We commend the ICTY for expediting
trails such that it anticipates concluding all but three
trials during 2013.

While the Tribunal has implemented several
reforms to expedite trials and appeals, it was not able
to redeploy four trial judges to the Appeals Chamber,
as authorized by the Security Council in 2009, because
they are still needed at trial. We look forward to the
President's proposals as to how that situation can be
remedied.

We recognize that staff retention will continue to be
a problem as the Tribunal nears the end of its mandate,
and we urge the General Assembly to reconsider
proposals put forward earlier for a modest financial
incentive to save funds through reduced staff turnover.

We also support the Tribunal's outreach programme,
given the continued need for reconciliation in the States
of the former Yugoslavia.

With regard to the International Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we commend that Tribunal on the
completion of numerous cases during the previous
reporting period, including the completion of work
at the trial level with regard to 92 of the 93 accused.
The Trial Chamber delivered two judgemenets, in
the Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana cases, with a third
trial judgement expected in December. The Appeals
Chamber delivered four judgements in 2012. We
welcome the Tribunal's projection that it will conclude
all cases at the trial level by the end of 2012.

We continue to urge all United Nations Member
States, in particular those in the Great Lakes region,
to cooperate in the apprehension of the nine remaining
fugitives from the ICTR. The United States continues
to offer monetary rewards for information leading to
the arrest or transfer of ICTR fugitives, whether those
individuals will be prosecuted by the Mechanism or in
Rwandan courts. Those who harbour fugitives obstruct
justice and stand on the wrong side of history.

We also welcome Rwanda's commitment to
adjudicating fairly the cases transferred from the
ICTR to Rwanda. We commend the ICTR and the
International Residual Mechanism for creating a robust
monitoring mechanism for the transferred cases. We
will be watching those cases to satisfy ourselves that
the conditions for referral continue to be met ahead of
the Mechanism's transfer of six more cases to the courts
of Rwanda as and when fugitives are apprehended.

The ICTR and the Rwandan authorities have also
shown close cooperation in holding skills-sharing
workshops and capacity-building seminars, which
will ensure fair proceedings at the national level.
Strengthening national legal and justice institutions is
one of the most important and lasting legacies of the
international tribunals such as the ICTR.

The defendants convicted in the Tribunal
proceedings have been found guilty of the most
heinous crimes known to humankind. The legacy
of the Tribunals, however, does not only consist of
bringing individual perpetrators to justice. Thanks to
the dedication of the Tribunals, these crimes have been
etched in the ledger books of history, and the records
and archives of these crimes will be accessible to future
generations, providing a corrective against distortions
of the historical narrative. The Tribunals have fostered
respect for the rule of law, developed capacity at
the national level, and enhanced reconciliation and
peace. Those are long-term achievements that not
only strengthen the societies affected by such heinous
crimes, but help ensure that those crimes will not be
repeated elsewhere. Our commitment to working with
the international community on behalf of this collective
moral responsibility is unwavering.
