Mr. Adada (Congo) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation welcomes your positive and
commendable initiative to convene this public meeting,
upon the request of the League of Arab States. In View
of the recent grave developments in the Middle East
situation, this is no routine meeting. To the contrary,
following the sudden outbreak of violence in the
region, the Arab League initiative to call for a
ministerial meeting of the Security Council has
emerged as an opening to help revitalize the
comprehensive peace process, which is currently at an
impasse.

The grave events that occurred in Gaza and
Lebanon following the abduction of Israeli soldiers
highlight the extreme volatility of the situation in that
vital region and the risk of a widespread eruption if
talks aimed at a comprehensive negotiated settlement
continue to languish.

Let us not forget that this is a human tragedy that
has endured for six decades. Unfortunately, in the face
of the heavy losses and destruction on both sides
caused by the new cycle of violence, the Security
Council - the United Nations organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - did not respond quickly enough
to shoulder its responsibilities. We regretted this
vacillation, which was misinterpreted by the victims of
the excesses and by international public opinion.
Resolution 1701 (2006) has made it possible to
open up new prospects in the Israel-Lebanon crisis. We
need to foster such developments and support all
efforts to build a peace that must not remain fragile.
We need to take advantage of this respite to seek
viable, lasting solutions to all the problems involved,
such as Lebanon's national unity and sovereignty and
its relations with its neighbours, and Israel's security.

In that regard, a strengthened United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon now has a particularly
crucial role to play. We commend the countries that
quickly answered the call for a speedy mobilization of
forces to confront this dangerous situation. France and
Italy merit our appreciation. We encourage other
countries to participate in this operation, which could
be of enormous help in creating new conditions for
peace. We also welcome the generosity of major
donors in rebuilding Lebanon.

But such developments, however positive they
may be, must not cloak the sad reality of the tragic
situation the Palestinian people face daily. We
encourage Hamas to shoulder its responsibilities as a
governing authority by accepting the validity of
previous commitments in the context of a settlement of
the Middle East crisis. At the same time, we call upon
the international community to continue humanitarian
assistance to a population that, owing to the
circumstances, is reduced to depending largely on the
outside world for daily survival. We also encourage all
Palestinian political forces to seek unity and to put an
end to all provocations, which have negative
consequences and which, moreover, do not resolve the
problem of the liberation of the occupied territories.

Our concern here is to help relaunch the peace
process without creating a new framework for
negotiations or new rules. The rules exist and are well
known. First of all, there are all the relevant Security
Council resolutions, which all - I stress "all" - the
parties must implement. For too long, the Council has
been accused of bias for continuing to close its eyes to
violations by one of the parties to the conflict and to
that party's failure to comply with the Council's
resolutions. Secondly, we have the Arab peace
initiative, based on the principle of land for peace; we
believe that this remains a good basis for a negotiated
settlement. Thirdly, we have the Quartet road map,
which is based on recognition of the existence of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.
If today's debate can help the key players - the
parties themselves and the sponsors of the peace
process - to return to the negotiating table and
implement the principles of the road map, that would
be an invaluable contribution by the Security Council,
which cannot stand aloof from a situation that affects
international peace and security - the Council's main
raison d'etre. The Security Council must make it clear
to the parties that there can be no solution to the
Middle East crisis based on the use of force. The only
useful approach is that of a political and diplomatic
settlement, and it must be resumed immediately.

