Mr. Fall (spoke in French): At this late hour, I
shall try to confine myself to certain of the comments
that have been made. I ask the indulgence of Council
members in advance.
With regard to substantive matters, the question
was asked whether the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa would be financed from the regular budget of
the United Nations or, implicitly, on the basis of
voluntary contributions. I would like to respond that in
the current state of affairs it is on the basis of the
regular budget of the Organization. The draft budget
has already come before the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and the
Secretariat hopes that the General Assembly, through
its Fifth Committee, will give its consent to the
financing of the Office.

Another financing question was raised with
regard to the problem of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and peace-building. I can only
reiterate the recommendations of the inter-agency
mission, and the observations made throughout this
debate, concerning the importance of strengthening
significantly the financial aspect of reintegration in
DDR.

Finally, a last financing problem concerns the
Tribunal and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
in Sierra Leone. The Council will recall that, for good
reasons, it was decided to finance both the Tribunal in
Sierra Leone and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission through voluntary contributions. Today,
one must acknowledge that the funds are insufficient to
permit the launching of those two institutions.
However, the Secretariat is sending a mission to the
area in January to contact authorities with a View to the
imminent establishment of the Tribunal, inter alia.

In a second question, it was suggested that for a
future debate on West Africa, a report be prepared by
the Secretariat indicating the application of the
recommendations and evaluating the actions initiated.
The Secretariat has noted this recommendation and will
do its utmost to prepare an interim report.

Thirdly, it was suggested that natural resources
and development issues be integrated with peace and
security issued. The Council will remember that the
report of the inter-agency mission had been moving in
that direction, and that is why the Council decided that
the reports should be submitted to the Economic and
Social Council as well. The Security Council had
envisaged a joint meeting between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council. I believe that
initiative is still on the table, and one hopes that within
the context of the mechanism that you have considered
putting into place, Mr. President, it might be possible
for West Africa to test this kind of inter-agency
coordination within the United Nations system.

In addition, a proposal was made that the
partnership with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) should be the guiding factor
of the work of the Office. I can confirm that this is the
approach that has been followed since the beginning,
because - apart from the fact that ECOWAS was a
member of the inter-agency mission in West Africa -
the report of the mission has shown that the action of
the future United Nations Office in West Africa will
involve a partnership with ECOWAS. The partnership
will serve as a kind of matrix to measure the success of
the Office, particularly with a view to strengthening the
capacities of the ECOWAS secretariat.

The penultimate question concerns the interaction
between the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly. I believe that I
have already referred to that.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity,
following the members of the Security Council and on
behalf of the Secretary-General, to pay tribute to
President Alpha Oumar Konare's chairmanship of
ECOWAS. On behalf of the Secretary-General, I can
bear witness to the fact that he has made partnership
with the United Nations a day-to-day reality. We
appreciate his vision and initiatives, but especially his
dynamism, availability and sense of efficiency and
collaboration and, above all, the important successes he
has achieved at the head of ECOWAS in the peace
process, with regard to the movement of weapons and
in strengthening economic integration in West Africa.
It is on that note, on behalf of the Secretary-General,
that I would like to conclude my statement.

