Mr. Stock: Allow me to also congratulate the new
Director-General of UNESCO, Ms. Audrey Azoulay.

I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
Italian presidency not only for convening this briefing
during an exceptionally full programme of work, but
also for its long-standing leadership on the protection of
cultural heritage. I am grateful for Italy's strong support
for and recognition of INTERPOL's work in this field,
and for the opportunity to address the Security Council
today with such distinguished fellow briefers.

Let me unequivocally state INTERPOL's View on
this threat. The destruction and trafficking of cultural
heritage in armed conflicts are serious and transnational
crimes, affecting international peace and security, first,
through the financing of terrorist groups, as recognized
by resolution 2199 (2015), which pointed to the use of
funds raised by selling antiquities pillaged and looted
from armed conflict zones; secondly, by hindering the
processes of reconciliation and return to democratic
governance in attempting to erase and desecrate social,
cultural and economic assets; and thirdly, in causing
loss to the global community. As the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict states,

"damage to cultural property belonging to any
people whatsoever means damage to the cultural
heritage of all humankind".

INTERPOL has been fighting those crimes on
behalf of law enforcement worldwide since 1946. In
that endeavour, we cooperate closely with partners such
as UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the World Customs Organization, the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), AI-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, the International Centre for
the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property, and the International Council of Museums.

Our efforts in protecting cultural heritage focus on
the core of the INTERPOL mandate - the collection
and exchange of vital, operational information across
borders, including with law enforcement in conflict and
post-conflict zones. In that endeavour we face unique
challenges; essential criminal information on foreign
terrorist fighters, travel and identity documents,
weapons, tradecraft and trafficked property are often
dispersed across actors in those areas.

Consolidating that information into a single
operational flow is INTERPOL's primary goal.
National central bureaus in each of our 192 member
countries, including those in conflict situations, act
as gateways for criminal data exchange with the
international community. Coordinating the gathering
and sharing of information into one centralized hub
avoids intelligence gaps, prevents silos and promotes
national sovereignty and the ownership of data by the
host country. That is how the information that is shared
by law enforcement on stolen cultural artefacts is given
the visibility requested by national authorities, which is
either brought to the attention of the general public or
private entities, such as auction houses and dealers, or
entered into our global database of over 50,000 records.

Recently, INTERPOL collected information from
our national central bureaus in Baghdad and Damascus,
identifying objects of invaluable cultural value stolen
from Raqqa and Palmyra, in Syria, and Mosul, in
Iraq. At the request of the two countries, that was
immediately disseminated to law enforcement and other
stakeholders to alert them to the thefts and facilitate
the recovery of the items. In parallel, intelligence
that is received through national gateways is used to
identify trafficking routes and the methods used. That
analysis is shared with member countries, along with
best practices and training, as part of our international
operational meetings and experts forum.

Finally, we are working to enhance real-time
access to that intelligence, including through an
upgrade to our database that would enable the storage
of three-dimensional images of objects. A mobile
application is being developed to allow police officers
in the field, including in conflict zones, to take, store,
upload and immediately check pictures of suspicious
items against our records.

As we discuss today how to continue the
implementation of resolution 2347 (2017) , I would like
to offer two action items for the Council's consideration.

First, it is imperative to exchange information
on stolen or illegally exported cultural objects on
routes, modus operandi and suspected traffickers.
That data must be shared as widely and as rapidly as
possible, while respecting the fundamental principle of
non-duplication of channels.

Secondly, we must create specialized police
units and national databases that are dedicated to the
protection of cultural property and the investigation of
heritage-trafficking cases. Italy was the first country to
establish one of those structures within the Carabinieri
corps, as early as 1969. it is a model for the international
community to adopt in front-line jurisdictions. It
ensures coordination through a single national point
of contact, opportunities to seize stolen objects and
specialized investigative abilities in complex cases.

In closing, I wish to reiterate INTERPOL's
commitment to working closely with our long-standing
partner organizations and the newly established Office
of Counter-Terrorism in the fight to protect cultural
heritage and prevent terrorist financing worldwide.

