Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Less than two weeks ago, the Foreign Minister of Canada,
in company with the former Secretary-General and many
other supporters of peace in Guatemala, witnessed the
signature ceremonies in Guatemala of the Agreement on
a Firm and Lasting Peace aimed at ending over 35 years
of civil conflict in that country. We celebrate this
achievement. We also recognize, as do the Guatemalan
parties to the peace accords and the people of Guatemala,
that there is much to be done - and to be done
quickly - to effect a complete national reconciliation.

The fundamental issue today is how the international
community can help the people of Guatemala inculcate a
culture of peace in their society. After decades of conflict,
mistrust and extreme insecurity, there is an urgent need to
establish sustainable security in Guatemala, including
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law,
good governance, sustainable development and social
equity. All of these are as important as the military
aspects of the peace settlement.

(spoke in English)

Canada believes that we are now at the critical point
where the peace-building measures envisaged in the
Guatemala accords must be rapidly implemented if the
momentum is not to be lost. We need to help put in place
the conditions that will allow Guatemala to take charge of
its own destiny and move forward with the important
tasks of social, political and economic reconstruction it
has set itself in the peace accords.

 

Among the immediate tasks to be taken up are the
implementation of the ceasefire, the separation of forces
and the disarmament and demobilization of combatants of
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG).
The successful reintegration of the former combatants into
civilian life is perhaps the first and most essential act of
peace-building, because until this happens there can be no
lasting peace and because these former rebels must secure
a stake in building the new Guatemala.

In order to move forward with this work, we are
pleased that the Security Council is considering a draft
resolution which provides for a mandate for a military
component to be added to the United Nations Mission for
the Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with
the Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on
Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA). Canada
enthusiastically supports this initiative and stands ready to
contribute military observers to this United Nations
Mission.
Canada recognizes the historic achievement of the
Government of Guatemala and the Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) in the peace accords. This
is the last stage in the Central American peace process,
which Canada has supported in many direct and material
ways. The parties and the people of Guatemala can remain
assured that Canada will continue to support them actively
as they move forward to implement the peace settlement.

I would also like to pay tribute at this time to the
work both of United Nations Mission for the Verification
of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA) and of the United
Nations Moderator of the Peace Talks, Jean Arnault, which
has been so essential to the successful conclusion of the
peace accords.

