President Kuchma (spoke in Ukrainian; English text furnished by the delegation): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for your personal
contribution to the successful realization of the
initiative to convene this meeting. I consider this
meeting to be a confirmation by the Security Council
of its willingness to assume the primary responsibility
for ensuring the effective functioning of the collective
security system in the twenty-first century.

The exclusive purview of the Security Council to
authorize the use of force in international relations -
except in cases where the right to self-defence is being
exercised - as well to employ effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace and to suppress acts of aggression should remain
the major foundation of this system. It is absolutely
essential that this veritable nerve centre of world
politics preserve its undeniable authority and enhance
its legitimacy and effectiveness in the coming century.
That goal should be attained by raising confidence in
the Security Council by improving the peacekeeping
instruments at its disposal and by achieving its
comprehensive reform.

In pursuing efforts aimed at resolving conflicts,
the Security Council should necessarily address their
root causes in order to reveal the real sources of
confrontation. Social and economic factors are the
leading causes for the outbreak of violence.

Significant opportunities could be offered by
better developing the under-utilized potential for
cooperation that exists between the Security Council
and other organs and institutions of the United Nations,
starting with the General Assembly. There is a pressing
need for appropriate implementation of the provisions
of Article 65 of the Charter, which governs cooperation
with the Economic and Social Council.

In my address to the Millennium Summit of the
United Nations today, I spoke in favour of developing a
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy. One of the
key components of such a strategy could be the
establishment of United Nations regional centres for
conflict prevention. It is also important to expand
further the range of instruments required for the
maintenance of peace and security. In this context,
conflict prevention operations should gain prominence
as a qualitatively new model of peacekeeping
activities. I am confident that, together with
peacekeeping and peace-enforcement operations, this
instrument will substantially strengthen the capacity of
the Security Council to discharge its responsibilities.

The founding fathers of the United Nations could
not have imagined how acute the difficulties related to
the application of enforcement measures imposed by
the Security Council would become. Sanctions were
designed as an important tool to ensure the
implementation of the Council's decisions. However,
they were eventually turned into ineffective and
sometimes even harmful instruments. It is therefore
indispensable to develop a clear and coherent
methodology for the imposition and lifting of sanctions
that takes into consideration the concerns of innocent
civilian populations and the interests of third countries.

I find it necessary to draw the attention of the
Council to the so-called frozen conflicts in the post-
Soviet region. It has been almost a decade that tensions
in Abkhazia, Georgia and Nagorny Karabakh have
been destabilizing the situation in this vast region and
posing the threat of wide-scale humanitarian
catastrophe. There is also an urgent need to resolve the
Transdniester conflict. Postponing a final settlement of
such crises might lead to irreversible consequences.
The poverty and sufferings of civilians in these
conflicts make active peacekeeping efforts absolutely
indispensable.

Ukraine has already put forward an initiative to
hold at Yalta in the near future the next round of
negotiations aimed at confidence-building between the
Georgian and Abkhaz sides. It is now the turn of the
other members of the Security Council.

We are also concerned with the fact that the tough
knot of problems in the Balkans has yet to be untied.
The ability to provide adequate responses to threats to
peace and security in every region of the world will
always constitute the major prerequisite to relying on
the Security Council. Today, this principle should be
upheld by giving special attention to the problems of
the African continent.

The challenges in Africa should be given utmost
consideration. Leaving the long-suffering continent to
solve all its difficult problems alone is absolutely
unacceptable. Ukraine is determined to make a
practical contribution to the United Nations peace
efforts aimed at resolving conflicts in Africa. This
determination is reinforced by our aspiration to expand
economic cooperation with African countries. Ukraine
looks forward to a century of African renaissance and
stands ready to hasten its arrival.
We have every reason to consider this historic
Summit of the Security Council as an encouraging and
promising beginning that will be followed by more
successful and productive efforts in the new century.
Whether it is a member of the Security Council or not,
Ukraine will always actively contribute to the effective
accomplishment of its honourable and responsible
mission.

