Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative of the
delegation of the Republic of the Congo to hold this
open debate on prevention and resolution of conflicts,
in particular in Africa.

The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Effective implementation of this
noble mandate hinges on the trust and support of all
Member States of the United Nations and on the
coordination and cooperation of regional and
subregional organizations, as well as on its own
persistent efforts to explore new solutions.

The Chinese delegation would like to make the
following four points on the topic before the Council
today.

First, greater importance should be attached to
preventive diplomacy, as was rightly pointed out in the
letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
delegation of the Republic of the Congo, of 14 August
2007 (S/2007/496). Although the Security Council has
on many occasions underscored its determination to
enhance the effectiveness of United Nations efforts to
prevent armed conflicts and to develop an effective,
comprehensive strategy on conflict prevention,
progress on the work in this area remains less
satisfactory. The main reason for this is that the
tendency towards conflict resolution rather than
prevention is yet to be effectively redressed.

In the past five years, the United Nations has
spent more than $18 billion on peacekeeping
operations. If more effective efforts had been carried
out in the area of conflict prevention, much less would
have been spent and many more lives would have been
saved from the scourge of conflict. It is therefore
important to be fully committed to putting all ideas
about conflict prevention into practice.

Secondly, more reform and ingenuity should be
encouraged. Since its inception sixty years ago, the
United Nations has made unremitting efforts and
widely acknowledged achievements in the field of
conflict prevention and resolution. Nevertheless,
confronted by various natures and forms of armed
conflict today, the Council should be adapted to
changing circumstances and come up with solutions
more suitable to current situations.

While dealing with the domestic conflicts of a
country, it is essential to bring into full play the active
role of the Government of the country concerned. The
Council's overall objective in this area is to help the
national Government to establish social stability. In
case of sudden crisis, it is all the more important for
the Council's actions to be attuned to the background
and the environment that shape the crisis and to
intervene in a timely manner so as to effectively
resolve the crisis.

Special attention should be paid to dealing with
problems both at their surface level and at their roots
by taking an integrative approach addressing the
economic and social causes of the conflict. All the
armed conflicts on the African continent stem from a
multitude of causes, most of which are related to
poverty and arms proliferation. Only by addressing the
deeply rooted causes of conflict can it be possible to
gradually emerge from playing a reactive role as
firefighters and gain more leverage in the endeavour to
prevent conflict, thus improving the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping efforts.

Thirdly, coordination and cooperation with the
regional and subregional organizations should be
significantly enhanced. It is widely acknowledged that
in recent years the African Union (AU) has played an
ever more important role in coping with the conflicts in
the African region on behalf of the international
community, and it has made invaluable contributions to
the maintenance of world peace and security. As an
embodiment of the will of African countries to achieve
unity and self-reliance, the AU is endowed with a
unique political, moral and geographical advantage in
handling conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

The Security Council should continue to
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union and
its Peace and Security Council, fully utilizing its
regional early warning mechanism and peacekeeping
capacity and providing various types of assistance to
the AU to help it to strengthen its capacity-building. At
present, matters related to Africa account for over
60 per cent of the issues on the Council's regular
agenda dealing with regional hot-spot problems. As a
matter of fact, by providing assistance to the African
Union and to subregional organizations in Africa, the
Council is also improving its own capacity to handle
international affairs in general. The Council should
attach greater importance to its work in this area.

Lastly, more efforts must be made to fully utilize
resources within the United Nations system and to give
full play to the good offices of the Secretary-General.
Multiple track approaches - addressing problems in
political, security, social and economic areas - are
needed to prevent and resolve conflicts. Given their
respective expertise and vast experience within their
own fields, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly should set an example for the
international community by enhancing their
communication and exchanges and learning from one
another so as to make up for their own shortfalls with a
view to making concerted efforts.

In recent years, the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his representatives to actively participate
in resolving regional conflicts through their
international good offices have yielded noticeable
results. In doing so, they have benefited to a great
extent from the trust and support of the Security
Council. In the future, the Council should continue to
support, through various ways and means, the
Secretary-General's role in this area.

