Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Russian Federation for having organized this debate
on the Sahel. I congratulate Ms. Hiroute Guebre
Sellassie on her nomination as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel and thank her for
her briefing. I also pay tribute to the former Special
Envoy, Mr. Romano Prodi, for his tireless efforts, and
commend the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa.

I welcome the fact that the Sahel region, which
is one of the poorest in the world, has attracted the
Security Council's attention. The region continues
to face security, humanitarian, governance and
development problems, as well as the damaging impact
of drought and desertification. The presence of armed
groups - including separatist, terrorist and criminal
groups - and the proliferation of weapons and
youth unemployment further complicate the already
precarious situation.

Chad welcomes the efforts of regional and
international organizations to find solutions to the
region's problems. We especially appreciate the
holding, in New York on 26 September 2013, of a high-
level meeting on the situation in the region, as well as
the high-level visit from 5 to 7 November 2013 to Mali,
the Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad carried out by the
Secretary-General along with the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, the President of the
African Development Bank (ADB), the Commissioner
of the European Union responsible for development
and representatives of the World Bank. We also
welcome the announcement of new investments in the
region - totalling $6.75 billion from the European
Union and $1.05 billion from the World Bank - to
benefit the five countries of the region. I should like
to make some observations on the three pillars of the
strategy, namely, governance, security and resilience.

With regard to governance, I welcome the
commendable initiatives by the United Nations
system and its partners, including the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, UNESCO and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, aimed at resolving the governance
problems that exist in several of the countries of the
region. Among other things, those efforts touch on
the question of women, promoting social cohesion,
preventing conflict, supporting Governments in order
to improve access to basic services, creating jobs and
income-generating activities, supporting efforts to
assess the risks of vulnerability, birth registration,
strengthening teaching, vocational and professional
education facilities, and assistance to defence and
human rights institutions, among other things.

With regard to security, the deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali,
followed by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
contributed greatly to stabilizing that country.
Nevertheless, the restoration of the territorial integrity
of the country continues to be a major challenge.
The resumption of clashes between Malian forces
and armed groups in Kidal on 19 May has seriously
undermined a country that is already quite fragile. We
Wish to commend the joint efforts by the Chair of the
African Union and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSMA that led
to the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement on 23 May.
We would also like to welcome the Algiers talks among
the armed groups, which have made it possible to
establish a platform for an inclusive dialogue with the
Government.

However, the ever-increasing terrorist attacks,
isolated incidents and the use of improvised explosive
devices against both Malian and international forces
are unacceptable and we resolutely condemn them.
Last week's attack in Aguelhoc, in which four of Chad's
soldiers serving in MINUSMA were killed and others
were injured, serves to remind us that the terrorist
threat has not been stemmed.

There are also enormous risks in Libya that the
democratic transition could be reversed, in spite of the
election of the Constituent Assembly last April and the
progress made in the area of transitional justice. The
country today is favoured territory for lawlessness and
all sorts of criminal and terrorist activity.

The terrorist acts and kidnappings of children
by Boko Haram in Nigeria are a further cause for
concern. That group has access to sophisticated
weapons and poses a growing threat to the region of
Lake Chad and Central African through its exploitation
of the porousness of the borders and the situation of
unemployment and ignorance among young people.

As the report of the Secretary-General points out
(S/2014/397), terrorist attacks in the Maghreb and
the Sahel increased by 60 per cent in 2013 over the
previous year, reaching a total of 230 incidents. This is
worrying when it comes to survival of both people and
public institutions. The United Nations, which has been
working in the region since July 2013, should continue
and step up its efforts. I wish to welcome the regional
projects carried out by the Organization to foster
security, in particular the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force of the Department of Political Affairs.

Security is at the heart of development. The goal
should be to wage a relentless war against jihadists,
terrorists, criminals and traffickers. Particular
emphasis must be placed on strengthening cooperation,
especially with the Maghreb, by involving police,
customs and education services, creating a regional
and subregional database and stepping up information
exchange.

Moreover, young people must be made aware of the
true teachings ofreligion, so as to prevent radicalization
and involvement in the ranks of terrorist and criminal
groups. We must also provide solutions to the economic
problems of youth. We must highlight to young people
the crucial role of traditional and religious leaders in
preventing and resolving conflict.

Security in and of itself is not enough; there must
be a major campaign with regard to resilience, given
the Sahel's acute development problems and its grave
humanitarian difficulties. In spite of the efforts made
by the countries ofthe region, at least 20 million people
face the risk of food insecurity, with 4.1 million already
in a critical stated, almost 5 million children threatened
by acute malnutrition and more than 1.5 million
refugees and displaced persons as a result of epidemics
and natural disasters. I welcome the regional initiatives
by all the agencies of the United Nations system aimed
at strengthening the people's resiliency.

We ask that particular attention be focused on
women by way of access to productive elements such
as land, financing and credit, technology and so forth.
Young people should also receive support in the areas
of education and access to decent employment.

We are embittered at seeing the degradation of
the environment as a result of climate change. We call
for adaptation and mitigation measures, in particular
through adaptation and the management of watersheds,
including those in Chad and the Niger River, as well as
by the implementation of the Great Green Wall for the
Sahara and the Sahel Initiative.

We must also encourage investment in herding
communities and create avenues for development
that can serve to settle people and improve their
living conditions. In that regard, we call for support
for national development programmes and regional
initiatives, in particular those developed by the African
Union and other institutions in the Sahel.

It is also crucial that we resolve the energy crisis in
the Sahel by emphasizing investments and by exploiting
the limitless potential of renewable energy, including
solar, wind, geothermal and biomass.

All of that will require considerable financial
resources, which should be provided through flexible
disbursement procedures, so as to effectively support
efforts in the Sahel. In that regard, we hope that the
Sahel Action Fund being put in place at the ADB will
bring substantial added value for the implementation of
the projects identified.

We also count on the support of the World Bank,
the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and all other
bilateral and multilateral partners to provide ongoing
financial and technical support to the countries of the
region, especially the five countries singled out in the

Sahel strategy. We commend the putting in place of a
coordination mechanism for the strategy. We welcome
the fact that the ministerial coordination platform for
the Sahel, currently led by Mali, provides a framework
to consider the major problems in the region and to
arrive at a common understanding on the initiatives and
follow up the progress achieved.

We remain optimistic that close collaboration
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the High Representative of the African
Union, as co-chairs of the technical secretariat for the
coordination platform, will be strengthened with a view
to coordinating and harmonizing initiatives.

We also welcome the development of an
implementation plan for the strategy covering the
period 2014 to 2016. We take note of the move of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General from Rome to Dakar on 1 January.

Chad also welcomes the drafting of various
initiatives aimed at resolving the manifold and complex
problems affecting the Sahel, including the African
Union strategy for the Sahel, the European Union
strategy for security and development in the Sahel,
the joint Sahel programme of the Permanent Interstate
Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel and the
IDB, the regional programme for the Sahel being
developed by the World Bank, which is focused on
resilience and the economic perspective, the Sahel
strategy of the Economic Community of West African
States and other relevant initiatives.

We hope that the strategy, given its evolving nature,
will take on the main priorities of development as set
forth in relevant national and regional development
programmes. In that context, in order to better
contribute to meeting the objectives set, Chad has
already appointed a coordinator for each of the three
objectives of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. In that regard, we ask that a formal working
group with the Permanent Missions in New York of the
countries of the Sahel region to ensure follow-up in the
development and implementation of initiativies.

In conclusion, we hope that pursuant resolution
68/247, section VI, para. 13, the title of the current
Special Envoy be raised to the Deputy Secretary-
General level to enhance the scope of the Office's
action to match the level of the challenges to be met in
the vast region of the Sahel.

