Mr. Owada (Japan): On 16 April, the Security
Council met to adopt resolution 1106 (1997) to extend for
the last time the mandate of the third United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for three
months, as it welcomed the major breakthrough that had
just been achieved in the Angolan peace process through
the inauguration of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation.

While my delegation shares the positive assessment
of this felicitous development, I am obliged to note that
the recent turn of events in Angola would seem to offer
us a cause for some serious concern. Tensions have risen
in the northern part of the country. UNAVEM. III
personnel have been restricted in their movements to this
region and have also been the targets of attack. The
extension of state administration to the areas formerly
under UNITA control is proceeding slowly in the face of
UNITA resistance. UN ITA has yet to transform itself into
a political party and it has become evident that it has
retained substantial military forces, despite its declaration
last December to the contrary. Demobilization has been
disrupted and remains incomplete.

In those circumstances, my delegation believes that
it is appropriate for the Security Council to call on the
Angolan Government, and particularly on UNITA, to
strictly refrain from jeopardizing the peace process and to
urge them with a sense of urgency to complete the
remaining military and political aspects of the peace
process. In this context, we strongly hope that President
Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will meet in Angola as soon

 

as possible in an effort to establish a relationship of mutual
confidence and cooperation.

Japan is convinced that, at this stage of developments
in the peace process, the Angolan people should be given
continued encouragement and support from the international
community for the full implementation of the provisions of
the Lusaka Protocol and for the completion of the peace
process. For this reason, Japan supports the draft resolution
now before us. By this draft resolution, the Security
Council is deciding that the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) should take over the mission
of completing the peace process after the withdrawal of
UNAVEM. III, which has carried out its very successful
mission. As indicated in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the draft
resolution, it is important that the departure of the formed
military units of UNAVEM. Ill be carefully determined in
accordance with the remaining tasks of the peace process
and in the light of developments in the situation on the
ground.

My delegation believes that in order for the Angolan
peace process to progress to the next stage, the support of
the international community as well as the political will of
the parties for the complete demilitarization of combatants
and their reintegration will be essential. With a keen
awareness of the paramount importance of this factor, the
Government of Japan decided, on 27 June, to make an
additional contribution of $1.3 million to the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) in support of its
demobilization activities. This is in addition to assistance
that we provided earlier for the removal of landmines and
the repatriation and resettlement of Angolan refugees. In so
doing, we hope that other donor countries will likewise
offer active assistance to Angola through the IOM. and
other channels.

It bears emphasizing time and again that in the final
analysis, peace in Angola can be realized and consolidated
only by the Angolan people themselves, and in particular
by their political leaders. We in Japan sincerely hope that
they will exert their best efforts for the complete
implementation of the peace process in all sincerity so that
the reconstruction and rehabilitation of that country may
become a reality as soon as possible, with the blessing and
cooperation of the international community.

In closing, I should like to express the sincere
appreciation of Japan to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin Beye, as well as to the
Secretary-General himself, for their tireless efforts exerted
on behalf of the Angolan peace process. We earnestly hope
that Maitre Beye will continue to play an indispensable
role as the Chairman of the Joint Commission.

