Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Malaysia's initiative in convening today's
meeting. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict Ms. Zerrougui, and
Executive Director of UNICEF Mr. Anthony Lake for
their briefings.

Children are the primary victims of armed conflicts
in war-torn countries and regions. As terrorist activities
escalate and spread, terrorist organizations' killings,
abductions and recruitment of children for terrorist
attacks have become an increasingly serious problem.
The continuing turbulence in parts of the Middle East
has triggered large waves of refugees and migrants.
Displacement and trafficking in children are becoming
even more rampant. The international community
should, in light of the new situation and dynamics, take
effective measures for the protection of children in
armed conflict.

First, we must wage a resolute fight against the
heinous acts and violations carried out by terrorist
organizations against children. The international
community should maintain consistent standards, zero
tolerance for and non-distinction vis-a-vis terrorism,
bring great pressure to bear on terrorists, and firmly
combat the killing, abuse and abduction of children
carried out by terrorist organizations. All countries
should step up their law enforcement cooperation
to ensure that all those responsible for violations
against children are severely punished in any country
they may flee to. In rescuing children abducted by
terrorist organizations, countries should increase their
intelligence and information-sharing so as to fully
mobilize all forces and come to the rescue of children
held hostage.

Secondly, children should be prevented from
becoming the victims of terrorist and extremist
ideologies. The international community should take
effective measures and effectively combat the use by
terrorist organizations of the Internet to spread terror
through audiovisual means and to carry out recruitment
and incitement activities. We should improve the
education of children and help them develop a mentality
of respect, openness and tolerance, reject violence and
avoid the negative influences of terrorist and extremist
ideologies. We should give full play to the role of the
family, the school and the community in forming
a protective umbrella against the encroachment on
children by terrorist ideologies.

Thirdly, a proper response should be made to
trafficking in refugees and migrants. The countries of
origin, transit and destination of refugees and migrants
should improve their border enforcement cooperation,
improve mechanisms for immigration, border control,
customs and coast guards, combat related crimes,
reduce the incidence of exploitation of children, step
up the identification, repatriation and protection of
children subject to trafficking, and protect children's
legitimate rights and interests.
Fourthly, international humanitarian relief for
displaced children needs to be strengthened. While
respecting the sovereignty of a country in conflict and
the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality,
the international community should ensure that children
are provided with food, medical care, education and
legal aid and help their reintegration into society. The
role of the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Population Fund, inter alia, should be fully leveraged in
coordinating international humanitarian relief efforts
and forming synergies.

