Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa): First of all, I
offer my apologies, as Ambassador Kumalo could,
unfortunately, not be here this afternoon.

Mr. President, we would like to thank you, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, for calling this
very timely meeting. At the outset, we would like to
extend our condolences to all the bereaved families
who are suffering as a result of the violence in the
Middle East.

The Non-Aligned Movement comes before this
meeting today and wishes to repeat its call on Israel to
stop subjecting the Palestinian civilians to collective
punishment. This is in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. We reiterate our call on Israel to
act with restraint and to meticulously abide by its legal
obligations with respect to the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

Just over than a month ago, this body met in
emergency session, in accordance with its mandate as
the custodian of international peace and security, and
adopted resolution 1322 (2000). The resolution called
for the establishment of an international inquiry into
the conflict. The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
the full and expeditious implementation of Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000) would go a long way
towards proving that the Council is prepared to take
decisive action in the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is time to seriously consider
protecting the Palestinian people.

The Non-Aligned Movement firmly believes that
it remains the permanent responsibility of the United
Nations to stay fully engaged in the Palestinian
question until a definitive solution is achieved. In this
regard, we welcome and fully support the important
role of the Secretary-General in the pursuit of peace at
the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and his efforts in the
recent dialogue with both the Israelis and Palestinians.
This serves to reaffirm the primacy of the United
Nations in global peace and security. We appeal to both
parties to respond constructively.

It is incumbent upon the United Nations to adopt
measures to protect the Palestinian people and to
ensure that actions which exacerbate their suffering not
be allowed to continue. The international community
has an obligation to this end. We call on the Council to
seriously consider the immediate deployment of a
protection force to the region.
The question of Palestine constitutes the nucleus
of the Middle East conflict. The achievement of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and to an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, is pivotal to the achievement
of a sustained and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

The Movement believes that peaceful negotiation
is the only means of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the region. We urge the parties to take
the required steps to ensure the cessation of hostilities,
to restore calm and to adopt measures to re-establish
mutual trust. It is only then that an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of negotiations can be
created.

The Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement,
meeting in September in New York during the
Millennium Assembly, reaffirmed their determination
to actively strive towards the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In a statement issued in Pretoria yesterday, the
South African Government strongly condemned the
attack on the Israeli civilian bus two days ago. We
equally strongly condemned the disproportionate and
excessive retaliatory attacks by the Israeli security
force that followed, disturbingly moving the crisis to a
precarious new level. We must ask ourselves the
question: How much longer can this collective
punishment by an occupying, militarily superior
force- in violation of international humanitarian
law - be endured by the Palestinian people? Closures,
blockades and restrictions imposed by Israel on the
movement of goods, persons and resources have
resulted in the economic suffocation of the Palestinian
people. The crisis has exacted too much suffering and
claimed too many innocent lives.

We firmly believe that the condition of land for
peace is essential if meaningful progress in the peace
process is to be attained. For a durable, just and
comprehensive peace, negotiation towards final status
issues has to be in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international legitimacy.

