Mrs. Duarte (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me once again to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their briefings. My
delegation would also like to thank them for their
efforts and for the steps they have taken to implement
the completion strategy.

We would also like to highlight in particular the
arrest of the last two fugitives from the ICTY. This is
not only a great achievement but also without a doubt
eliminates one of the obstacles in the way of the
satisfactory conclusion of its mandate. We also
welcome the activities undertaken to facilitate the
transfer of specialized and institutional knowledge to
national jurisdictions and to other existing
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC).

It is very important to preserve the legacy of the
Tribunals in the area of international humanitarian law
and legal doctrine, including substantive and
procedural aspects, and the influence that their
jurisprudence could have on the future of global justice
and the promotion of human rights.

Through their activities, these two subsidiary
bodies of the Council have shown that the
establishment of an effective system of international
justice is not only possible but desirable. Their
achievements have contributed to paving the way for
the establishment of the ICC.

From a practical point of view, there is no doubt
that, as Presidents Meron and Khan stated so
eloquently, staff retention is the most serious problem
facing both Tribunals. If the existing difficulties are not
resolved, a situation could arise that would prevent the
timely implementation of the completion strategies
devised and adopted by the Council.

For that reason, we support the request made by
both Presidents to the effect that the activities currently
under way would be strengthened if we Council
members provide them with support and if we send a
clear and unequivocal message as to the importance of
resolving the retention and staff recruitment policies.
Failing that, it will be very difficult, if not impossible,
to guarantee the full implementation of the completion
strategies.

The Council should renew the appeals that it has
made in the past for the relevant bodies of the United
Nations to step up their efforts to resolve this
fundamental issue and make it easier for the Tribunals
to retain the human resources necessary for the timely
implementation of their completion strategies.

This is not a routine administrative problem,
since both Tribunals were established by the Council
under very specific circumstances and have provided
outstanding service in the cause of international justice
and the maintenance of international peace and
security.

We consider, for example, that the administrative
practice that prevents the recruitment of interns before
a certain period of time has elapsed is not applicable to
the Tribunals. Under its own terms, resolution 51/226
of the General Assembly applies only to Secretariat
personnel. The rationale for the establishment of this
rule clearly is not relevant to the particular situation
facing both Criminal Tribunals.

Colombia is of the View that the Tribunals have
worked diligently to comply with the decisions of the
Council in terms of the fulfilment of their
responsibilities. The International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda are the
main instrument through which the Council has
channelled the will of the international community to
put an end to impunity for heinous international
crimes.

Now that both judicial bodies will be wrapping
up their work, it is crucial that the various entities of
the United Nations take the actions necessary to ensure
that the Tribunals have the resources required to
conclude their mandates in an effective, orderly and
timely fashion.

