Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his briefing on the
90-day report on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We commend the role of the Committee under
his leadership and reaffirm our continued cooperation
with it. I should like to make the following comments.

First, Lebanon was one of the first countries to
join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), and is a signatory to all the main
international instruments and conventions related to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Lebanon fully abides by its responsibilities in that area.
In that context, Lebanon reaffirms the importance of
the balanced implementation of the three main pillars
of the NPT: non-proliferation, disarmament and the
peaceful use of nuclear technology. The latter of course
includes the right of all States parties to the NPT to
develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.

Secondly, Lebanon calls for the reactivation of
the negotiation process and the resumption of dialogue
as the optimal solution to achieve a final and
comprehensive resolution of the issue that answers all
questions related to the peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme, pursuant to the comprehensive
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). That would facilitate efforts aimed at
fruitful relations of cooperation with the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

Thirdly, my country calls for addressing the issue
of non-proliferation in the Middle East within the
framework of a comprehensive and integrated regional
vision free of selectivity or double standards and aimed
at creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East. However, the obstacle to achieving that objective
is a single country in the entire the Middle East, Israel,
which has neither joined the NPT nor subjected its
nuclear installations to the IAEA comprehensive
safeguards system of inspections. We therefore
welcome the appointment of a facilitator to prepare for
the 2012 conference on creating a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East in implementation of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference action plan.

