Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We welcome you, Mr. President, in your capacity as
President of this Security Council meeting, which
comes as a follow-up to the successful international
Conference on Somalia held in London.

We are pleased to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Somalia, to the
Chamber. We would like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/326). We agree with
his conclusion that the military and political situation in
Somalia remains tense and will require corresponding
continuing military pressure on Al-Shabaab. That
terrorist group still controls a significant piece of the
southern and central part of the country and is in active
opposition, resorting to partisan attacks on African
peacekeepers and security forces and using terrorist
tactics, including in Mogadishu, where an extremist
underground movement is reportedly still active.
Reports of Al-Shabaab's spreading influence in the
north of the country can only provoke anxiety. It is
essential to reinforce and build on the recent military
successes of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the National Security Forces and their
Ethiopian colleagues, by acting vigorously, avoiding a
military vacuum and speedily occupying the remaining
extremist positions so as to allow them no independent
local base from which to regain control over liberated
areas. And that, unfortunately, has already happened in
a number of cases.

In that regard, there can be no doubt as to how
essential it is to continue to help to strengthen
AMISOM, given its limited resources and increasing
area ofresponsibility. The arms and charcoal embargoes
on Somalia and the region remain important tools in
the cooperative stabilization effort as long as they are
strictly observed by Member States, which is far from
always the case. Weapons freely enter Somalia, and
charcoal continues to be shipped to consumers, and is a
source of significant material and financial sustenance
for Al-Shabaab.

Given current realities, one of the Somali
Government's priorities should be strengthening the
security sector and State institutions, including in
areas where it is essential not to leave a political power
vacuum in the wake of Al-Shabaab's exit, to provide
the population with vital basic services and to advance
the political process with the aim of establishing a
permanent constitution for the country and holding
general elections in 2016.

Tackling the tasks of national reconciliation
is just as important, including the reintegration of
former combatants and the development of federalism
by strengthening links to regional administrations
and taking local social traditions and customs into
account. We support the Government's efforts to
launch a dialogue with representatives of Somaliland
and Jubaland on how to conduct mutual relations
based on the inviolability of the country's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and in accordance with its
Provisional Constitution. We believe that the role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
as an intermediary in this area is fundamental.

As before, the humanitarian situation, which is still
an acute threat, requires serious attention. The numbers
of starving people, the internally displaced and refugees
are not falling.

We should not fail to note the positive trend in the
fight against piracy. International efforts in that area
have led to a substantial drop in the number of pirate
attacks. The key to solving the problem still lies in
achieving a complex anti-piracy strategy, and above
all establishing order on land. Also in the forefront is
the task of coordinating efforts to suppress financing
channels for piracy, including by applying specific
sanctions.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome Mr. Nicholas
Kay's start at work as the new Special Representative for
Somalia. We hope that the recently created forthcoming
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) will be rolled out as soon as possible and
will busy itself by supporting the Government of the
country in resolving the priority tasks of peacebuilding,
including security-sector reform and the coordination
of international aid. In that regard, it will be essential to
refine the mechanisms whereby UNSOM. coordinates
its activities with the United Nations country team, the
African Union and IGAD, and giving special attention
to the security situation. We believe that the new
United Nations partnership will give impetus to the
stabilization process in Somalia, for whose success the
primary responsibility lies, of course, with the Somalis
themselves. We would like to wish them every success.

