Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
important open debate. I would also thank you for your
concept note highlighting the need to further deliberate
on ways to improve the Council's work (S/2013/6l3).

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

It is encouraging that, as reflected in the Council's
presidential note of 28 August (S/2013/515), the Council
will strive to improve dialogue with non-members of
the Council and representatives of other bodies, as part
of its commitment made in 2010 to enhance Council's
efficiency and transparency and to increase its
interaction and dialogue with external stakeholders. In
undertaking the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security in an effective manner,
the Security Council must take actions and decisions
that garner support and cooperation from the greater
United Nations membership. Accordingly, greater
communication, understanding and input from the
Member States is vital to enriching the Council's
decision-making capacity and to the achievement of its
aims.

As the Council is entrusted with its responsibilities
on behalf of the entire United Nations membership,
its meaningful engagement with the non-members of
the Council reflects its intention to heed and voice
the aspirations of the whole of the United Nations,
and not just those of a privileged few. The Council
should therefore show a greater degree of transparency,
accountability and efficiency and democratic values.

In order to help enhance the working methods of the
Council and increase inclusiveness therein, Indonesia
would like to share its views as follows.

First, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter of the
United Nations should be implemented in an effective
manner by consulting with non-members of the
Security Council on a regular basis, especially those
with a special interest in the substantive matters under
consideration by the Council. The Council should
also seek those countries' views in order to ensure
that countries are able to implement the Council's
decisions. Furthermore, Member States particularly
affected by sanctions should be given an opportunity, at
their request, to participate in meetings of the relevant
Sanctions Committees. The Council should also grant
affected non-members access to its subsidiary bodies,
including the right to participate and give substantial
input.

Secondly, the Council should hold regular, timely
and meaningful consultations with troop-contributing
countries, financial contributors and other countries that
are directly concerned or affected by a peacekeeping
operation before and during the decision-making
process for establishing, conducting, reviewing and
terminating a peacekeeping operation, including for a
change of mandates and specific operational issues.

Thirdly, draft resolutions, presidential statements
and other documents submitted at informal consultations
of the whole of the Council, if so authorized by authors
of the drafts, should also be promptly made available to
non-members of the Council.

Fourthly, the reasons for exercising a veto should
be explained at the time of doing so, and a copy of the
explanation should be circulated to all Member States.

Fifthly and lastly, as a general rule, the Council
should meet in a public forum that is open to all
Member States. It could decide to meet in private on an
exceptional basis.

Accordingly, we welcome the Council's enhanced
engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries, relevant regional and subregional
organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission. The
constructive steps taken should be maintained and
enhanced.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Indonesia's
commitment to supporting the Council in its work
and in its efforts to incorporate greater transparency,
inclusiveness, accountability, efficiency and democratic
values as it carries out its responsibilities.

