Mr. Salame: Allow also me to congratulate Peru
on its presidency of the Security Council this month.

Before beginning my briefing, I would like to pay
tribute to the late President of Tunisia, Mr. Beji Ca'id
Essebsi. President Essebsi was a great supporter of
the United Nations and was an active and committed
partner to the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in its efforts to end the Libyan crisis
through Tunisia's generous hosting ofthe Mission. I will
personally miss his wisdom, frankness and friendship.
He will be greatly missed. May he rest in peace.

The armed conflict in Libya shows no signs of
abating. The war around Tripoli has already left nearly
1,100 dead, including 106 civilians. Hundreds of
thousands of people have fled their homes in the capital
and neighbouring districts as a result of the fighting.
Tens of thousands have crossed the border to Tunisia,
seeking safety for their families. More than 100,000
men, women and children are immediately exposed to
the front lines, and there are over 400,000 more in areas
directly affected by clashes. The war has worsened
humanitarian conditions and hindered access to food,
health and other life-saving services.

Ignoring calls for de-escalation, the parties have
intensified air campaigns with precision air strikes
by aircraft and armed drones. The geographical scope
of the violence has also spread. For the first time, on
26 July, Government of National Accord (GNA) forces
launched an air attack on the main rear base of the
Libyan National Army (LNA) in the Jufra region. On
27 July, General Haftar's forces launched air strikes
on a GNA airbase in Misrata. There is increased
recruitment and use of foreign mercenaries, alongside
the use ofheavy weapons and ground attacks. Forces on
both sides have failed to observe their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

The most tragic example of indiscriminate attacks
was the air strike that hit a migrant detention centre in
Tajoura on 2 and 3 July, killing 53 and injuring at least
87, including children. What is even more appalling is
that the precise coordinates of the Tajoura detention
centre, and other such centres, were shared by the United
Nations with the parties following a previous incident
in May. While the vast majority of the fatalities were
due to the air strike, several victims were cruelly struck
down by those guarding the centre as they attempted to
flee. To make matters worse, following United Nations-
supported efforts to move the migrants to more secure
locations, authorities have in recent days returned more
than 200 migrants to the bombed facility.

The tragedy of up to 150 migrant deaths at sea on
25 July again underlines the urgent need to address
the root causes of the migrant issue and migrants"
immediate suffering. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies have worked hard to mitigate the terrible
conditions in these detention centres. Over 5,000
refugees and migrants are currently being held at
detention centres run by a Government agency; some
3,800 of these persons are exposed to the fighting.
What is required is that these facilities be shuttered.
Towards this end, I urge the Council now to call upon
the authorities in Tripoli to take the long-delayed but
much-needed strategic decision to free those who are
detained in these centres. UNSMIL has devised a plan
for an organized and gradual closure of all detention
centres and seeks the Security Council's support for
its implementation.
So far in 2019, nearly 4,500 refugees and migrants
have disembarked in Libya and faced serious risks of
detention, arbitrary arrest and being trapped by the
fighting. The international community can prevent
another tragedy. Iurge European countries to respond to
the Secretary-General's repeated pleas, revisit policies
and move migrants and refugees to safety.

I note with alarm the increasing frequency of attacks
on Mitiga airport, which serves as the only functioning
airport in the greater Tripoli area. Several of these
attacks have come perilously close to hitting civilian
aircraft with passengers on board. I am afraid that with
the almost daily bombardment, luck will run out. I call
upon the authorities in Tripoli to cease using the airport
for military purposes, and for the attacking forces to
immediately stop targeting it.

Pro-GNA forces retook the city of Gheryan on
26 June, located approximately 80 kilometres south
of Tripoli. It was a notable development, as Gheryan
was the first city that the LNA forces entered during
their march to Tripoli in April. There are unconfirmed
allegations that human rights abuses might have taken
place there, which we are now investigating. The recent
uptick in violence may worryingly presage a new
phase in the military campaign, but I do not believe
that will fundamentally alter the strategic stalemate.
The parties still believe that they can achieve their
objectives through military means. Prime Minister
Serraj and General Haftar have publicly reaffirmed
their commitment to a future political and electoral
process, but have yet to take practical steps to stop
the fighting. The LNA maintains that it will not stop
its attacks until Tripoli is conquered, while the GNA
forces insist that they can push General Haftar's forces
back to eastern Libya.

Libya's present and future need not be taken
hostage by the warring parties. While engaging with
political leaders and armed groups, UNSMIL is also
actively engaging a wide range of constituencies and
hosting second-track dialogues.

From 13 to 15 July, under the auspices of the
Egyptian Parliament, a meeting that brought together
72 members of the House of Representatives affirmed
the role of the House in a political solution to the Libyan
crisis and called for the formation of a Government of
national, unity without any mention of the need to cease
all hostilities. While I commend the efforts of those
who met in Cairo to seek an end to the conflict and
form a unified Government, I urge them to reach out
to their fellow members of Parliament to forge a truly
national project. I discourage the trend of establishing
a parallel parliament in Tripoli.

In the same vein, I am troubled by the insistence
of authorities in eastern Libya to press forward with
the establishment of a municipal elections committee
parallel to the national body for municipal elections that
already exists. Efforts to delegitimize the work of the
national body short-change Libyan voters themselves,
given the paucity of expertise and resources available
to the parallel institutions, cause confusion at the local
level and, ultimately, impede the country's fragile
transition to democracy.

The hatred and invective on social media and
satellite television stations is fuelling the violence on
the ground. I note that the owners and editors-in-chief
of those publications and television stations have invited
individuals who use despicable language of incitement,
aired and published calls to violence and assassinations,
spread intentionally false news and allowed ad hominem
attacks. I urge those who dwell in their self-contained
silos of enmity to cease spewing hatred and start talking
face-to-face with their compatriots.

Libya has become a terrain for experimentation
with new military technologies and recycling of old
weapons. Armed drones, armoured vehicles and pick-
up trucks fitted with heavy armaments, machine guns,
recoilless rifles and mortar and rocket launchers have
been recently transferred to Libya with the complicity,
and indeed outright support, of foreign Governments.
The weapons discovered after the retaking of Gheryan
illustrate the advanced systems that are provided. There
is no doubt that external support has been instrumental
in the intensification of air strikes.

I also note with concern that the imported weaponry
is being accompanied by foreign personnel working
as pilots, trainers and technicians. This reliance on
external support is a conflict driver. More than ever,
Libyans are now fighting the wars of other countries
that appear content to fight to the last Libyan and to
see the country entirely destroyed in order to settle
their own scores. Without the full cooperation of all
Member States regarding the implementation of the
measures related to the arms embargo in accordance
with resolution 2473 (2019), the flow of weapons to
Libya will continue to fuel this needless conflict.

The security vacuum created by the conflict in
and around Tripoli continues to be exploited by Da'esh
in remote areas in the country's southern and central
regions. Among other incidents, Da'esh claimed
responsibility on 2 June for a car-bomb attack in Derna
that resulted in 11 wounded.

Even more worrisome are the indications that the
arsenal of weapons being delivered by foreign supporters
to one side or the other is either falling into the hands of
terrorist groups or being sold to them. Some extremist
elements have sought legitimacy by joining the battle.
This is nothing short of a recipe for disaster, not only
for the safety and security of Libyans themselves but
also for that of Libya's neighbours and for international
peace and security. It is high time the warring parties
cease all hostilities, redeploy their forces and focus on
the common threat before Libya becomes more of a safe
haven for terrorist organizations. While I can report that
recently our warnings have been heeded, the parties
must be urged to decisively dissociate themselves from
all violent extremist elements and actively prevent them
fromjoining the conflict.

While UNSMIL had to reduce its footprint in Libya
due to the security situation, I have decided that the
Mission should not leave Libya. That allows the United
Nations to respond to growing humanitarian needs and
human rights concerns and remain fully engaged with
all interlocutors regarding de-escalation of the fighting
and the resumption of the political process. Since the
start of the conflict in and around Tripoli, the United
Nations, in support of local efforts, has provided
humanitarian assistance to over 75,000 people.
However, I regret to report that only 30 per cent of the
$200 million requested under the 2019 humanitarian
response plan has been received to date.

The humanitarian community will be unable to
respond to increased needs and assist about 100,000
highly vulnerable people impacted by the conflict if no
additional funding is received. Critical infrastructure
and vital installations that provide water, electricity
and other essential services to the population have been
damaged by the war. With Libya already in peak demand
during the hot summer, deficits in water and electricity
supplies have been aggravated by the fighting and
deliberate attacks targeting the Great Man-Made River
facilities. While Libya's oil continues to flow, the risks
to its continued production are as grave as those that
imperil the supply of water and electricity.

Earlier this month, the National Oil Corporation
declared force majeure after valves in the Hamada
area were closed by an armed group. The Mission
used its good offices to facilitate a quick resolution
to the dispute; force majeure was lifted several days
later. The parallel eastern National Oil Corporation
continues its efforts to sell oil, in violation of Security
Council resolutions. There is a serious danger of the
weaponization of oil in this conflict, the consequences
of which would be disastrous to the Libyan economy.

The conflict situation has limited the ability of
Libyan authorities to meet the basic needs of the
population. International and national humanitarian
partners are providing emergency relief, including
in response to floods in Ghat in early June. I led an
exceptional humanitarian visit to Ghat on 13 June,
where United Nations agencies delivered emergency
food, water, sanitation supplies and other provisions
needed in the town.

The situation in the south of the country is dire,
with a rise in communal violence, particularly in the
city of Murzuq. Southern communities face terrible
fuel and electricity shortages and an absence of bank
notes, in addition to a renewed security vacuum and an
increase in terrorist attacks.

UNSMIL has re-established an operational
presence in the east, with the reopened United Nations
hub in Benghazi. My Deputy for political affairs
conducted an eight-day mission to the east, covering
1,000 kilometers and visiting five cities to demonstrate
UNSMIL's commitment to serving all Libyans. We are
working hard to open a similar hub in Sebha, the capital
of the south.

In the course of the current fighting, serious
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law have been committed by all parties.
Residential areas have been hit by indiscriminate
shelling and targeted air strikes. I am particularly
worried to see that health workers and facilities have
been repeatedly targeted, with 19 ambulances and four
health facilities struck, many medical doctors and health
workers killed, including five yesterday, and others
wounded. Impunity should not prevail, especially for
those who attack hospitals and ambulances. Protecting
civilians and humanitarian workers requires sanctions
against those committing crimes.

There has been an unacceptable spike in enforced
disappearances and arbitrary detentions since the
outset of hostilities. On 17 July, elected House of
Representatives member Siham Sergewa was violently
abducted from her home in Benghazi by an unknown
group. I have raised Ms. Sergewa's case with the
authorities in the east, including yesterday with General
Haftar. Ms. Sergewa must be released immediately
and those responsible for her abduction must be held
accountable. Abductions have also risen at an alarming
rate in Tripoli, with numerous Government officials,
including the Deputy Director of the Food and Drug
Administration, being kidnapped by armed groups to
settle scores and extort ransoms.

Nearly four months into third war since 2011,
it should be abundantly clear to all that the risks of
either an open-ended low- intensity conflict or a full
escalation to outright war on the shores of the southern
Mediterranean are equally unacceptable. The decision
to stop the war cannot be postponed indefinitely. I
therefore submit the following three-part immediate
action to stop the conflict.

First, I call for a truce to be declared for Eid
Al-Adha, which will fall on or about 10 August. The
truce should be accompanied by confidence-building
measures between the parties, to include the exchange
of prisoners, the release of those arbitrarily detained or
abducted, and the exchange of mortal remains.

Secondly, following the truce, I request a high-
level meeting of concerned countries to cement the
cessation of hostilities, work together to enforce the
strict implementation of the arms embargo to prevent
the further flow of weapons to the Libyan theatre, and
promote strict adherence to international humanitarian
and human rights law by the Libyan parties.

Thirdly, the international meeting should be
followed by a Libyan meeting of leading and influential
personalities from all over the country to agree on
comprehensive elements for the way forward. Such a
consensus was on the verge of being built in the run-up
to the national conference in April. It is past time for
Libyans to end this long season of mutual suspicion, fear
and division. This triple action will require consensus
in the Council and among the Member States that exert
influence on the ground.

As for the Libyans, they need to listen to their
better angels. They are now fighting the wars of others
and in so doing destroying their country. Proposals
to revive political talks should be the basis for the
reunification of Libyan national institutions. I believe
that a comprehensive solution to the Libyan conflict
will require tackling the underlying drivers of what is
ultimately, though not exclusively, a war over resources.
The solution, therefore, will need to factor in much-
needed structural economic reform and an equitable
method to distribute the country's vast wealth.

We have taken a step forward in reinvigorating
the audit of the Central Bank and its parallel eastern
branch, which will be vital in promoting the unification
of the bank and increasing transparency on how
national funds are being spent. We have also devised
concrete proposals to allow the largest number of
Libyans to benefit from oil income, replacing predation
with fairness and self-interested disbursement with
welfare for all. Robust efforts will also be required to
combat the smuggling of people, fuel, weapons and
drugs - sources of wealth for the armed groups and
associated criminal elements.

Measures must also be taken to combat the rampant
corruption that has infested almost all elements of
the State. Economic reform should be coupled with
comprehensive reform of the security sector that
would allow the Libyan authorities to fight terrorism
and secure the country's borders. Structural security
issues, namely, the fragmentation of armed groups
and the proliferation of small arms, combined with
the absence of a unified and professional army, have
not been addressed since the fall of the former regime.
The Libyan State cannot be effective without having
an undisputed monopoly over force of arms. That will
require collection of weapons outside of the control
of the State and clear civilian oversight over the
security structures.

Much of the groundwork for these efforts was laid
during the military unification talks sponsored by the
Egyptian Government, in addition to the UNSMIL
supported steps taken, following last September's
violence in Tripoli, to reinforce and reform the Interior
Ministry. We urgently need to revive that momentum.

Stopping the war will require the will of the
parties and the support of the international community.
Should the parties agree to silence the guns, the United
Nations and international partners should stand ready
to provide material and technical support, enabling
the parties to negotiate a comprehensive agreement on
cessation of hostilities and appropriate mechanisms for
its implementation and monitoring.

Since the outbreak of the conflict, national
Governments and regional organizations have called
on the Libyan parties to stop the fighting and resume
the political process. For that, I am deeply appreciative
of the efforts of the African Union, the European Union
and the League of Arab States. People in Libyan cities
stop me to convey a clear message. The majority of
Libyans believe that it is now time for the Security
Council to join this chorus and decisively call for an
end to this needless war before it grows into a full-
blown civil war with serious, potentially existential
consequences for Libya and its neighbours.
Almost 70 years ago, the United Nations decided
to create an independent Libya. This organ bears a
particular responsibility to ensure that Libya does not
fracture into weak and unstable pieces but remains
the collected strength of the Libya that united in 1951.
Only with the imprimatur of the Security Council can
we, together, help the Libyans move past this dark
and violent episode and towards a more hopeful and
promising future.

