Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate and for allowing us to participate. We
also congratulate you on your presidency of the Council
this month. Let us also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2010/394) and express our gratitude for
the informative briefing provided by Ms. O'Brien.

The situation in Somalia poses a great challenge
and is a source of concern with regard to the stability
of the African continent in general and the Horn of
Africa in particular. As South Africa has pointed out on
numerous occasions, the issue of piracy off the coast of
Somalia cannot, and should not, be addressed in
isolation from the political, socio-economic and
humanitarian situation in that country.

During the fifteenth session of the Summit of the
African Union (AU), held in Kampala in July this year,
the AU reaffirmed its support for the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia and
condemned, in the strongest terms, the terrorist attacks
and violence perpetrated by Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups against the TFG, the Somali people and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The
Summit further condemned the despicable terrorist
attacks against innocent civilians that were committed
in Kampala on 11 July. It called on the entire
international community to isolate, and take all
required measures against, individuals, entities and
States that are engaged in terrorist acts and whose
actions are undermining the peace and reconciliation
process in Somalia, as well as regional stability and
international security.

Yesterday's tragic attacks in Mogadishu, resulting
in the death and injury of innocent civilians and
members of Parliament, are a manifestation of the
ongoing crisis in Somalia. South Africa condemns
those attacks in the strongest possible terms.

The AU has shown its commitment to the
resolution of the Somali conflict by committing to
strengthen AMISOM. with additional troops. With this
in mind, the Summit reiterated its call to the larger
international community, especially the Security
Council, to play its rightful role in bringing about
peace in Somalia, including through the transformation
of AMISOM. into a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. In that regard, the AU Assembly has called on
the international community to mobilize resources
commensurate with the magnitude of the challenges
facing Somalia and the region.

Furthermore, resolutions 1816 (2008), 1838
(2008) and 1846 (2008) on the situation in Somalia are
illustrative of efforts to combat piracy. It is important
to note, however, that General Assembly resolution
63/111, on oceans and the law of the sea, as well as the
Council resolutions I have just mentioned, emphasize
that those "apply only to the situation in Somalia and
do not affect the rights, obligations or responsibilities

of Member States under international law" (resolution 63/111, para. 66).

Turning to the issue of combating piracy in
Somalia, allow me to make a few points. The African
Union and South Africa have reiterated that piracy off
the coast of Somalia is but a symptom of the broader
peace, security, development and humanitarian
challenges that have afflicted Somalia for many
decades now, and that have, unfortunately, been
consistently ignored by the international community.

The piracy situation in Somali waters and the
high seas can only be addressed in the context of
seeking peace and security on land. Finding a political
solution to the conflict in Somalia and establishing
peace and security should therefore be the ultimate aim
in addressing and achieving a holistic and durable
solution to the challenge posed by piracy. Such a
holistic solution can be achieved by strengthening and
extending the authority of the TFG, especially its police
and security capacity, by continuing diplomatic and
military efforts against spoilers and by once more kick-
starting in earnest the political peace process in
Somalia based on the Djibouti process.

Among other factors, pirates have in particular
invoked as justification for their actions the illegal
fishing carried out in Somali territorial and exclusive
economic zone waters by foreign ships, and the illegal
dumping of toxic waste off the coast of Somalia. All
Member States and international corporate citizens
should therefore observe their obligations in
conformity with international maritime law and desist
from illegally exploiting the natural resources of
Somalia or committing illegal dumping activities.
Additionally, as many have pointed out, under article
100 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, all States have a duty to cooperate in
suppressing piracy on the high seas near Somalia.

Continued support for AMISOM. is therefore
indispensable in order to help the Government resist
the military challenge confronting it. However, I
reiterate that the Security Council must fulfil its
responsibility, as mandated in the Charter, to maintain
international peace and security. We look forward to
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission that can eventually take over from the African
Union Mission in Somalia. The Security Council
cannot continue to avoid the question of Somalia. The
Council's primary mandate includes making peace take
root in Somalia, and in a manner that the Council has
expressed to the African forces in AMISOM.

The international community has committed
millions of dollars to create an international naval
presence in and around Somali waters. While this
investment is to be welcomed, it is also important that
investment be made in establishing a coastguard
capacity under the control of the TFG, and to empower
national law enforcement agencies to perform policing
duties that could act as a deterrent to would-be pirates.

Lastly, the African Union decision to prohibit the
payment of ransom, taken at its thirteenth Summit in
2009 and reiterated again at the latest Summit, should
be adhered to, since this is one of the main forms of
funding for such groups. It is widely acknowledged
that paying ransom perpetuates the problem, as it helps
fund more illegal activities on both land and sea. In
that regard, the focus should instead be on creating
income-generating opportunities in coastal villages as
an alternative to the lucrative opportunities associated
with piracy.

South Africa also feels it is important that the
best and most appropriate mechanisms, at the national,
regional and international levels, be established and
implemented, so that pirates can feel the force of the
full prosecution and might of international law, as
suggested in the report of the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, addressing piracy around Somali
waters in a lasting manner will require a combination
of political, socio-economic and security strategies to
yield the desired effect. Focusing exclusively on one,
without the others, is doomed to yield limited success,
or at best success in the short term only.

