Ms. Anderson (United States): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate today. Let me also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/514) and briefing. My thanks go
as well to the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union (AU), Ambassador Lamamra, for his
important contributions to today's discussion.

The United States commends the African nations
that provide resources, police officers and troops to
support vital peacekeeping missions on the continent.
In particular, we applaud the major deployment of
more than 7,000 Ugandan and Burundian troops in
Somalia and the critical work being done together with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Such contributions have improved security and
saved lives across the continent, and they are helping
to prevent threats to international peace and security
from spreading further.

The United States fully supports strengthening
the strategic relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). We are encouraged to see
improved communication and collaboration between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. We also welcome the increased frequency
with which African Union officials have briefed the
Security Council and United Nations Special
Representatives have briefed the AU Peace and
Security Council.

My Government also supports the continued
United Nations assistance to the AU in the
development of the continental early-warning system,
which, once it becomes operational, will further
enhance the African Union's ability to prevent conflict.
The United States is fully dedicated to supporting the
African Union as it grapples with the complex
challenges of illicit drug trafficking and post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa. We also strongly support
plans to enhance joint operational efforts to counter the
Lord's Resistance Army. My Government firmly
supports the African Union's operations in Guinea-
Bissau, the Sudan, the Central African Republic and
Somalia.

Let me just say a few words about Somalia. The
Djibouti peace process has moved forward and parts of
Mogadishu have remained outside extremist control
because of the efforts of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). The partnership between the
United Nations and the AU has allowed both
organizations to accomplish more than they could have
on their own.

It is in our collective interest to support that
partnership, and we welcome the opportunity to review
its progress and consider way to make it more
effective. The United States will continue its strong
bilateral support to AMISOM's troop-contributing
countries, but securing sustainable, predictable and
flexible financing remains a key challenge to the AU's
capacity to undertake effective peacekeeping
operations.

The United States commitment to supporting the
vision of the African Standby Force contributing to AU
operations is broad and deep. Since 2005, the United
States has provided more than $940 million to support
ongoing African Union operations in Darfur and
Somalia and capacity-building through the Africa
Contingency Operations Training and Assistance
Programme. The United States support for building up
the capacity of the African Standby Force is focused at
all three levels - continental, subregional and Member
State. My Government welcomes the ongoing
simulation and evaluation exercise known as Amani
Africa, which we see as an important first step towards
that goal.

Going forward, we expect that the United Nations
Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa will help
make United Nations support to the AU better
coordinated and more effective, especially in the area
of financial management. That will help ensure that the
AU has the capacity to use donor support effectively,
even as we improve cooperation and coordination. We
also support making more and better use of the AU
Partners Group in Addis Ababa to help make donor
funding to the AU Commission more sustainable and
predictable.

We should also work together to further enhance
the AU secretariat's capacity to plan, manage and
sustain peacekeeping operations. We must identify
areas that need additional support and attention from
African and other partners, including logistics,
mobility and mission management. We encourage
continued efforts to operationalize the African Standby
Force, and the United States will continue to support
capacity-building and encourage others to support
resource-intensive endeavours.

The United States would like to explore the
possibility of better links between United Nations and
African Union capabilities. We support a detailed
analysis of the operational, budgetary, human resources
and legal implications of letting AU peace support
operations authorized by this Council have access to
the United Nations logistics base in Brindisi, increased
United Nations technical expertise, United Nations
strategic deployment stocks and United Nations
strategic lift capabilities, as recommended by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We would
like to examine the preparatory reports as soon as they
are available.

We also urge all those who seek peace and
security to pay greater attention to the protection of
civilians caught up in conflict and war. We applaud
efforts to incorporate doctrine on protecting civilians
into all aspects of the AU's peace support operations
and related activities. The United States has increased
efforts to deploy formed police units in Africa.
Protecting civilians and responding to gender-based
violence requires stronger advocacy and programme
efforts from the AU and in the preparation of
peacekeepers. We support doing more to enhance the
civilian and police dimensions of peacekeeping in
Africa.
Finally, the United States encourages the United
Nations to continue its work with the African Union as
it develops its peace and security architecture and the
African standby force.

