Mr. Ortiz Gandarillas (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to express to you, Sir,
and to your country our warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and on your skilful guidance of the delicate
and important work of the Council during the month of
March.

My country, Bolivia, along with many other
countries, is following with much concern the situation
in Iraq and the measures that are being taken at the
political and diplomatic levels and, obviously, at the
military level. Our concern relates to the unforeseeable
consequences in terms of human, political, economic
and social costs that an armed conflict - any armed
conflict - can entail. We are all aware of these
dangers, which no one can escape.

But we are also concerned about the danger that
the Iraqi regime represents for international peace and
security because of its possession of weapons of mass
destruction, which could be used or could fall into the
hands of extremist or terrorist groups. It is in the light
of this situation that, for 12 years, the Security Council
has been demanding the total dismantling of Iraq's war
arsenal through various resolutions, particularly
resolution 1441 (2002).

Regrettably, the situation that we are
experiencing today stems from Iraq's determination to
arm itself, which constitutes a threat to international
security and defies resolution 1441 (2002).
Undoubtedly, it is the responsibility of the Iraqi regime
to demonstrate credibly and reliably that it does not
possess weapons of mass destruction.

In the light of the situation facing the
international community - particularly the
Organization - we also wish to express our concern at
the division and lack of agreement within the Security
Council, which weakens the capacity of the United
Nations to defend international peace and security.

We believe firmly and wish to express with all
due respect that, now more than ever, the Security
Council must shoulder its responsibility and act with
resolve so that its decisions can be duly implemented.
In that connection, the message of the United
Nations - and particularly of the Security Council -
must be clear and unequivocal: the Government of Iraq
must disarm swiftly in order to spare the international
community greater conflicts. We believe that, in this
way, we shall be able to ensure greater effectiveness
and strength for the Council and for the United Nations
system, to the benefit of global security and peaceful
coexistence.

