The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as a representative of France.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing. I should also like
to thank the Ambassador of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin,
for his statement.

I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

Afghanistan is writing a new page in its history.
The 2014 presidential election was an important step in
the country's political transition process and allowed
for the first peaceful, democratic handover of power.
France reiterates its support to the Afghan President,
Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, and to the Chief
Executive, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, and to all new
members of the new national unity Government. France
welcomes the appointment of members of the national
unity Government on 12 January and wants to see the
follow-up to that process to ensure that the Government
team will soon be fully staffed.

In addition, the security transition concluded in
2014 under satisfactory conditions. The NATO Resolute
Support Mission advisory training services are helping
the Afghan Security Forces, which are now responsible
for security across the Afghan territory.

Afghanistan has now entered the transformation
decade, which should result in the implementation of
an ambitious reform programme. With its partners,
France will continue to support the Government on the
implementation of the reform plan presented during the
London Conference on 4 December 2014. We stress the
importance of the commitments undertaken under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, which is to
be revised this year.

However, the completion of the transition and the
beginning of the transformation decade should not let
us to forget that many challenges remain. In a fragile
security context, the role of regional partners is essential
for Afghanistan's stability. The initiatives taken to
better secure the border are very positive. Regional
support is also important to ensure that the process of
national reconciliation can begin in order to guarantee
the conditions for lasting peace in Afghanistan. France
supports the efforts of the Afghan Government in that
regard.

Furthermore, it is crucial that the mobilization
of the Afghan authorities remain strong on the issue
of countering drug trafficking. This is a concern for
my country. We encourage the Afghan authorities to
continue their efforts to combat the production and
trafficking of drugs, which pose a real threat to the
stability and development of the country and for the
health of its people.

In that context, France believes that the role of the
United Nations is more important than ever. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
embodies the will of the international community to
continue to support Afghanistan, and we attach great

importance to the United Nations continuing to enjoy
the necessary means to achieve that goal. We believe
that, while the current mandate remains relevant, it
will be useful in future to reflect on its evolution. In
that regard, we welcome the invitation to reflect on its
evolution set in resolution 2210 (2015), which we have
adopted today.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of Mr. Haysom and the entire UNAMA team, which is
working in difficult conditions. France is convinced that
the United Nations will continue to play a decisive role
in Afghanistan in the framework of the transformation
decade, which is characterized by renewed support
by Afghanistan's partners, with full respect for the
principle of the country's sovereignty.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

