Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The graphic scene of
the destruction of the white ambulance, which reportedly
killed two women and four children the other day in
southern Lebanon, is a shattering reminder of a tragedy

 

which must be brought to an end at once. My delegation is
of the view that the current situation in Lebanon and along
the Israel-Lebanon border deserves serious consideration by
all the members in this Chamber, particularly given its
possible impact upon the overall Middle East peace process.

The fact that the Council must meet twice in a single
day on the question of the Middle East is a distressful
reflection of the grave situation which exists at multiple
levels in that region. It is, however, all the more reason for
the members of this Council to deliberate cautiously and
patiently on this issue, as peace in the Middle East cannot
be complete without reconciliation between Israel and
Lebanon, as well as between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization and between Israel and Syria. The
Middle East peace process can be rounded out only by
making progress on each track, in keeping with the
approach envisioned at the Madrid Peace Conference.

In this regard, we would like to join the previous
speakers in expressing deep concern about the recent
escalation of the hostilities and the sharp deterioration of
the situation in Lebanon and along the Israel-Lebanon
border. My delegation reaffirms its support for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries, as
reiterated by the Council on various occasions.

We are particularly disturbed by the growing number
of civilian casualties which have resulted from the targeting
of cities and villages by the two sides. It is alarming that
the 1993 understanding between the parties to restrict
fighting to military targets in the l9-mile buffer zone seems
to have been scrapped. We call upon both parties
immediately to cease targeting civilian populated areas and
to respect fully the non-combatant status of civilians.

My delegation is equally concerned at the growing
number of refugees who are fleeing their homes, and the
worsening humanitarian situation in the area of conflict.

From a historical perspective, the current situation
serves as a sobering reminder of the significant obstacles
which exist in overcoming the deep-rooted suspicions and
hatred among the parties in the region. It has been the
Republic of Korea's consistent view that only through
open-minded and serious dialogue can the parties concerned
overcome these formidable impediments to peace and
security in the Middle East.

At this critical juncture, my delegation firmly believes
that only restraint by the parties directly concerned can
keep the peace process alive. The continuation of the
present hostilities will merely provide the extremists with
further pretexts to hamper the peace process and dim the
prospect for achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region.

It is in this context that my delegation joins the
appeals of the international community to the parties
concerned to cease the fighting immediately and to enter
into negotiations for a peaceful settlement on the basis of
the Council resolution 425 (1978).

