Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): In his report on the work of
the Organization to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session, the Secretary-General had this to say on Africa:

"An estimated 44 per cent of Africans, and 51 per
cent of those in sub-Saharan Africa, are living in
absolute poverty. Of the 30 million people infected by
HIV/AIDS in the world, 23 million live in
sub-Saharan Africa; 91 per cent of all AIDS deaths in
the world have occurred in 34 countries - 29 of
which are in Africa." (A/54/I, para. 172)

There are over 6 million refugees and about 8 million
internally displaced persons in Africa. Twenty countries are
either engaged in or affected by conflict. And the list goes
on.

I have chosen to commence my statement with this
extract for two reasons. One is to highlight the
incompatibility of conflict with durable peace and
sustainable development. The other reason is to stress that
the Netherlands remains an important donor country and
development partner to Africa and particularly to my
country, Namibia. It is therefore no surprise to us, Sir, that
your delegation has initiated yet another important debate,
this time on the progress made towards the implementation
of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa. Your physical presence in presiding over this
meeting, Sir, is no small measure of your interest. My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for the progress
report which is guiding our discussions and for his tireless
efforts in addressing conflict situations in Africa and
mobilizing international support for the development of
Africa.

It is now 17 months since the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General was issued. Notwithstanding the
recommendations contained therein, conflict in many parts
of Africa - based on ethnicity, religion or the pursuit of
diamonds, drugs, timber concessions and other valuable
commodities - continues to plague Africa. Rebel groups
and their supporters are creating turmoil on our beloved
continent. The security and neutrality of refugee camps
are not respected, while the problem of refugees and
internally displaced persons is becoming unmanageable.
The traffic in women and girls as sex slaves and the
recruitment and training of children as combatants are
rampant.

Today, massive resources continue to be diverted to
the procuring of arms and munitions. Furthermore, and
according to the Carnegie Commission on Preventing
Deadly Conflict, the cost to the international community
of major wars in the 19903, excluding Kosovo, amounted
to $199 billion. We also know that Africa received less
than $5 billion in foreign direct investment in 1998. If
half of the resources lost to wars were channelled into
development programmes, then surely millions of
children, women and men who today are victims of
armed conflict would be saved and Africa's development
and prosperity would have been enhanced.

Thus, we concur with the Secretary-General's views
that

"Taking prevention more seriously will help to
ensure that there are fewer wars and less
consequential disasters to cope with in the first
place." (ibid., para. 21)

It is for this reason that we commend the initiatives of the
United Nations for its support to the Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament and the peacekeeping training
centres in Cote d'Ivoire and Zimbabwe, as well as
regional and subregional initiatives in the areas of conflict
prevention through the United Nations Integrated
Regional Information Network, which serves as an early-
warning mechanism in Central and Southern Africa.

To this end, we commend the United Nations post-
conflict peace-building effort in countries emerging from

 

civil wars and its assistance in the destruction of small arms
and light weapons trafficked in violation of Security
Council-imposed sanctions.

Furthermore, as the Secretary-General correctly points
out in his progress report, rivalry in mediation efforts is
detrimental to peace and frustrating to United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, and therefore new initiatives must
augment the existing mediation efforts. In this context, we
reiterate our appeal to the international community to
continue and to increase assistance to the Organization of
African Unity and other regional organizations in Africa.

The Security Council has issued numerous resolutions
imposing sanctions against UNIT A. In addition, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1237 (1999) on 7 May
1999, establishing the expert panels with the mandate to
study the violations of sanctions against UNITA. Namibia
remains committed to the full implementation of sanctions
against UNITA and pledges its full support to the work of
the panels and eagerly awaits their recommendations in this
regard. UNITA must not be permitted to continue defying
the will of the international community with impunity.
UNITA must comply with its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol by demilitarizing its forces and must permit the
extension of State administration to areas under its control.

With regard to the further tightening of sanctions
against UNITA through the adoption of national legislation
criminalizing violations of the Council's sanctions imposed
against UNITA, my Government supports this measure and
will approach the Secretariat for assistance in preparing its
own national legislation in this regard. We share the view
that the Security Council has exercised and continues to
exercise a double standard in the application of sanctions,
which has indeed undermined the effectiveness of sanctions
imposed against UNITA. The political will of the
international community is of utmost importance in
rendering the sanctions more effective. We highly commend
the efforts and commitment of Ambassador Robert Fowler
of Canada, the Chairman of the sanctions Committee, in
galvanizing momentum among the international community
to implement sanctions against UNITA.

Since the outbreak of the war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo more than a year ago, enormous
efforts have been made by regional leaders, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations to resolve the conflict. As a result of those efforts
and the determination of African leaders to address
conflicts afflicting the continent, the Ceasefire Agreement
was signed on 10 July 1999 by the States involved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo conflict and
subsequently by the Movement for the Liberation of the
Congo and the Congolese Rally for Democracy on 1 and
31 August 1999, respectively.
That war has caused immense human suffering to
hundreds of innocent civilians, some of whom have lost
their lives. Others are now internally displaced or have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries. The humanitarian
needs of these refugees and internally displaced persons
need to be addressed, for it will take time before they
return to their homes.

Security Council resolution 1234 (1999) of 9 April
1999 called for the immediate signing of the Ceasefire
Agreement, among other things. Now that the Agreement
has been signed by all parties, we regard it of utmost
importance for a United Nations peacekeeping operation
to be deployed to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without further delay, in order to implement the
Agreement. Such an international peacekeeping force, of
the right size, should be deployed with an appropriate
mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations and should be supported with the necessary
resources.

We have always maintained that the Council should
act swiftly so as to avoid creating a vacuum. It is now
time for the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to take immediate action. What we had
feared is now taking place in the Congo. Resolution 1234
(1999) is being flouted in earnest in the eastern part of
the Congo, not to mention the continuous looting of the
natural resources of the Congo.

The pace for the deployment of the military liaison
personnel, the dispatch of the technical assessment team
and the eventual deployment of the peacekeeping force
should therefore be increased. Any further delay will
prolong the agony and suffering of the people of the
Congo and result in more bloodshed in that country. We
thank the European Union and all those who have assisted
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
in the peace process for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We call for their continued assistance.

Several international human rights instruments have
been developed and ratified over the past 50 years which
address the rights, protection and welfare of children.
Fundamental guarantees pertaining to the rights and needs
of children are explicitly noted in these agreements.

 

There is, however, an urgent need for all parties to
conflicts to respect fully the provisions of these
international instruments. The impact of armed conflict on
children in Africa has been particularly harmful,
disproportionate and widespread. No region of the continent
has been spared the scourge of armed conflict. It is true that
the primary responsibility for bringing to an end the use of
child soldiers lies with the relevant Governments and other
parties to the armed conflicts. At the same time, the
international community has a major role to play to ensure
an end to the immoral use of children as soldiers.

We will continue to witness the tragedy of war-
affected children who are severely malnourished, abused,
raped and murdered at the hands of adults unless we all get
involved and do something serious about it.

The Secretary-General has issued his report
(S/1999/1003) on the Observer Mission in Sierra Leone,
which, inter alia, states in paragraph 57 that,

"With the signing of the Lorne Peace Agreement,
the people of Sierra Leone have an opportunity
to repair some of the damage caused by their
long conflict and to set their country back on the
road to peace and prosperity. In order to do so,
they will have to make a strong national effort,
but they will need significant international
assistance in that regard. Many of the efforts
needed are of a long-term nature, requiring the
commitment of the Government and donors for
many years to come."

My delegation could not agree more.

Namibia therefore supports the earliest deployment of
the proposed peacekeeping force to Sierra Leone, to be
known as the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). Only then can the people of Sierra Leone
begin to nurture peace in their country. We must act with
the same urgency to address conflict situations in Africa as
we do elsewhere in the world. Peace in Africa will benefit
us all.

It is important for the international community not to
be seen to be selective when dealing with various
humanitarian situations around the globe. The Secretary-
General stated in paragraph 104 of his progress report
(S/ 1999/ 1008) that

"As of 31 August, the United Nations had
received only half of the $800 million it had
requested to meet humanitarian needs in
Africa".

The time has now come for the international community
to pay equal attention to all conflicts.

However, we are of the view that reacting to
humanitarian situations alone is not enough. The
international community should spare no effort in
addressing the root causes of conflict. Democracy, good
governance, accountability, transparency and the rule of
law have all taken root in most countries in Africa. These
must, however, be accompanied by the necessary
development assistance if they are to be sustained.

Never before has a region been the subject of so
many reports in the United Nations yet the situation
seems to remain the same. In the area of the maintenance
of international peace and security, the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa has provided recommendations which hold the
key to solving Africa's problems. The recent OAU
summit held in Algiers has once more demonstrated the
resolve of African States to make peace and development
the rule in Africa. What is needed, therefore, is the
political will to earnestly assist Africans to make peace
and security in Africa a reality.

