Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
presiding over the work of the Security Council and for
holding this important meeting.

My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

In those areas that are controlled by the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, the Army of Islam, also
known as the Free Army, or other terrorist entities
that are satellites of Al-Qaida, criminal battalions
have been created under a number of different names.
They include the Zarqawi Youth around Damascus, the
Khalifa Youth in Al-Bukamal in the eastern part of the
country, and the youth of the Ibn Taymiyyah Brigade
in the Aleppo area, which is linked to Jabhat Al-Nusra.
Those battalions are fuelled by children who have
been brainwashed in order to turn them into monsters,
murderers, rapists and executioners. They undergo
rigorous physical training, drill with arms and carry
equipment and weapons that weigh more than their
own young bodies. The innocent laughter of children
has vanished from the region, replaced by slogans of
hatred, murder and blood. The children have been
turned into suicides with an instinctual hatred for their
fellow citizens.

In one of the videos that are circulating, an old man
is talking to some children in a school yard. He speaks
with a distinct Gulf accent and indoctrinates them with
distorted religious statements that he then ties to a
historical personage, religion or party so as to establish
a religious and divine justification for killing and
slaughtering. In the video, he asks them what should be
done with evil Christians and Jews, and the response
they have been taught is that their throats should be
cut preceded, of course, by the phrase "Allah akbar"
or "Allah is great".

 

In order to deal with such violations, the
Government of Syria, since the beginning of the crisis
and in accordance with its constitutional responsibility
to protect its citizens, has undertaken various measures
aimed at promoting the protection of children, including,
as I have said, every possible measure to prevent
the recruitment of children into combat, including a
decree adopted on 6 May 2013. The Government has
taken steps to prevent the targeting of schools and
hospitals and violence against children, including
sexual violence, killing and mutilation. The relevant
Syrian authorities are cooperating with the Special
Representative in the country regarding the monitoring
of crimes committed against Syrian children and their
investigation. The Government has presented her with
proof and confirmed information on the hundreds of
crimes and serious violations committed by the armed
terrorist groups in Syria, in the hope that that will help
to expose those crimes, but so far we have not seen any
concrete steps taken to do so.

As an example, on 6 April, our delegation presented
the Special Representative with verified information on
the armed groups' systematic attacks on schools and
hospitals, including 58 cases relating to schools and
54 cases of children killed, abducted or mutilated. On
7 March we asked for an investigation by the Special
Representative into the recruitment of Syrian children as
war correspondents by foreign authorities and satellite
TV networks. On 7 April, we informed the Special
Representative about the more than 18,000 cases of
organ trafficking involving Syrians in northern Syria.
Around 100,000 children in refugee camps in Turkey
are at risk for such trafficking. We have voiced our
concern dozens of times about the situation of children
in the refugee camps in neighbouring countries, which
we do not have time to discuss today. What has the
Special Representative and the country team done
to verify those crimes or to denounce the violations
perpetrated by the terrorist armed groups against the
Syrian children in my country?

