Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking Lord Ashdown for his
briefing. I would also like to pay tribute to the
outstanding job he has done throughout his term in
office. The progress we are witnessing today owes a
great deal to his tireless dedication. I think we can state
assuredly without mistake, that, without him, Bosnia
and Herzegovina would not have made so much
progress in its process of rejoining Europe.

Ten years after the signing of the peace
agreement, relations among the three peoples
concerned have greatly improved. The large number of
returned refugees, the growing improvement in
relations with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the inquiry by the Republika
Srpska into the Srebrenica massacre and the absence of
all ethnic and inter-ethnic violence are all signs that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is putting conflict behind
itself and becoming a stable and democratic State,
moving closer towards meeting the standards and
values of Europe.

The progress made over the past two years in
building a central unified State has been remarkable.
Important reforms have been implemented and have
made it possible for the country to become unified
economically. Central institutions in the main
governmental sectors - including defence, justice,
taxation and public broadcasting - have helped to
launch the process of European integration for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The latest significant reform - the law
concerning the police - has just overcome its last
obstacle with the vote of 5 October of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska. With the
establishment of the principle of an integrated police
force for Bosnia and Herzegovina, that reform has
made it possible to meet the last requirement for the
opening of negotiations with the European Union
concerning a stabilization and association agreement,
which should be in place by the end of the year. That is
a major step forwards towards building a stable and
democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Once again, we pay tribute to the activities of the
High Representative, who has played a decisive role in
bringing about the success of the negotiations.
However, that process should not encourage us to
diminish our efforts. Bosnia and Herzegovina has not
yet completed either its process of reconciliation or its
integration with Europe. First, its efforts to cooperate
fully with the Tribunal must be continued and
strengthened. The arrest and transfer of all accused
persons to The Hague - in particular Karadzic and
Mladic - is essential in order to satisfy both its
international obligations and its own needs to complete
the reconciliation process.
The reform of the defence forces and the police,
where many practical measures remain that still need
to be worked out or implemented - needs to be
pursued further. In the area of education we are
concerned about the increasing segregation of students
according to their ethnic origin.

It is due to the progress that has been made that
we can thus envision the gradual dismantling of the
international trusteeship, along with a concomitant
transfer of authority to the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That process should be undertaken within
the next year.

France and the European Union, for their part,
will continue to stand side-by-side with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although a High Representative may no
longer be needed, the Special Representative of the
European Union will continue to play the essential role
of providing support and advice to the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensuring coordination
among the various forms of the European presence
there.

