Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the head of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Yury F edotov, for his comprehensive briefing.

We view today's meeting as an important step in
strengthening the contacts between the Security
Council and UNODC. We support the Security
Council's intention to continue along this path, in
accordance with earlier Council decisions, including
the presidential statement of 24 February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/4).
There is a need to more actively use the unique
expertise and potential of UNODC and other
specialized areas of the Secretariat in the Council's

work to counter threats to international peace and
security posed by drug trafficking and other forms of
transnational crime. In that regard, we reaffirm the
topical nature of the Security Council's proposal to the
Secretary-General to include those threats as a factor in
conflict analysis and joint mission planning and
assessment, as well as to analyse the impact of those
threats in connection with situations on the Security
Council's agenda.

These tasks of priority importance concern a
number of areas, including drug threats from
Afghanistan, which remains a pressing issue. The
destructive impact of Afghan drug trafficking has
spread far beyond its borders and those of the region.
We are dealing here with a threat to international peace
and security. The response to that threat should be
comprehensive and coordinated, including adapting the
United Nations internally to new challenges.

We welcome the steps taken by the Secretary-
General to strengthen interdepartmental cooperation
within the United Nations on the issues of drug
trafficking and crime, including the creation, to that
end, of a cross-cutting task force within the Secretariat,
with a leading role played by UNODC and the
Department of Political Affairs. Those measures are in
keeping with the Security Council's decisions, as set
forth in relevant presidential statements on threats to
international peace and security stemming from drug
trafficking and organized crime.

The Russian Federation advocates the creation,
with the United Nations playing a leading role and with
the participation of Afghanistan's neighbours, of a
comprehensive system of counter-narcotics and
financial security belts. The basis for carrying out such
work lies in the decisions taken within the framework
of the Paris-Moscow process, which is being conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations. That process
is one of the most effective and promising instruments
available to the international community.

We place great hope in the third international
ministerial conference to be held in Vienna in
December under the auspices of UNODC. The
conference will undertake a detailed analysis of ways
to bolster the effectiveness of technical and other
assistance to the Government of Afghanistan and those
of the States of Central Asia and adopt a concrete
programme of action.

We attach special importance to the UNODC's
development and launching of a regional programme
for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, which will
reinforce UNODC's current work in the region. We
support improved coordination of efforts in this area, in
our national capacity and within the framework of
relevant international organizations and structures. We
will continue to contribute to the counter-narcotics
efforts of the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the
Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and
the Financing of Terrorism and the Central Asian
Regional Information and Coordination Centre on the
trafficking in illicit narcotics, psychotropic substances
and their precursors.

We welcome the forging of relevant contacts
between UNODC and those organizations, especially
the recent memorandum of understanding between
UNODC and the SCO. At its recent summit, the SCO
adopted a counter-narcotics strategy for the period
2011 to 2016, including a programme of action for its
implementation that gives priority to cooperation on
combating opiates from Afghanistan.

One important track in combating the flow of
narcotics from Afghanistan remains the interdiction of
shipments to Afghanistan of precursors for the
production of heroin and opium. We stand ready to
cooperate closely with all our partners in implementing
the provisions of resolution 1817 (2008).

In our view, the role of the UNODC in this field
is of great importance, alongside those of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Inter-Agency
Coordination Body (IACB). We believe it is important
that the Office be actively involved in devising
initiatives to strengthen the international control
regime on precursors, in particular the marking of
precursors to identify specific manufacturers and
suppliers to Afghanistan, as well as the strengthening
of international monitoring of the movement of
precursors on the basis of pre-export notification, re-
export notification and re-sale to third-State systems,
and the monitoring of large-scale bulk transport across
Afghanistan's borders, licensing activities related to
the shipment of precursors and replacement products.

In countering the interlinked threats of drug
trafficking, terrorism and other forms of transnational
organized crime, it is important to make full use of the
United Nations legal instruments available to Member

States, such as existing international conventions and
Security Council resolutions. We must guard against
any weakening of the regime established by United
Nations counter-narcotics conventions and ensure that
they and the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime are effectively implemented. In that
regard, we note the substantial contribution made by
UNODC, the need for the Office's technical assistance
and the high quality support functions provided by the
IACB, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
and the Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

To strengthen the international legal basis to
combat crime, Russia advocates that appropriate
measures be developed to regulate the use of new
information and communication technology. The
Security Council has already expressed its concern at
the growth of cybercrime. We believe that the time has
come to develop an international convention for
cooperation to combat cybercrime, as well as rules, or
perhaps a code of conduct, in this area. We trust that
UNODC will provide assistance for relevant initiatives
and agreements in this area.

Given the range of large-scale and long-term
tasks facing UNODC, its financial situation, including
its de facto dependence on voluntary contributions, is
alarming. We advocate careful consideration of these
issues in the General Assembly with a view to restoring
a balance of financing from the regular budget of the
United Nations and extrabudgetary resources.

In conclusion, I should like to underscore again
that we highly value UNODC's work and see a
substantial role for the Office in assisting the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies in
implementing their counter-narcotics activities. We
welcome the practice of holding regular briefings for
the Security Council by the Executive Director. We
believe that relevant formal documents should be
adopted at the conclusion of such meetings, as was
previously the case, to bolster the effectiveness of such
meetings, reaffirm our commitment to agreed policies
and, when necessary, clarify, fine-tune and expand our
approaches.

