Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are convinced of the importance of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and African regional and subregional organizations to
ensure peace and security on the continent. The Russian
delegation therefore voted in favour of resolution 2320
(2016). However, we are forced to note that, during
work on the resolution, the co-sponsors did not take on
board a number of important amendments from some
delegations, ours included.

We are puzzled by the refusal to include in
the resolution references to the basic principles of
peacekeeping, which have been approved by Member
States many times. We cannot shake the impression that
this is a cover-up for the intention to deploy African
peacekeeping operations against the will of host
parties and in violation of the principle of impartiality.
The universal basic principles of peacekeeping are
obligatory for any operation, especially those approved
by the Security Council. A paradox arises in that
regard when United Nations support is requested, but
United-Nations-approved principles are ignored. The
resolution is also replete with specific language likely
more characteristic of the General Assembly and its
Fifth Committee than of the Security Council.

We call attention to the fact that there was a lack
of unity among African delegations on the Security
Council in agreeing on the resolution. The 29 September
communique of the African Union Peace and Security
Council calls for such unity. As we understand it,
the African Union itself has not yet settled on a final
position on the modalities for funding its own peace
operations, and it intends to draft such during the
Summit to be held in Addis Ababa in January.

We are also unhappy with the working methods of
the co-sponsors, who did not fully take into account
the legitimate concerns of several delegations and
stubbornly stuck to their language, which made it more
difficult to achieve consensus on this very important
resolution.

The meeting rose at 1.10pm.
