China thanks Special Representative Meagher La Lime for her briefing. Since the previous meeting on this issue in the Security Council in June (see S/2020/568), Haiti has been mired in a prolonged political impasse and continued constitutional crisis, with a deteriorating security situation that put its people in danger. The situation of women is a matter of particular concern. The economic reality is grim, and the coronavirus disease further aggravates the already difficult livelihoods of Haitians. The political, economic and social crises that Haiti is facing show no signs of lessening. To defuse the crises and achieve stability and development, Haiti ultimately has to rely on its own efforts, and the Haitian authorities bear the primary responsibility. However, it is regrettable that the Haitian Government's governance capabilities are severely inadequate and that corruption has persisted despite repeated prohibitions. According to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/944), certain Government authorities have committed abuses. It is reported that some Haitian police officers took to the streets to protest over low salaries, and even exchanged fire with police officers on duty. The Haitian Government must effectively improve its governance capabilities, shoulder its own responsibilities and meet the people's expectations. At the same time, the Haitian authorities and various domestic factions must put the interests of the people first, abandon personal interests, put aside their differences and commit themselves to inclusive dialogue and extensive consultation in order to reach a political solution. Haiti will hold a presidential election next year. Election preparations must be in compliance with Haiti's Constitution and laws and on the basis of broad consensus among various parties to ensure the legitimacy and credibility of the election. Haiti, the first country in Latin America to achieve independence, was once under foreign occupation and control for decades. Its national resources were plundered for far too long. Its people were plunged into misery and suffering. China sympathizes with the Haitian people about this unfortunate historical experience and has always called on the international community to scale up its assistance to Haiti. Over the past 10 years, Haiti has received billions of dollars in aid, but there has been no fundamental improvement in the lives of the Haitian people. The main donors to Haiti should pay earnest attention to the needs and priorities of Haiti and invest funds in the areas that are most urgent for the Haitian people, particularly the areas of poverty reduction and economic and social development. The Haitian Government should also use its aid in a rational and effective manner and continuously improve the effectiveness of the aid it receives. The mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) will expire on 15 October. As a special political mission, BINUH, established a year ago, has made some efforts in promoting dialogue between the Haitian government and the opposition. However, there has been little progress. There is no external solution to the problems in Haiti. Unless all parties in Haiti truly demonstrate their political will, it would be impossible to break the deadlock. We therefore recommend the Security Council consider the future United Nations presence in Haiti in the light of the development of the situation, to make an assessment and take onboard the previous experiences and lessons learned.
