Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of May. Your energy and
diligence have already left a splendid imprint on the
Council's work.

It is furthermore a great pleasure to welcome in our
midst Foreign Minister Chikvaidze and his colleagues. We
recall an equally welcome visit just about a year ago from
President Shevardnadze, from whom the Minister has
brought us greetings.

Before turning to the matter at hand, let me further
thank all those previous speakers who had words of
appreciation for my delegation's work in April, work in
which we enjoyed the true and unstinting assistance of
every single delegation around this table - for which we
are very grateful.

The situation in Abkhazia and its fallout on the rest of
Georgia can be characterized in one sentence: Nothing
much has changed, and this is, on balance, bad. My
delegation, for one, is alarmed by this state of affairs, and
feels that several points are worth making in elaborating
upon that one sentence.

First point: The key to resolving the situation is the
return of those who have fled Abkhazia to their former
homes. Whatever political understanding might eventually
be reached by politicians of the opposing parties, it would
be intolerable if that understanding were based on
demographic changes that have been brought about by
military means. There are some 200,000 refugees and
displaced persons, and only the tiniest trickle of them is
returning under the voluntary repatriation programme. My
delegation is pleased that we are invoking the timetable
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) for the return of displaced
persons. The main obstacle to their return is still the
continuing intransigent position of Abkhaz authorities.

Second point: The most problematic region is Gali.
This is where most displaced people are from; this is
where most of them therefore want to return to; yet this
is where lawlessness is most rampant. The return of the
original population to Gali should be the cornerstone of
the whole repatriation programme. But in order for this to
succeed, their basic human rights have to be respected, a
task for which the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) does not have a mandate, let alone
the wherewithal. Today, therefore, we request the
Secretary-General to look into possibilities that might be
available for improving the observance of human rights in
the region in general.

Third point: What has been doing on in Abkhazia is
"ethnic cleansing". Resolution 993 (1995), which we have
just adopted, recognizes this fact but couches it in
impenetrable language. Instead of calling a spade a spade,
our resolution refers to a garden, assuming that the reader
will grasp that there is a tool shed in the garden and a
spade in the tool shed. This language should be decoded,
of course, if only for the record.

We thus want to underscore here the fact that the
eighth preambular paragraph, which recalls the 1994
Budapest summit declaration of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, is intended to refer
especially to the following sentence of that document:

"[The participating States] expressed their deep
concern over 'ethnic cleansing', the massive
expulsion of people, predominantly Georgian, from
their living areas and the deaths of large numbers of
innocent civilians." (S/1994/1435, p. 20)

Fourth point: While we are anxious for any political
solution to the crisis that would be agreeable to both the
Government of Georgia and the Abkhaz leaders, we
welcome their understanding that such a solution is to be
based on Georgia's territorial integrity. A federal
arrangement for the country would be very appropriate,

 

with as much autonomy as feasible devolving to its
constituent parts. But we do not see much merit in a
confederation, which in practice would amount to a break-
up of the country, or in any "federation of independent
entities", which in practice would amount to a
confederation and thus again to the break-up of the country.
This is why the resolution welcomes and encourages
consultations regarding a new constitution for the country
based precisely on federal principles.
In this context, we reiterate our full confidence in
Ambassador Brunner's efforts in this regard, undertaken on
behalf of the Secretary-General. We also appreciate the
assistance provided by the Russian Federation as facilitator
and by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in searching for a comprehensive political
settlement. Coordination between these several organisms
is, of course, an absolute must.

My fifth and final point, on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) forces: We
are heartened and encouraged by their cooperation. At this
moment, they constitute a stabilizing factor rather than
one that is resolving the problem. Without their presence,
though, another flare-up of uncontrollable hostilities
would be extremely likely. This is why we are in favour
of extending the UN OMIG mandate and welcome the fact
that the CIS forces apparently intend to stay until the end
of 1995. Like other delegations, we are grateful for
information that the Russian delegation provides on the
CIS operation, and would be even more grateful if it were
more frequent and in writing.

