Ms. Mohammed: On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and to express our gratitude for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel).
I would also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, and Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa and the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. I also look
forward to hearing from the two additional briefers,
Mr. Vervaeke and Ms. Assitan Diallo.

As requested, I will try and keep my remarks as
brief as possible. We have heard from both briefers
today about the increasing deterioration of security
in the Sahelo-Saharan region. That continues to be of
great concern to the African Union.

We have heard that there has been a sharp increase
in terrorist attacks in Mali, both in the north and in the
centre of the country, targeting mainly the Malian armed
forces and their posts and camps. Dozens of people,
including civilians, have been killed in those attacks.

The latest attack, on 18 November in Tabankort, in
the Gao region, during a joint operation by the Malian
and Nigerian armies to secure the common borders,
killed 13 Malian soldiers and wounded 29 others, and
also caused extensive material damage. We have also
heard that the Niger continues to face terrorist attacks
in its border areas, particularly on its border with Mali,
and also insurgent attacks from Boko Haram in the
southern part of the country, particularly in the Diffa
region. We have also heard that in Burkina Faso there
is clearly a fury of terrorist attacks. We are witnessing
an extension of those attacks, particularly in the central
and eastern parts of the north. Sometimes the attacks
target civilian groups, but other times they can also
target places of worship and schools. And we have also
witnessed in recent weeks the great losses suffered by
defence and security forces. Chad is also not spared in
that context. It is also facing insecurity due to activities
linked to terrorist groups, particularly Boko Haram.
We have seen attacks, particularly in the north, earlier
this year in January and February.

Once again, the African Union condemns these
heinous attacks and expresses its solidarity with
the countries of the region. In particular, we express
solidarity with the G-5 Sahel countries and, of course,
welcome the establishment of its Joint Force. That
decision, which entails a great deal of responsibility,
is very much in line with the philosophy of the African
Peace and Security Architecture. In that regard, during
its recent meeting on 9 April, the African Union Peace
and Security Council renewed the mandate of the
Joint Force.

More than ever before, the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel requires adequate resources in order to be in
an offensive position. This is urgent and of absolute
necessity moving forward. I take this opportunity to
recall the persistent request from the Heads of State
of the G-5 Sahel for direct funding from the United
Nations to the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and for
the Joint Force to operate under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as recommended by
the Secretary-General. Moreover, it should be recalled
that the international community's efforts should be
part of a global vision, taking into account the other
challenges faced by the Sahel region, such as in the
areas of governance, development and climate change.
The African Union aligns itself with that vision, which
we believe that will bring more hope to the people. I
must also recognize the efforts of the member States
of the Economic Community of West African States,
which decided earlier this year at their Extraordinary
Summit held on 14 September to mobilize support for
the Sahel countries. The African Union supports that
initiative and calls upon the international community
for substantial assistance.

On the political level, the African Union also
remains committed to the peace process in Mali and
Libya and will continue its efforts to resolve the crisis
in those countries.

In the area of development, the African Union is
supporting the countries of the Lake Chad basin as part
of its regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery
and resilience in the areas affected by Boko Haram. The
African Union continues to provide support to the G-5
Sahel by advocating for the mobilization of resources
pledged at the Partners and Donors Coordination
Conference that the G-5 Sahel held on 6 December
2018 in Nouakchott to finance its priority investment
programme. In addition, the African Union recently
held a regional conference in Niamey on the issue of
climate change in the Sahel and adopted pertinent
resolutions in that regard.

As I conclude my remarks, I would like to stress
that the support of the countries in the region as well as
that of the African Union, the United Nations and the
entire international community, is an absolute priority
for winning the fight against terrorism in the region. As
the Secretary-General rightly stated in his report,

"[t]errorism is a global issue and the entire
international community has a responsibility to
contribute." (S/2019/868, para. 38)

