Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his briefing, as well as
Mr. Fedotov and Ambassador Djani.

We remain convinced of the need for peace talks.
Unfortunately, we cannot ignore the fact that those
talks were held in the context of a proliferation of
extremely deadly terrorist attacks. Using the lives of
children, women and men as a means of pressure in
negotiations is unacceptable. One cannot hold the pen
to sign a peace agreement in one hand and a bomb in
the other.

After so many years of conflict, the Afghan people
deserve lasting peace and a peace agreement that is
acceptable to the Afghan people and their Government.
We fully support the Afghan Government's central role
in the peace process and call on the Taliban to engage
in talks with the Government and to control their
combatants in order to put a stop to any future attacks.

A lasting peace agreement must preserve the
gains made in women's rights at all costs, as it would
be extremely unjust to sacrifice progress in that area.
We also stress the importance of the meaningful and
equal participation of women in the peace process and,
in that regard, we attach particular significance to the
implementation of the new phase of Afghanistan's
national action plan on human rights in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). Belgium, for its part, is
supporting the implementation of the action plan
through a contribution to UN-Women.

Belgium fully supports the holding of credible, free
and fair presidential elections, which would strengthen
the legitimacy of State institutions and pave the way
for intra-Afghan dialogue. A high voter turnout will
be crucial in order to reflect the democratic will of the
Afghan people. In that context, we strongly condemn
the attacks announced by the Taliban and others on
the electoral process. Attacks targeting schools and
hospitals are particularly heinous. We encourage the
Government to honour its commitments under the
Safe Schools Declaration and to take every measure to
protect those serving atpolling stations during elections.
We also recall the importance of maintaining a level
playing field for all candidates and all stakeholders.

Belgium remains gravely concerned by the high
number of civilian casualties and the growing number
of displaced persons, due to both the conflict and
the drought. We recall the obligation of all parties to
uphold international humanitarian law and to take
immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. The
proliferation of attacks against humanitarian workers
is unacceptable, as they deprive the most vulnerable
communities of access to vital aid. We also condemn
the indiscriminate use ofimprovised explosive devices.

We strongly condemn all violations and abuses
perpetrated against children in Afghanistan and
deplore the record number of minor victims in the
past year. We are eagerly awaiting the next report of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children in
armed conflict in Afghanistan and look forward to
the Council taking decisive action in that regard. The
treatment of detainees, including minors, requires
particular attention.

Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm
Belgium's determination to implement the sanctions
regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) in order to dissuade the Taliban
from supporting Al-Qaida and its affiliates and
discourage attacks against the Afghan Government. We
echo the Committee Chair's appeal to Member States
to provide information to keep the sanctions list as
up-to-date as possible and to assist the Committee in
enhancing the effectiveness of sanctions measures.

Finally, I wish to acknowledge the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and all United Nations agencies in
supporting peace, prosperity and the promotion of
human rights in Afghanistan. Belgium, for its part,
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan by
providing military training through the Resolute
Support Mission and contributing financially to the
Afghan National Army Trust Fund.

