The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for the kind words addressed to my
delegation. I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway. It will be
brief.

Protection of civilians is at the core of the
Security Council's work for peace and security.
Norway therefore attaches great importance to this
issue on the Council's agenda.

Like the speakers before me, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Oshima for his
comprehensive and very informative briefing. In
particular, we would like to thank him for the many
concrete examples he provided of specific situations
and ongoing crises where protection of civilians is a
highly relevant concern. These concerns neither can
nor should be overlooked. Those responsible for
endangering the protection of civilians must take
immediate action to prevent such occurrences.

The examples mentioned in the briefing clearly
demonstrate the relevance of the aide-memoire on
protection of civilians in armed conflict that we are
about to adopt. Norway would like to thank
Mr. Oshima and his colleagues in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
many other United Nations institutions involved for
their very constructive cooperation in preparing the
aide-memoire and the high quality of their
contributions. We welcome OCHA's readiness to
continue to work closely with the Council in the same
spirit. I would also like to thank all the other
delegations for their cooperation in working out the
draft statement that we are going to adopt later.

It is worth noting the considerable precedence for
addressing concerns related to protection of civilians
represented by the nearly 40 references to previous
Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements contained in the aide-memoire. This proves
both the relevance of the issue and the Council's
commitment to addressing these concerns. But the
situations cited clearly show that we have to do better.
While we believe that the aide-memoire is a powerful
and practical tool, the job is far from finished. We
reaffirm Norway's readiness to continue to work
closely with the Secretariat and other Council members
to make further progress with regard to protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

It is our hope that the aide-memoire will serve as
a practical tool box that will enable the Council in the
future, while it deals with the conflicts on its agenda, to
become more effective in addressing concerns related
to protection of civilians. However, like any other tool,
it will be useful only to the extent that it is utilized to
solve particular tasks. I encourage you all to make
active and frequent use of this new tool box.

I shall now resume my function as President of
the Council. I now give the floor to Mr. Oshima to
respond to the comments and questions raised.
