The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should now like to make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Russian
Federation.

First and foremost, I should like to express my
gratitude to all my colleagues who have accepted our
invitation to attend today's meeting. My special
gratitude goes to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
other representatives who have come from their
capitals, as well as, of course, to the Secretary-General
for his personal participation in today's meeting.

The Security Council last met in today's format
not long ago. In December 2008, the Council held a
ministerial meeting at which it adopted resolution 1850
(2008), in which we unanimously expressed our
understanding that progress towards the establishment
of peace and stability should continue and that it
should be comprehensive, cover all negotiating tracks,
and be based on commonly accepted decisions and
principles anchored in international law.

However, an alarming negotiating vacuum has
arisen as a result of well-known causes, including the
eruption of violence, the Gaza crisis at the beginning of
the year and the elections and the extended time it took
to form a new Government in Israel.

I believe that, in the current circumstances, the
most important thing is the rapid resumption of
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. It is
of primary importance that the political process not be
relaunched from the baseline, but that it should benefit
from the available decisions of the international
community and the agreements and understandings
already achieved between the sides.

That is why one of the most pressing tasks is to
reaffirm the international legal basis for the settlement
of the Palestinian question, first and foremost on the
2

basis of the two-State principle, which will lead to an
independent, viable Palestinian Government, living
side by side in peace with Israel. Of special
importance, we believe, is the support expressed for
the Arab Peace Initiative at the recent League of Arab
States summit held in Doha. Together with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), other relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Road Map, the Arab Peace Initiative has become an
integral part of the basis for building a new Middle
East - a Middle East in which there will be no place
for occupation or terrorism, but in which mutually
beneficial and respectful cooperation between
sovereign States and equal peoples will prevail.

It is clear that the path towards this objective will
be a difficult one. The focus of our attention should be
the situation in the region. It is essential to achieve
clear compliance by the Palestinians and Israelis with
their commitment to fighting terrorism and violence
and to avoiding any unilateral action to prejudice a
final status settlement, including the cessation of
settlement activities and ensuring freedom of
movement for the Palestinian population in the West
Bank.

A great deal will depend on the success of the
inter-Palestinian dialogue. The relevant efforts by
Egypt should, in our View, continue to enjoy the full
support of the international community. The restoration
of Palestinian unity on the basis of the platform of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and adherence to the
Arab Peace Initiative are the only keys to meeting the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and to
progress in the Middle East peace process on the basis
of the proposals arrived at by the Quartet in the context
of the United Nations.

In accordance with the aforementioned
considerations, we have prepared a draft presidential
statement, which we propose to adopt as an outcome
document of today's meeting. I would like to thank all
our colleagues, who have made substantial
contributions to the agreed text. We, along with the
entire international community, have the responsibility
of ensuring the viability of the peace process,
promoting its rapid resumption and ensuring that it is
acceptable to all. Work towards this goal should not be
hampered by emotions.

The next step in our common efforts will be the
Moscow conference on the Middle East. There is broad
09-33303
international consensus in favour of that forum, as
enshrined in Security Council resolutions and the
decisions of the Middle East Quartet. During the
course of the preparation of practical aspects of the
Moscow conference, we are of course taking into
account the views of the main stakeholders - the
Palestinian, Israeli, Syrian and Lebanese people. With
their support, for which we are grateful, the date and
substantive part of the Moscow forum have been
agreed. The conference stands to make a substantial
contribution to the overall settlement of the Palestinian
question and to bringing peace, security and stability to
all peoples and Governments of the Middle East.

I now resume my function as President of this
Council.

I welcome His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to this meeting, and I give him the floor.

