Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
pays tribute to you, Mr. President, for holding today's
public meeting, and thanks the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, for her
briefing.

The Syrian conflict, which has gone on for five
years, has caused a huge number of civilian casualties
and triggered a serious humanitarian crisis and refugee
crisis. In particular, the population in some besieged
faces a severe shortage of food and medicine, and their
living conditions are truly appalling. China is deeply
saddened by the humanitarian situation in Syria and
sympathizes with the Syrian people in their suffering.
We urge all the parties in Syria to effectively implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
to go all out to work with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies to carry out full-fledged
relief activities in all besieged areas and alleviate the
burning needs of the population. China hopes that the
international humanitarian pledging conference on
Syria, to be held early next month, will achieve positive
results. We call on international donors to show
generosity so as to ease the suffering of the Syrian
people.

China has been actively supporting efforts to ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria. So far, through
various channels, China has provided, on nine different
occasions, humanitarian assistance to Syria totalling
RMB/ ¥ 685 million. At the Group of 20 Summit held
last year, President Xi Jinping announced an additional
$100 million of humanitarian assistance to the relevant
countries and international organizations. We are
ready, together with the international community, to
play our part in easing the humanitarian crisis in Syria
and improving the livelihoods of the Syrian people.

Achieving a political solution to the question of
Syria is the best way to resolve the relevant questions
on Syria, including on its humanitarian dimension. The
international community should remain steadfast in
its search for a political solution. As the humanitarian
situation worsens, there is a greater need to push for
a political solution. The International Syria Support
Group has held three ministerial-level meetings so
far. Last month, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015). That was the first resolution
ever adopted by the Council on the political process in

Syria. It consolidated the common understanding of the
international community for a political solution. It has
injected vitality into the search for a political solution.
It is truly a hard-won result.

The priority facing the international community
is to keep alive the current positive momentum for a
political solution and to make sure that the relevant
process will stay the course and produce results. At the
same time, it is necessary to make sure that the United
Nations continues to be the main channel for mediation.
China calls upon the parties in Syria to seize this
historic opportunity, swiftly restart negotiations and
approach the political process in Syria in such a way
that real results can be achieved soon. China is ready,
together with the parties concerned, to continue to play
a positive and constructive role in finding a political
solution to the Syrian question.

