Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for having invited the delegation of the Republic
of Haiti to have its views and comments heard before
the Security Council with regard to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/795) of 30 August on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). I welcome the presence of Ms. Leona
Marlin-Romeo, Prime Minister of Sint Maarten among
us, and am grateful for her statement. I would also like
to especially thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou
Keita for her excellent presentation of the Secretary-
General's report.

My delegation notes with the utmost interest the
Secretary-General's observations concerning results,
progress, trends and salient facts in the political,
economic, social and humanitarian areas during
the reporting period in the light of the set goals and
established benchmarks. The evolving political
situation in Haiti over the past three months, especially
with regard to the fears of destabilization caused by the
unrest of 6 to 8 July following the announcement of an
increase in gas prices, has rightly become a centre of
attention. Those events, which reflected an irrefutable
expression of public frustration in the face of real
socioeconomic difficulties, were certainly a major test
for the country.

However, the political stability of the country,
which had been won through such hard work, was not
called into question - nor were the democratic gains
or the many achievements of recent years. No one can
deny that the country was rigorously put to the test, but
the crisis was overcome. The nation recovered quickly.
The institutions of the Republic demonstrated their
maturity. State authority is today restored, and public
order is being maintained. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the support of the international community,
and in particular that of the Security Council as
expressed in its press statement on Haiti of 12 July
(SC/ 13419).

In the wake of the July events, the President of
the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, fully
aware of the challenges of the situation, spared no
effort to restore peace to the restive neighbourhoods
and peace of mind. Accordingly, following an extensive
and painstaking process of national consultations,
he appointed a new Prime Minister from among
the opposition - Mr. Jean Henry Ceant. The latter
has been entrusted with forming a national unity
Government enjoying the full confidence of Parliament
and the legitimacy necessary to confront the urgent
economic problems facing the country and pursue
the reforms needed for strengthening the rule of law,
consolidating democratic gains and achieving long-
term institutional and political stability. The next
Government will be tasked, inter alia, with organizing
the next parliamentary elections, to be held in October
2019, and scaling up the fight against corruption, while
vigorously pursuing the structural reforms essential to
reviving sustainable growth and development.

In that regard, the Secretary-General's call on all
actors in the national political arena to work together
for the common good was welcomed with special
interest by the Haitian authorities, as was his call for the
adoption of short-term measures to meet the immediate
needs of the Haitian people and alleviate the difficult
situation that they are facing. My delegation hopes that
that appeal will also find the broadest possible response
from all international community partners, while
seeking, in that regard, greater awareness of the extreme
vulnerability of the population in the context of official
development assistance, in particular opportunities
providing essential support for implementing structural
adjustment programmes.

Extreme poverty, as we well know, carries with it
the inherent risk of creating instability, as the Security
Council has repeatedly emphasized. A coherent and
integrated strategy for sustaining peace is predicated
upon an understanding of the close link between the
three pillars of security, development and human
rights. In that regard, my delegation believes that
immediately improving the living conditions of the most
disadvantaged segments of society is one of the most
pressing challenges facing the country today. The Head
of State has made it a top priority, as it is an essential
and unavoidable condition for maintaining a stable
political environment, as the report judiciously notes.

With regard to the Secretary-General's review of
results and progress in the light of the objectives and
benchmarks that have been set, I would like to make
a brief comment. My delegation is aware of the delays
in a number of targets, but the most important thing
to remember is that, despite the enormous difficulties
encountered, despite the July crisis and despite the
limited resources available, sustained efforts are
recorded daily in most targeted areas, be it in the
strengthening of the rule of law, the justice system and
the National Police, or in the protection and promotion
of human rights.

Many indicators bear witness to these efforts
and ongoing measures. Let me cite a few on a purely
indicative basis: the appointment of the Civil Protector
and the strengthening of the capacities of the Office
for the Protection of Human Rights; the stability of the
security environment; the significant decrease in the
level of violent crime; a decrease of about 25 per cent
in cases of mob rule; the increased efficiency of the
judicial system; the ongoing adoption by the legislature
of a new criminal code and a new code of criminal
procedure; the improvement of the penitentiary system
and conditions of detention; the steady increase in the
proportion ofwomen in the police force, where the 10 per
cent threshold is about to be reached; the intensification
of the fight against corruption, as illustrated by the
referral ofthe PetroCaribe case to the Superior Court of
Audits and Administrative Disputes for the necessary
follow-up; and the launch of the sector-based estates
general of the nation, with the prospect of adopting a
pact for stability and economic and social progress.

Much certainly remains to be done, as the Secretary-
General has pointed out, to bridge the gaps and catch
up with the delays, but the consolidation of the rule
of law and stability is on track. That is the essential
thing. This is, as we all know, a long-term process.
Whatever happens, the public authorities intend to
make every effort to achieve the hoped-for results and
targets, in particular the continued strengthening of
the justice system and police forces, the substantial
improvement of the penitentiary system, and the
promotion and permanent defence of human rights. The
Haitian authorities are firmly committed to ensuring
that everything will be done to prepare in the coming
months for a smooth transition from MINUJUSTH
to a United Nations presence that is more focused
on peacekeeping.

In appointing the new Haitian Prime Minister, the
President of the Republic reiterated his determination
to implement, together with the Government, the
structural reforms necessary to enabling the country
to cope with recurrent crises, such as that from which
it is emerging, and to meet the complex challenges
that it still faces in terms of development. The shock
wave unleashed by the events of July - regardless of
their magnitude and the public perception of political
volatility that they generated - must not obscure
one fact that my delegation considers to be essential,
namely, the irreversibility of the democratic gains of
the Haitian people and their very real and sustained
progress towards the consolidation of the rule of law.
The President of the Republic and the new Haitian Prime
Minister are in agreement with all sectors and actors of
the nation that these achievements must be entrenched.
At this crucial turning point in national life, the
Haitian people and Government hope to be able to count
on the solidarity of the international community, and in
particular on the support of the United Nations system,
for the establishment of a new cooperation pact that
is better adapted to the real needs of Haiti, within the
framework of a genuine strategy for the perpetuation of
peace, which, in order to be viable, necessarily entails
the speedy improvement of the living conditions of
the poorest strata, vigorous and sustained growth, the
economic and social modernization of the country, and
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the Goal of eradicating poverty by 2030.

In conclusion, I offer my warmest congratulations
to the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, who
was appointed on 1 August. I convey my best wishes for
success to her and her mandate in Haiti.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.
