Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to Ambassador Inocencio Arias for his
exhaustive and useful presentation of the programme of
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for the next
90 days and also, in more general terms, for his
efficient and effective guidance of the work of the
CTC.

I should like first of all to say that the Chilean
delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of Peru
on behalf of the Rio Group. For that reason, I will
underscore only a few aspects of the programme of
work outlined to us by Ambassador Arias - those to
which we attach the highest priority.

It is vital that, as is stated in the programme of
work, the principles of transparency, cooperation and
equal treatment continue to be applied in the work of
the Committee. The joint action of the international
community in the struggle against terrorism requires
this. This is an initiative that is the responsibility of us
all. The Committee, as we have said in the past, is
making practical and effective efforts to apply these
principles case by case; this is certainly what makes
consensus possible and what gives legitimacy to our
action.

We must move forward with practical measures in
order effectively to confront the scourge of terrorism
and to help all States to increase their capacity to
prevent and react to actions of that nature.

Identifying the difficulties and the problems
confronting States in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is a vital task. We take note of the report
which will soon be presented in this regard by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to the
Security Council, which is referred to in paragraph 21
of the programme of work. That report, we believe,
will be very useful in planning the future work of the
Committee.

We welcome the fact that the Committee has
continued to broaden its contacts and its cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations. The 6 March meeting with those entities
was followed by one on 7 October last, held in
Washington under the auspices of the Committee on
Terrorism of the Organization of American States. That
exchange will now continue, on 12 March 2004, in
Vienna, with European organizations. All of this work
of cooperation and collaboration should lead to more
concrete operational results.

Technical assistance to those States that need it
should also be among our constant concerns. We know
that the Committee is taking a more active and
dynamic role in this field; the Security Council should
ensure that this approach continues to be followed.

In connection with the reports of States to the
Committee, the figures given to us today by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee are
encouraging. All States have completed their initial
reports. A large number of States have completed the
second report, and an equally large number have
already submitted the third report.

Furthermore, the Committee has prepared a
working paper on criteria for the preparation of draft
letters addressed to those States that are beyond stage
B, which, under the principles of transparency,
cooperation and equal treatment, will allow for more
dynamic assessments and contacts with States, which,
ultimately, are the main protagonists of this joint effort.

For that reason, above and beyond numbers, what
we need to underscore is the ongoing relationship
between the Committee and States, so that they can
contribute together to the resolution of their problems
in the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). It is
relevant to recall that effectiveness in the fight against
terrorism, in the final analysis, depends on the
responses of States and of international organizations.

At the global level, the threat of terrorism is one
of the gravest and most urgent - one that transcends
all geographic and cultural boundaries. Unfortunately,
this meeting is further clouded by the criminal attack in
Baghdad which took the lives of many staff members
of our Organization, including the outstanding Latin
American Sergio Vieira de Mello. It is our duty to
redouble our efforts to defeat that scourge.

Resolution 1373 (2001) was the beginning of
unparalleled cooperation aimed at effectively
confronting the global challenge of terrorism, and it
made the Counter-Terrorism Committee the focal point
in a process of cooperation that must involve every
country of the world. We welcome the fact that the new
programme of work continues to envisage the taking of
practical measures to increase the ways and means that
States have at their disposal in the fight against
terrorism.

