The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Macharia
Kamau, Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission; His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden
and former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and His Excellency Mr. Gert Rosenthal, Chair of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Louise Sharene
Bailey, Adviser at the Permanent Observer Mission
of the African Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Permanent Observer
of the Organization of American States to the United
Nations; and Mr. Carl Hallergard, Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in that regard.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/104, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 February 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kamau.

