Mr. McNee (Canada): Terrorism is a grave threat
to international peace and security. We welcome the
opportunity to speak today on this important issue and
thank the Croatian delegation, and in particular the
President of Croatia, for the idea of organizing this
debate, which aims at renewing the Council's
commitment to fighting terrorism.

At the outset, I would like to express, on behalf
of all Canadians, our deepest sympathies and profound
condolences to the families of those killed and injured
in the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai. Canada
stands with India and the entire international
community in condemning these attacks in the
strongest possible terms. We call on all States to assist
in bringing those responsible to justice.

The Mumbai attacks serve as a reminder that
terrorism is an evolving and multifaceted global threat -
one which has the potential to affect all Member States.
Among those killed in the attacks were nationals of
many countries, including Canadians. A terrorist attack
on any country is a threat to international peace and
stability. The global effects of such attacks underscore
the importance of strong international cooperation
against terrorism. Multilateral action, in particular
through the United Nations, is critical if we are to
counter this threat successfully.

In particular, Canada strongly encourages all
United Nations Member States to work towards
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions against terrorism, including resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Canada is
in full compliance with these and other terrorism-
related Security Council resolutions. Canada also
encourages Member States to ratify and implement
effectively the relevant international counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols, which form the basis for
international efforts in this area. We support continued
efforts by Member States to work constructively
towards the conclusion of a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism.

Canada also welcomed the 2006 adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
This document and its successful review this year Show
the ability of Member States to collaborate and achieve
consensus on pressing international issues. Following
on this agreement, however, Canada strongly urges all
Member States to work towards implementation of the
Strategy.

Since 2005, Canada has demonstrated its
commitment to a global response to terrorism through
its Counter-Terrorism Capacity-Building Assistance
Programme. Through this programme, Canada provides
$13 million annually to address training, equipment,
technical, legal and other security assistance and
expertise aspects of the response to terrorist activity, in
full compliance with the rule of law, including taking
account of human rights.

(spoke in French)

Canada believes that protection of human rights
and respect for the rule of law must be at the centre of
both international and national counter-terrorism
efforts. Measures against terrorism consistent with
international law, in particular international human
rights law and refugee and humanitarian law, are
critical to the functioning of democratic institutions
and the maintenance of peace and security. Strong
protections for human rights, including freedom of
association and freedom of thought, belief, opinion and
expression, are integral to successfully countering the
threat of terrorism.

In conclusion, Canada remains strongly
committed to the global fight against terrorism, and
encourages the Security Council, as well as other
United Nations institutions, to renew its efforts to
broaden international consensus on appropriate
measures to combat this threat.

