Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of my delegation, Madam Chairman, I would like to
congratulate you on presiding over the work of the
Council this month. We are convinced that you will be
able to direct its work with the wisdom we know you
possess. My delegation would also like to thank you
for having convened this public meeting devoted to the
question of children and armed conflict. This is a
subject of paramount importance in today's tumultuous
world.

We believe that your interest in children, your
experience and the fact that you presided over the
Preparatory Committee for the Special Session on
Children will make it possible to achieve concrete
results. Nor can I fail to thank Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for the presentation of
his report and for his efforts in this area. I very much
wish that, when he presented his report, he had referred
to the children of Palestine or of Iraq, particularly since
he quite correctly referred to the children of Africa,
particularly of Sierra Leone, and to the children of
Afghanistan. May I also thank the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), who
has been making very sincere efforts. In fact, the
children of Iraq have witnessed the sincerity of her
efforts over the last 10 years.

Since we are taking up this important issue, it
should be noted that what we are trying to do here is to
carry out one of the most important tasks entrusted to
the United Nations. In fact, that task is referred to in
the Charter: "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war". As children are the most vulnerable
group in any society, it is quite natural that they should
be the first to be affected by armed conflict. Despite all
the efforts that have been made by the international
community for several decades to lay solid foundations
of international law to protect civilians in armed
conflict, and children in particular - efforts that have
led to a number of international instruments and
numerous declarations governing the conduct of
combatants and providing protection for the most
vulnerable members of society - we unfortunately
continue to see indifference towards children on the
part of certain people and even States. Children are
even being deliberately targeted, which is a flagrant
violation of international conventions and instruments,
as well as an undeniable international crime.

My delegation would like once again to
emphasize that the Security Council's addressing this
matter is a very positive sign. However, this should not
prevent us from dealing with this issue in a broader and
more appropriate forum in which all States are
represented on an equal footing, namely, in the General
Assembly.

Because of the existing balance of power, the
Security Council has become incapable of dealing with
a number of cases of armed conflict. In fact, it has even
become the cause of a number of armed conflicts,
thereby subjecting children to suffering and daily
dislocation, starvation, bombings, killings and other
acts of aggression that have deprived them of the most
basic rights, particularly the right to life. The situation
of children in Iraq, Palestine and numerous other parts
of the world provides but a few striking examples of
this. Iraqi children were the first victims of the military
aggression by the United States and its allies against
Iraq in 1991. In the course of that aggression, over
88,000 tons of bombs were dropped, striking civilian
targets and our infrastructure: roads, bridges, hospitals,
schools, water purification plants, electric power
stations and so on.
All this has had a devastating impact on children,
both directly and indirectly; to say nothing of the use
of depleted uranium, which led to birth defects,
leukaemia and great suffering for children. At the time,
the United Nations simply stood by as a spectator of an
aggression that caused tens of thousands of child
victims and that continues to produce victims. Before
and after that aggression, the United States imposed an
unprecedentedly comprehensive sanctions regime on an
entire people in the name of the United Nations.

According to a UNICEF report published in
August 1999, those overall sanctions led to the deaths
of 500,000 Iraqi children under the age of 5 between
1991 and 1998. As of today, the number of civilian
victims resulting from the sanctions against Iraq has
reached over 1.6 million, most of them children. The
sanctions are killing 5,000 Iraqi children monthly. The
least one can say about this is that it is a crime of
genocide being experienced today with the full
knowledge of the Security Council. Despite all this, the
United Nations is still incapable of providing even the
slightest explanation as to why these sanctions that are
killing children every day continue to be in place.

As if that vengeance were not enough, the United
States and the United Kingdom continue to take
revenge on the Iraqi people, including children, despite
the norms of international law and the United Nations
Charter. Both those States have imposed no-fly zones
in the northern part of Iraq since 1991. Those zones
were extended to the south of Iraq in 1992. American
military planes are daily bombing civilian targets in
Iraq, killing children, causing terror in villages and
towns, burning agricultural land and destroying
schools. Despite the entire international community's
condemnation of those daily acts of terrorist
aggression, and despite the statement made by the
United Nations to the effect that a no-fly zone
constituted a unilateral use of force against a sovereign
State, the Security Council and the United Nations do
not appear to be in a position to end that aggression
and terrorism.

The Palestinian people is also subject to
occupation and oppression. Their lands have been
usurped. Their villages and towns have been destroyed
and are under siege. All of this is happening without
the United Nations making any attempt to take any
concrete steps against the Zionist entity, the main
perpetrator of that aggression or against Zionist
terrorism, which mows down Palestinian children.
Those children are suffering from very serious
psychological trauma, which has a severe impact on
their future.

We have chosen to refer exclusively to these two
situations by way of example to emphasize that the
United Nations and the international community are
still far from achieving their objective of fully
respecting duties and commitments entered into for the
protection of children in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The United Nations still has a great deal to
do in order to stop, bring to justice and punish those
who perpetrate violence and violate the rights of
children. We refer primarily to those who use the
machinery of the United Nations to target children and
who exert pressure to prevent the United Nations from
playing its proper role in the protection of children.

We would also have liked the draft resolution that
is now before the Security Council, and which we
learned of only a few hours ago, to have contained
some provisions about children under foreign
occupation, or those under the effects of embargo.

We would have also preferred it had the Council
not been so abominably selective, once again, due to
certain pressures.

