At the outset, I would like to congratulate Ms. Deborah Lyons on her appointment as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and to thank her for her first briefing to the Council. I also would like to thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, for their briefings. Tunisia welcomes the power-sharing agreement reached in May between President Ashraf Ghani and former Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, and looks forward to the completion of the formation of the new Government and the High Council for Peace and National Reconciliation, which has been tasked, under the chairmanship of Abdullah Abdullah, to lead the Government's efforts to reach a peace deal with the Taliban. While we regret the increasing number of attacks staged by the Taliban against Government forces over recent weeks, we are encouraged by the recent announcement that the two sides have agreed to start the long-awaited peace talks. Tunisia reiterates, in this regard, its support to all international initiatives in favour of peace efforts in Afghanistan. We also stress the importance of an inclusive Afghan-led, Afghan-owned political process, with the meaningful participation of women, to achieve a sustainable solution that includes guarantees for the protection and promotion of fundamental rights and freedoms for all in Afghanistan, especially women. Tunisia remains deeply concerned by the high level of violence in Afghanistan at a time when the priority should be given to protecting the population from the dangers of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We are, in this regard, particularly appalled by the recent attacks against health-care facilities and personnel, including the gruesome attack on a maternity ward in Kabul on 12 May, which left 24 dead, among them newborns, mothers and nurses. We call on all parties to heed to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and stress the importance that they uphold international humanitarian law and take the necessary measures to prevent civilian casualties. We also underline the necessity to hold all those responsible for these casualties accountable. Efforts should also be reinforced to defeat the terrorist groups that are still active in Afghanistan by limiting and hopefully eliminating their operational and financial capabilities. In this regard, we share the view that the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces should continue to be fully supported and that more efforts should be made to fight drug trafficking, which continues to fuel the illicit economy and finance terrorist groups. The Taliban should also to do its utmost to stop the attacks perpetrated by its members and honour its counter-terrorism commitments. Lastly, we believe that the peace process should be accompanied by an ambitious plan to assist the Afghan Government on the economic and social levels. The international community should step up its efforts to that end. Initiatives to further promote regional cooperation and economic integration should also be encouraged.
