The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Vice Chancellor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany.

I would like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their update on the inspections in Iraq. They have
briefed us on the substantial progress of their work, but
also on deficits in the Iraqi regime's cooperation with
the inspectors. Those deficits must be rectified by
Baghdad without delay. Iraq must not be allowed to
possess any weapons of mass destruction and must
disarm completely. Baghdad must actively and fully
cooperate with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and must comply unconditionally with the
requirements of the relevant resolutions.

The inspectors have reported on headway that
they have made. The first private interviews with Iraqi
experts have taken place without official escorts. The
problem of U-2 aerial surveillance has been resolved.
Helicopters, drones and Mirage and Antonov aircraft
are to be put at UNMOVIC's disposal to ensure
comprehensive surveillance from the air.

The inspectors have thus been able to score some
successes. Already today their presence on the ground
has substantially diminished the danger emanating
from Iraq. The need now is to gain experience with the
new measures in place and to evaluate them in the light
of our common goal of ensuring Iraq's complete
disarmament. Why should we now turn away from that
path? Why should we now halt the inspections? On the
contrary, the inspectors must be given the time they
need to successfully complete their mission.

How we proceed from here is laid down by
resolutions 1441 (2002) and 1284 (1999). What is
crucial are the resolutions' three core elements: full
cooperation, inspection and verification.

First, Iraq must cooperate fully, unconditionally
and actively with the inspectors if the looming tragedy
is to be averted.

Secondly, the inspection regime must be made
more efficient. France has made very concrete
proposals on how this can be done. These envisage
increasing the number of inspection teams and
improving the technical resources at their disposal. In
addition, the inspectors' capacities for coordination,
surveillance and concrete action need to be spelled out
precisely and strengthened. We strongly support these
proposals, for they help ensure a response more
appropriate to the size of the task.

Thirdly, and in parallel with the inspections, the
verification and monitoring mechanisms called for in
resolution 1284 (1999) need to be developed and
expanded. An ongoing, long-term monitoring regime
must prevent any future rearmament. We need
structures that guarantee Iraq's disarmament and
containment on a permanent basis. That is of immense
importance for the whole region. Such a reinforced
inspection and verification regime could also be of
service to the United Nations in other crises involving
weapons of mass destruction.

All possible options for resolving the Iraq crisis
by peaceful means must be thoroughly explored.
Whatever decisions need to be made must be taken by
the Security Council alone. It remains the only body
internationally authorized to do so.

Military action against Iraq would, in addition to
the terrible humanitarian consequences, above all
endanger the stability of a tense and troubled region.
The consequences for the Near and Middle East could
be catastrophic. There should be no automatism leading
us to the use of military force. All possible alternatives
need to be exhaustively explored. That was once again
reaffirmed by the Governments of Russia, France and
Germany in a joint declaration issued on Monday.
Diplomacy has not yet reached the end of the road.

I resume my function as president of the Security
Council, and I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Mohammed Aldouri, Permanent Representative of
Iraq.

