Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Swedish presidency for convening today's
open debate and for its capable leadership of the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. I also want to congratulate the Council
collectively on its adoption today of resolution 2427
(2018), of which we were a sponsor.

Italy aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and by
the representatives of Canada and Argentina, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict and the group of countries endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration, respectively. I would also
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.

According to the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2018/465), in the past year there has been an
alarming increase in the number of children affected
by armed conflict and the severity of the violations
committed against them. New armed groups have
emerged, while the cross-border nature of conflicts
makes it harder to monitor and report all the abuses.
We would therefore like to commend the work being
done by the United Nations in this area. Despite the
devastating number of violations in 2017, more than
10,000 children were formally released from armed
groups and forces, thanks mainly to the advocacy
efforts of the United Nations system, accomplished first
through the country visits of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Council's Working
Group, and secondly through the Secretary-General's
political urgings in his annual reports. In that regard,
we welcome the approach applied to the list and hope
it will encourage more parties to armed conflicts to
put in place measures to improve the protection of
children, including by signing and implementing action
plans. The third way has been through UNICEF's
crucial role in monitoring and reporting on the ground,
together with the work of humanitarian workers and
non-governmental organizations.

In order to break the cycle of violations affecting
children, we must take a systematic and coherent
approach based on prevention, accountability and
reintegration. With regard first to prevention, we should
continue to encourage as many States as possible to
ratify the relevant international instruments, including
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, and to promote their implementation and
enforcement. We encourage the endorsement of
initiatives such as the Paris and Vancouver Principles
and the Safe Schools Declaration, with a View to making
significant improvements in children's lives. It is also
important to ensure that peacekeeping and political
missions have the necessary means to monitor, report
and respond to grave violations. To that end, we must
ensure that the positions of child protection advisers
are duly staffed and budgeted. Finally, United Nations
personnel should receive specialized predeployment
training on children in armed conflict, a practice that
should be scaled up and become standard. In Italy, all
the courses offered to peacekeepers each year by our
Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units include
modules on respect for human rights, international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians.

Secondly, with regard to accountability, it is
difficult to rebuild broken communities and begin
the process of social healing without ensuring that
violations and abuses are prosecuted and victims
receive reparations. At the national level, States
should adopt, develop and implement the legal and
administrative measures needed to ensure that all
violations against children are criminalized and their
perpetrators brought to justice, in compliance with the
provisions of the relevant international instruments.
At the international level, we encourage the Security
Council to include in its sanctions regimes specific
listing criteria for grave violations of children in armed
conflict. Lastly, the International Criminal Court
has an essential role to play in holding perpetrators
accountable for their crimes.

Thirdly, turning to reintegration, the international
community's attention must not cease once children
have been released from armed groups. Exposure to
the cruelties of war and the battlefield has a serious
and often irreparable impact on the physical and
psychological well-being of children involved in armed
conflicts. They must be successfully reintegrated into
society and helped to overcome the stigma and blame
wrongfully attached to them. That is unfortunately the
last and most frequently forgotten link in the chain. At
the Arria Formula meeting we organized last year, Joy
Bishara, a student kidnapped by Boko Haram, testified
from her personal experience that if children are not
reintegrated, they will see no alternative other than
re-recruitment to armed groups. As the successful
example of Colombia has shown, all peace agreements
must include specific provisions on this issue if they are
to be sustainable. We need to connect all the dots in this
chain as we strive together to build long-term peace,
stability and development.

