Mr. Rodriguez Parilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to thank the Gambia for its
important contribution during its presidency of the
Security Council, and I should like to wish you,
Mr. President, success during your leadership of this
important body.

Today the Security Council is formally considering,
through a public debate, the progress and problems of
Africa, matters which, because of their importance and
nature, must also be taken up by the General Assembly
and other bodies within the system, which should fully
exercise their authority and fulfil their responsibilities so
as to help the region.

Cuba welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
being considered at this meeting, and we acknowledge its
indubitable merits. We are particularly pleased that it

 

includes reference to certain elements pertaining to the
origins of conflict on the African continent and the
consequences of colonialism for African nations.

We attach the utmost importance to the international
community's reflections on the problems of the African
continent. In particular, we consider it of vital importance
that urgent measures be adopted throughout the United
Nations system in order to support the successes and
progress that Africa is achieving at the cost of terrible
hardship, as well as to contribute to the bold efforts African
countries are making for development, to remove the
serious external obstacles in their way, to put an end to the
grave consequences and imbalances brought about by
colonial and neo-colonial pillaging, to confront the poverty
in which millions of our African brothers live and to
resolve the overwhelming problems of the present and the
threats of future marginalization.

Of the regions that make up the so-called third world,
or the developing world, as we are sometimes
euphemistically called, the African continent is undoubtedly
the one that has suffered most. The massive colonization of
that continent and the centuries of colonial plunder have led
to an almost unparalleled accumulation of serious economic
and social problems.

While the practice of slavery existed in other regions
of the third world, Africa was the continent where slavery
was reborn in modern times and millions of Africans were
abducted, where the genocide of the conquest occurred and
where enormous wealth was extracted to feed the prosperity
of a few countries and make possible the development they
enjoy today.

Africa has been more plundered than any other region.
The worst of it is that today, like all the developing world,
it continues to suffer from the philosophy of plunder, which
cannot be spoken of in the past tense because it is a fully
contemporary phenomenon, one we will undoubtedly
continue to have to speak of in the coming millennium if
the growing marginalization is not reversed and if so-called
globalization does not include real opportunities to do
something other than increase the opulence of the few and
the poverty of most of the planet's inhabitants.

The debt to the African continent has not yet been
settled. While it is up to the international community as a
whole to contribute to the search for ways to bring about its
recovery and development, the greatest historical
responsibility falls on those countries that for years
benefited from Africa, from its resources and from the
labour of its men and women.

Historical apologies are not enough. Nor is the
solution to Africa's problems to be found in the
marketplace or to be considered a business matter;
cooperation and solidarity are required.

Despite the initiatives of financial institutions and the
United Nations system, as well as the occasional
contributions made by some countries, the African
countries continue to be burdened by the unbearable
weight of external debt, adjustment measures, the unfair
and unstable international monetary system, trade
imbalance and protectionist and discriminatory measures,
all of which widen the gap that separates them from the
countries of the first world.

What we, the developing countries, seek in our
relations with developed countries is not charity, but equal
and non-discriminatory treatment, fair prices for products,
fair access to international markets and, finally, a
cessation of the continuous pillage to which our peoples,
including the African peoples, are subjected.
Cuba is proud of the enormous contribution it has
received from hundreds of thousands of Africans, and of
its own origins, which have deep African roots. We
Cubans are deeply proud of the African blood that flows
in our veins and of the fact that the presence and
assistance of Africa contributed decisively and indelibly
to forging the Cuban nation.

It has been our fundamental duty to offer, with the
fullest respect, absolute unselfishness and deep humility,
our cooperation to Africa, and Cuban blood has been shed
in struggles for the independence of its peoples. We have
also tried, and despite our economic difficulties we
continue to try, day by day, our cooperation, primarily by
sending doctors and teachers to Africa and by training
professionals and technicians in our country.

Cuba confirms its will and its commitment to
continue to cooperate, within its limited resources, with
other third world countries and with the cause of Africa.
Cuba hopes that the entire international community will
join in these efforts for Africa, and we expect this in
particular from those who have the sufficient and
necessary means to do so. This would be a minimal act
of justice and reciprocity, and, to view it from an
objectionable and selfish viewpoint of national interest, it

 

would even be an indispensable investment for the future
and to ensure the stability of the world.

Peace cannot be exported or imposed, it is true, and
much less can it be imposed by force of arms. Lasting
solutions cannot emerge from the barrels of guns. It is not
by imposing allegedly democratic models, by weakening
the sovereignty of States or by requiring the use of
neoliberal recipes for adjustment that we will advance
towards peace.

As long as tens of millions of Africans live in hunger,
disease, ignorance and injustice, there will be no peace in
Africa. As long as the profound structural causes of
conflicts are not eliminated, there will be no peace in
Africa. As long as there is no social peace, there will be no
peace.

Africa has extraordinary potential and needs only the
opportunity that all developed countries had in their
beginnings to demonstrate the strength and qualities of its
people, the depth and wealth of its culture, the talent and
unselfishness of its children. This is further supported by
the enormous economic resources that are at its disposal.

Africa must be treated as an equal partner and as the
extremely weighty factor in the balance of the world that it
is. The world must, of necessity, change if it wishes to
survive, and in that new, lasting world that we are still far
from discovering or constructing, Africa will be essential
and will occupy its rightful place.

