We support the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses a challenge for all of us, causing a crisis with numerous and devastating effects not only to health but also for the economy, trade and our societies in general. The pandemic does not respect borders or ideologies. Political differences must be put aside at this dramatic moment for humankind. We express our deep concern about its impact in countries of the Middle East, and we call for the avoidance of any action that may lead to a further deterioration of regional stability and security. While Governments around the world are working tirelessly to fight the pandemic, Israel continues to undermine Palestine's efforts in that regard. We condemn the occupation of Palestinian territory, the annexation policies and the increase in illegal and colonizing practices and measures, including the construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, the punitive demolitions, the seizure of resources from Palestinian institutions, the forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians and the blockade of the Gaza Strip, which aggravate the emergency situation of the public health system and the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of Palestine, especially in East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, hampering the possibility of counteracting the spreading of COVID-19. It is regrettable that no measures have been taken in the past period to end the Israeli military aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), adopted by the Security Council, which remains silent while Israel, with impunity, consolidates its policy of expanding illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and threatens to annex the Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other regions of the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We reject the acts of provocation, terror, incitement and violence and the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force against Palestinian civilians, in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian law. Due to repeated obstruction by the United States, the Security Council has not even been able to condemn the escalation of violence and the tragic events that have taken place in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018. The need to work together to address the challenges is clear. We must all come up with the necessary responses. We must complement each other, providing the resources within our grasp, however limited they may be. We cannot afford exclusion of any kind. In this respect, we regret the precarious situation in which the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East finds itself as a result of the withdrawal of financial support by the United States. The Security Council must fulfil its primary responsibility bestowed under the Charter to maintain international peace and security, and demand that Israel immediately and completely end its occupation of the Palestinian territories and its aggressive policies and colonizing practices. We express our unwavering solidarity with the Government and the people of Palestine and the support for Palestine's entry as a full Member into the United Nations. We reaffirm our unrestricted support for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that would enable the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination and establish an independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and which will guarantee the right of return for the refugees. Washington's aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions in the Middle East severely undermine the legitimate interests of the Arab and Islamic nations and lead to a dangerous escalation in the region. We reiterate our rejection of the so-called "deal of the century", drawn up by the current United States Administration, which does not envisage the creation of a Palestinian State, ignoring the two-State solution, which has been historically supported by the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other international actors. The unilateral decision of the United States Government to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and to establish its diplomatic representation in that city, showing disrespect for its historic status, and its decision to recognize Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan constitute flagrant violations of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council. We call once again for Israel's total and unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and from all occupied Arab territories. We reaffirm our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and our condemnation of the withdrawal by the United States from the agreement as well as its reimposition of unilateral sanctions and military threats against the Islamic Republic of Iran. Itis unacceptable that some countries have to endure the application of arbitrary unilateral coercive measures, in violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. We demand the immediate end, without political conditions, of the illegal unilateral measures imposed against sovereign States, which hamper the fight against the current situation. As the international community is facing a major global threat, the United States - the largest military, economic, technological and communications Power on the planet - pursues a foreign policy aimed at stirring up and promoting conflicts, divisions, chauvinism and supremacist and racist positions. As the world is fighting against the pandemic - which calls for the promotion of cooperation and the important role of international organizations, especially the United Nations and the World Health Organization (WHO) - the current Government of the United States is attacking multilateralism and seeking to discredit the recognized leadership of WHO. The threat to international peace and security is real, and constant acts of aggression against certain countries aggravate it. We support the urgent call of the Secretary-General to "end the sickness of war and fight the disease that is ravaging our world: the coronavirus pandemic". All forms of war, including unconventional warfare, must cease. Against this backdrop, it is the duty of all States - and in particular of the members of the Security Council - to defend multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and their political independence, unity and territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in international relations.
