Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by reiterating our warm congratulations,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month, during which consultations
were held on the Secretary-General's report on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2015/378). Those consultations
coincided with the discussions on the resolution on the
extension of the mandate of UNAMID (resolution 2228 (2015). I would like to take this opportunity to thank
those States that made every effort at the consultations
to produce a balanced text that takes into account the
positive developments in Darfur by sending a clear
message to the remaining rebel groups to listen to
reason and to engage resolutely and unconditionally
in the political peace process on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which includes the
Government's guarantees that those groups' leaders
will be able to participate inclusively and transparently
in the national dialogue.

While we welcome the positive paragraphs
contained in the resolution, we would affirm the
importance of the regular review of peacekeeping
operations, which requires the Secretary-General to
present recommendations on the future of UNAMID
and the mission's exit strategy, in response to paragraph
7 of resolution 2173 (2014), through which the mission's
mandate was renewed last year, and in consultation with
the Government of the Sudan and the African Union.
Other paragraphs affirm the importance of the efforts
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Special
Representative for Darfur to ensure that those groups
that have so far rejected peace sign the Doha Document,
in order to give the process a global character. We also
welcome the Council's condemnation of any actions
by any armed group aimed at the forcible overthrow of
the Government of the Sudan, and the paragraphs that
affirm the Council's support for the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. We reiterate our gratitude to those
fraternal States that played a leading role in ensuring
that such paragraphs were included in the resolution.

At the same time, we have reservations regarding the
fact that certain paragraphs of the resolution, alleging a
deterioration in the humanitarian and security situation,
were simply copied from the previous resolution
(resolution 2223 (2015), giving the impression that
all five provinces of Darfur are currently a theatre of
open war with the armed groups. Such an impression
is incorrect. While we admit, of course, that such tribal
clashes as the latest incidents involving the Ma'aliya
and Rezeigat groups in East Darfur have occurred in
certain regions, resulting in the flight and displacement
of citizens, they must be viewed in their true context,
and we cannot therefore speak of a deterioration in the
humanitarian situation owing to such clashes.

In the same way, we strenuously object to the seventh
preambular paragraph of the resolution, expressing the
Council's concern about the assertion in the Secretary-
General's report that UNAMID has collected evidence
of two cluster bombs near Kirigiyati, North Darfur.
The Secretary-General emphasizes in his report that
an inquiry into the incident is being conducted, and it
is therefore unacceptable for the resolution to contain
a preambular paragraph on the matter. The same goes
for the paragraphs mentioning obstacles to the work
of UNAMID. As I highlighted when I last addressed
the Security Council on the subject (see S/PV.7460),
the Secretary-General states in his report that 595
UNAMID-related visas were granted during the
reporting period. We would remind delegations that
UNAMID has 17,428 staff members, excluding its
civilian component, and that the occasional delay in
the granting of Visas to a few dozen individuals, or in
the granting of internal movement permits, should not
lead us to ignore the positive developments or to speak
of obstacles to the freedom of movement of UNAMID
staff.

In accordance with paragraphs 26 and 27 of the
resolution, relating to the UNAMID exit strategy, the
joint working group on the matter must immediately
resume its activities in line with the agreement we
reached during the last round of talks, to the effect
that West Darfur and four regions of Central Darfur
are stable, and the first stage of the UNAMID exit
strategy should therefore be implemented there. We
would remind the Council that the UNAMID military
and police presence in those areas is now irrelevant
and should be replaced by United Nations agencies
and programmes responsible for development and
reconstruction. We reiterate the complete commitment
of the Government of the Sudan to full cooperation and
coordination with UNAMID, particularly because the
next stage is extremely important. We repeat our call and would remind the Council that it needs to send the
for the Security Council to play its role in relation to right messages to end the violence.

th art' thatr f t ' in th D ha a r . .
OSCP res 0 use OJO c 0 pe COP oeess The meeting/059 at 10.33 am.
