Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I have the honour to report to the Security Council on the work of the Committee established pursuant toresolution 2140 (2014), pursuant to paragraph 19 (e) thereof. The last such briefing took place on 15 May 2019 (see S/PV.8525); this briefing will therefore cover the period from 16 May 2019 to date. From 16 May to 31 December, the Permanent Representative and then the Deputy Permanent Representative of Peru served as Chair of the Committee. During that period, the Committee held one informal consultation on 23 August to discuss the mid-term update of the Panel of Experts. Four recommendations were addressed to the Committee, two of which were referred to the Panel for further information, with action on the other two having been agreed to by the Committee. I would also like to recall that, for the sake of comprehensiveness, during this time period my predecessors also took action, as agreed upon by the Committee, on three recommendations contained in the final report (see S/2019/83) of the Panel of Experts under resolution 2402 (2018). Those recommendations concerned engagement with the Head of the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen and the Head of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), respectively, with a view to facilitating the establishment of an information-sharing protocol between the Mechanism and the Panel of Experts and between UNMHA and the Panel of Experts. The recommendations also concerned engagement with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the possibility of introducing the analytical capacity of the Mechanism to identify networks using false documentation to evade vessel inspections. Action on the third recommendation involved the dispatch of a joint letter to the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the United Nations Global Compact, seeking their views on the possibility of organizing a conference to support the Government of Yemen in implementing due-diligence mechanisms to best manage cash flow and the import of goods under the principles of the United Nations Global Compact. Lastly, during that time period the Committee received two implementation reports, from Panama and Portugal. The Committee also continued to receive vessel inspection reports from the Mechanism. Since I took over as Chair, the Committee has held one informal consultation, on 10 January, to discuss the final report (see S/2020/70) of the Panel of Experts under resolution 2456 (2019), which was transmitted to the Security Council on 27 January. Of the 11 recommendations contained in the report, five were addressed to the Security Council and six to the Committee. The Committee agreed to take action on two of the six recommendations. It therefore agreed that, during this briefing, the Committee would call on all parties to the conflict in Yemen to strictly adhere to international humanitarian law and to investigate and prosecute their members who commit international humanitarian law violations, and I am doing so via this periodic report. The Committee also agreed to refer back one recommendation to the Panel, requesting further information, and concluded the process of considering a delisting request submitted by the legal representatives of Mr. Khalid Ali Abdullah Saleh, through the delisting focal point in the Secretariat, for the delisting of his father Mr. Ali Abdullah Saleh. The latter's name remains on the Committee's sanctions list.
