Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Let me at the outset, Mr. President, thank
you for having convened today's meeting, during
which we are continuing the positive practice of
holding joint briefings by the Chairpersons of the three
counter-terrorist Committees of the Security Council.

I should like also to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Ambassador Ellen Loj and
Ambassador Mihnea Motoc for their substantive
briefings and in general for their tireless efforts at the
head of their respective committees.

We note with sadness that, despite the
international efforts made, the victims of terrorism in
recent days have included dozens of people in London,
in Turkey and in the Middle East, including in Iraq. My
own compatriots in Russia have died at the hands of
terrorists.

With respect to the subject of today's meeting,
the Russian delegation Views the work of the 1267
Committee as one of the key areas of the counter-
terrorism activities of the Council. We fully support the
efforts of the Committee and of its Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team to enhance the
sanctions regime against the Taliban and Al-Qaida, and
we support negotiations on a new resolution of the
Security Council that is meant to ensure that that task
is effectively addressed.

In the context of the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), I should like to highlight
the ongoing efforts of the Danish Chairperson and of
all members of the Committee to develop new forms of
dialogue with States by carrying out country visits,
enhancing reporting mechanisms, incorporating new
methods for assessing States' technical assistance
needs, and disseminating best practices in order to
fully and effectively implement resolution 1373
(2001).

The CTC is successfully developing its
cooperation with international and regional
organizations. Indeed, expert assistance is particularly
important when carrying out country Visits.

At the same time, there is growing concern at the
fact that the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) is not yet fully staffed, which clearly is having
a negative impact on the CTC's ability successfully to
address the tasks facing it, including its plans to
intensify its counter-terrorism work. We believe that
this problem will be dealt with in the near term and
that, at subsequent meetings of the Council on the
work of the three Committees, there will no longer be a
need to take up this issue.

Worth noting are the positive dynamics in the
work of the 1540 Committee, benefiting from the
active support of the expert team.

We share the View that, at this stage, the priority
task is to clear the backlog of States that have not
submitted their national reports. We hope that the
appeal made by the Group of Eight at Gleneagles for
countries that have not yet done so to immediately
submit their reports on the measures they have
undertaken at the national level in the area of non-
proliferation and on their contributions to international
cooperation will be heeded.

Increasing the Committee's practical interaction
with international and regional organizations in the
area of non-proliferation and export controls continues
to be a pressing matter. We support efforts aimed at
expanding the geographical scope and the formats of
such cooperation.

Given the long-term nature of the tasks set out in
resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that it would be
appropriate to extend the Committee's mandate beyond
April 2006.

In conclusion, I would like to touch upon one of
today's most pressing issues on the counter-terrorism
agenda of the United Nations. Informal consultations
will be held next week on the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. Russia supports
those efforts, which are aimed at quickly reaching
consensus on this most important of legal instruments
in the area of counter-terrorism. We hope that other
delegations share our view, and that they will be
prepared for constructive dialogue to successfully
complete that work and promptly adopt the text of the
convention.

