The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank Mr. Miyet for his briefing, and I also thank
Ambassador Holbrooke both for his contribution and for his
generous remarks of praise about me. He may not be a son
of Africa, but he is proving to be a good friend of Africa,
and that is much appreciated.

The messages we have heard today are very sobering.
Five months after the Lusaka signing, we are coming to a
critical moment. There is a peace agreement, and
institutions have been established to take forward its
implementation. United Nations liaison officers and
Organization of African Unity (OAU) observers are on the
ground. The United Nations is making preparations and is
planning for a peacekeeping force. I want to see it deployed
as soon as it is feasible on the ground to do so - not a day
before, and not a day after.

We need to recognize, as others have indicated, that
the situation is deteriorating. The parties are not all
complying with their commitments under Lusaka. The
renewed fighting we are seeing threatens a return to full-
scale war, and that is very worrying.

The Accord is fragile. But there is no alternative to the
negotiated peace provided for by Lusaka. Everything rests
on its successful implementation. The Security Council as
a whole - and its members individually - must play their
part in driving the process forward, both through political
and diplomatic support, but also through practical
assistance. I suggest we focus on six areas in particular.

First, we must insist that the parties - all of them -
return to their Lusaka obligations. We need to keep on
making clear, publicly and privately, that there is no
alternative to the negotiated peace provided for by the
Lusaka Agreement and I very much agree with Ambassador
Holbrooke and others on that point. We need to be clear
that without their support for Lusaka, the international
community cannot help implement it. We need to be clear
that the parties' support or otherwise for Lusaka will
condition their own relationship with the international
community. Similarly, outside support for parties who
break the ceasefire must be publicized and condemned.

Secondly, we need to do all we can - individually
and collectively to support the Lusaka framework through
help to the mechanisms established to implement the
Agreement. Britain has offered money to fund the
Democratic Republic of the Congo national debate.
British officers are deployed in the region as part of
MONUC. I am pleased to tell the Security Council today
that our Department for International Development has
announced a further funding of £100,000 to the Joint
Military Commission (JMC), in addition to the £50,000
we have already provided. With our strong support, the
European Union has pledged to do all it can to help -
for example, with up to 1.2 million euro for the JMC. We
should continue to look at what more we can each do to
help, and encourage others to follow suit.

Thirdly, we should support the deployment of an
effective United Nations force to help implement Lusaka.
We are ready to support a viable United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. But that can only be, and must be, an operation
which helps the parties implement an agreement to which
they themselves are committed. We cannot enforce
compliance. There must be a clear ceasefire and
withdrawal arrangements consent of all of the
Governments concerned to a United Nations deployment
and commitment to a viable political process on internal
and external security issues, and adequate guarantees of
security and freedom of movement for United Nations
personnel, including a Security Council mandate
providing the United Nations mission with the ability to
protect itself on the basis of robust rules of engagement
and adequate armament.

Any United Nations force deployed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should, at a minimum,
be capable of monitoring the ceasefire, of monitoring and
verifying the withdrawal of all foreign forces and of
investigating reports of military activities by other armed
groups. But the deployment of United Nations troops will
not in itself guarantee peace and security for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries in
the region. They must bear the principal responsibility for
their own future.

Fourthly, we need to move ahead in developing a
plan for the successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of the armed militia groups active in

 

the region, whose presence is one of the key root causes of
the conflict. DDR is critical for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and for lasting
peace in the region. Without it, the Agreement will fail.
Any successful DDR programme will require a political,
not military, solution; commitment by all Governments
concerned to end support for the ex-Rwandan Armed
Forces (FAR)/Interahamwe and other armed groups;
commitment by the Governments concerned to foster an
environment which will enable all other militia personnel
who accept DDR to return and restart their lives and
commitment by the international community to monitor and
assist this process; and sustained financial support. We urge
the parties, through the JMC to continue to work to draw
up a credible plan that will attract the levels of international
support that we need to make implementation possible. This
means working in close collaboration with the OAU and the
United Nations, whose support and input will be vital.

Fifthly, we must address profiteering from and
exploitation of the vast natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These are being used by all sides
to sustain the war. All parties must ensure that commercial
dealings of this nature are legal under relevant domestic
and international law, transparent, consistent with States'
arrangements with the international financial institutions and
benefit the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, not private individuals. We must be prepared to
take action to close down illegal commerce.

Sixthly, we should sustain our support for an
international conference on the Great Lakes to address the
region's underlying problems. But this should only take
place once the parties have implemented the main elements
of Lusaka. The conference cannot be an alternative to the
Lusaka Agreement.

Ultimately the only people who can bring peace to the
region are the leaders of the region.

It has taken too long to choose a facilitator for the
national dialogue. We very much welcome the appointment
yesterday of former President Masire of Botswana. It is
now important that all those concerned move swiftly and
without preconditions to the start of that dialogue.

We hope too that the Political Committee established
by the Lusaka Agreement will convene at an early date to
discuss implementation. Without their engagement and
input the ceasefire will fail.

These are our thoughts on the way forward for
Lusaka. Africa needs our support to secure a lasting peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region. We must do all
we can to help deliver it.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

