I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU). The EU remains united in its commitment to achieving a two-State solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all final-status issues in order to end the conflict. The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles - including land for peace, the road map and the agreements previously reached by the parties - and of the Arab Peace Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition. The EU reiterates its fundamental commitment to the security of Israel, including with regard to current and emerging threats in the region. The EU strongly opposes all actions that undermine the viability of the two- State solution and urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild trust and create a path back to meaningful negotiations. To that end, the EU will continue to closely monitor developments on the ground and their broader implications and will consider further action in order to protect the viability of the two-State solution, which is constantly eroded by new facts on the ground. As the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union, Josep Borrell Fontelles, wrote in his letter to the current members of the Security Council on 23 June: "In recent days, I have had open, friendly and constructive conversations with a number of senior Israeli interlocutors, including Alternate Prime Minister Benny Gantz and Foreign Minister Gabi Ashkenazi. In addition, I am in close contact with the Palestinian leadership and with other key Arab representatives and, together with EU Foreign Ministers, I also held a useful discussion on the Middle East peace process with United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. "Tn these discussions, I emphasized the EU's opposition to any unilateral steps by the parties, in particular the possible annexation by Israel of any parts of the West Bank. I am firmly convinced that such steps would endanger the continuous efforts of the Security Council and the wider international community to achieve the vision of a region where two States - Israel and Palestine - live side by side within secure and recognized borders. "In March this year, at the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the EU delivered a statement to that effect, noting clearly that 'any annexation would constitute a serious violation of international law'. Indeed, a core legal provision of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, is that the acquisition of territory by force is prohibited. "Importantly, unilateral annexation would cause real damage to the prospects for a viable two-State solution." (see S/2020/596, annex 23) Recalling that settlements are illegal under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a two-State Solution impossible, the EU reiterates its strong opposition to Israel's settlement policy and actions taken in that context, such as building the separation barrier beyond the 1967 line; demolitions and confiscation, including of EU-funded projects; evictions; forced transfers, including of Bedouins; illegal outposts and restrictions of movement and access. The EU calls on Israel to halt continued settlement expansion, including in East Jerusalem, especially in sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1, which severely threatens the two-State solution. The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce a fundamental change to the political, security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns. Recent rocket fire by militant groups is unacceptable and underlines again the danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit to non-violence and peace. The EU reaffirms its readiness to work towards the resumption of meaningful negotiations to resolve all final-status issues and to achieve a just and lasting peace. It urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine commitment to the two-State solution as the only realistic way to end the conflict. Allow me to turn now to the situation in Syria. In Idlib, the offensive by the Syrian regime and its backers, including Russia, has created untold human suffering and has provoked the worst humanitarian crisis since the beginning of the Syrian conflict. The EU reiterates, in the strongest possible terms, its call on all parties to maintain a sustainable ceasefire so as to guarantee the protection of civilians on the ground and from the air and to enable the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance by the international community. While the European Union recognizes the presence of United Nations- designated terrorist groups in the region, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction of civilian infrastructure - including health facilities, schools and settlements for displaced persons - by the Syrian regime and its allies cannot be justified under any circumstances and must stop. We reiterate the EU position that all the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity should be held accountable. The EU has condemned Turkey's unilateral military action in north-eastern Syria, which causes unacceptable human suffering, undermines the fight against Da'esh and seriously threatens European security. Turkey is a key partner of the European Union and a critically important actor in the Syrian crisis and the region. Turkey's security concerns in north-eastern Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic means, not military action, and in accordance with international humanitarian law. In response to the findings of the 8 April report of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Executive Council recently took a crucially important decision on addressing the possession and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime. That decision has been carefully drafted in accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. It sets clear and verifiable parameters for action that the Syrian regime needs to take in order to return to full compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. The European Union strongly supports the decision and urges the Syrian regime to take all the measures required to redress the situation in the specified time frame. As set out in the decision, it will now be the duty of the Conference of the States Parties to decide any further course of action, in accordance with article XII of the Convention. We call on all States parties to fulfil their responsibility and bolster the credibility of the Convention. The EU urges the Syrian regime to return to the negotiating table and repeats that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine political transition in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process, and remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian State. The EU is addressing the humanitarian situation as a matter of priority. It is delivering humanitarian assistance to address the emergency needs for shelter, medical and food support of some | million displaced persons and all other Syrians in need in the Idlib region. We must continue to ensure safe, sustained and immediate access to populations in need, in full compliance with international humanitarian law. As stated by High Representative Josep Borrell and Commissioner for Crisis Management Janez Lenareie on 12 July: "On Saturday, 11 July, the Security Council adopted a much-needed resolution on cross border assistance that is crucial for helping people suffering from the conflict in Syria. "However, it is a matter of deep concern that the resolution adopted after repeated vetoes by Russia and China authorizes only one crossing point out of the two previously available to the United Nations. The unconstructive approach of certain members of the Security Council is all the more regrettable at a time when needs have never been greater and in the context of the coronavirus pandemic. "Only the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point is now left for the United Nations to provide essential humanitarian assistance. The authorization of only one crossing will hamper the delivery of life-saving emergency supplies to hundreds of thousands of people in need in north-west Syria." The EU will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition, in the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.
