Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Soliz and welcome
him as the new Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I wish him every
success in fulfilling this important responsibility.
We appreciate his informative briefing and commend
him on the immense progress that has been achieved
already. At the same time, we should acknowledge that
many strides still need to be made. I make the following
observations for the Security Council's consideration.

As we know, this is a most crucial period for the
Committee, which, after having covered much ground
over the past five years, is now moving to a completely
new level. A new expanded mandate with wider
functions, as well as new challenges and threats, present
a vast new areas of work and great responsibility, not
only for the Committee and its new Chair but also for
all Member States.

Kazakhstan is a strong supporter of strengthening the
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) non-proliferation
regime. We are committed to these efforts and strictly
comply with all the requirements of resolution 1540
(2004). We are also firmly committed to our fulfilling
our obligations under the new resolution 2325 (2016).
My country is a member of the Group of Friends of
Resolution 1540, and we are among the 77 Member
States that sponsored resolution 2325 (2016). On
11 and 12 March 2014, Astana hosted a seminar on the
contribution of resolution 1540 (2004) in regional and
global disarmament and non-proliferation dedicated to
the tenth anniversary of the resolution in the Central
Asia + format. The event was jointly organized by
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
1540 Committee.

I would like to note that the Committee's sixteenth
programme of work, for 2017, is the most comprehensive
of its kind. It requires all of us to redouble our efforts
to press our collective action to strengthen the WMD
non-proliferation regime in the most effective manner
possible. As we heard in the Chair's briefing, some
of the provisions of the programme are already being
implemented. I fully agree with the Chair that there
cannot be a common approach for all and that the
specificity of States needs to be taken into account.
I am confident that individual interactions with each
country, visits to States, increased outreach activities
and sufficient financial resources will contribute
significantly to advancing our actions to counter
contemporary threats and challenges.

In the Committee's work programme, we also
consider the tasks ofcontinuing to institute transparency
measures and to set up outreach activities to be of
great importance. These tasks could enable effective
interaction among States Members of the United Nations
and inform them of all our achievements. We therefore
consider it very useful to conduct regular meetings open
to all Member States on the Committee's activities.

The threat of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors, especially destructive
terrorist organizations, has significantly increased. In
this regard, correctly assessing the evolving nature of
the risk of proliferation and rapid advances in science
and technology as well as responding in a timely manner
with proactive measures should become our main tasks.

Paragraph 27 of resolution 2325 (2016) reiterates
the need to enhance ongoing cooperation among the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004), 1267 (1999), 2253 (2015), on Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida, and 1373
(2001), on the Counter-Terrorism Committee. As the
Chair of the Sanctions Committee on ISIL, Da'esh and
Al-Qaida, Kazakhstan is ready for cooperation within
our respective mandates.

Given the importance of capacity-building,
Kazakhstan is considering making a voluntary
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities in order
to assist States in implementing their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, we call for greater multilateral
confidence and trust to be achieved so that the
powerful global anti-nuclear movement may prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
need to rise above our national interests when it comes
to the common good for people and the planet.

