Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): Sir, your
colleague and friend, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation and African Integration of Niger, very
much wished to be here today to participate in this
discussion on behalf of the current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Unfortunately, developments in Togo have
meant that she must remain in our subregion. She has
therefore instructed me to convey her regrets, and to
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Security
Council for having convened this public debate on
cross-border issues in West Africa.

On her behalf, I also welcome the considerable
attention that the Council is paying to the problems of
West Africa in general, and to border-related problems
in particular.

There could be no more suitable occasion to
discuss these issues, since today is the eve of the one
hundred twentieth anniversary of the conclusion of the
Berlin Conference, that gathering of colonial Powers
on Africa - without the presence of Africans - held
from 15 November 1884 to 26 February 1885, which
resulted in the carving up of the so-called black
continent into colonial possessions that were
subsequently to become independent, within borders
that are straitjackets for each of the States concerned,
while also constituting, in many cases, sources of
discord among them.

For a regional economic community such as
ECOWAS, whose primary mission is to provide for the
well-being of its people through economic and social
integration, the question of borders and their attendant
problems is, of course, a matter of major concern. This
concern becomes a source of anxiety as it affects the
mobility of populations both in times of peace and in
times of crisis.

I wish to share with Council members, our
comments and our concerns, but also our hopes and
wishes, as regards one of the most recurrent cross-
border problems that our region must tackle, and which
has to do with the mobility of our populations. There is
a high degree of mobility among the populations of the
ECOWAS area. Movements are prompted largely by
the need to seek employment, or by family reasons.
According to studies on this issue, at the end of the
1990s, 11 per cent of the population of West Africa,
Nigeria excluded, resided in a State member of the
Community other than their country of origin.
Moreover, 30 to 40 per cent of the inhabitants of the
region, again Nigeria excepted, no longer lived in their
district or community of origin.

Generally speaking, there are favourite
destinations in West Africa, especially when there is a
need to find a professional occupation, or to buy or sell
a consumer product. The following movements are to
be seen: there is great movement from Burkina Faso,
from Mali and from Niger to Cote d'Ivoire; fairly
significant movement from Guinea to Senegal; and a
fairly high level of migration from Senegal to the
Gambia.

Migration in West Africa is either voluntary -
caused by the quest for better living conditions; labour
migration - or forced, as a result of conflict or of
natural catastrophe or disaster. The displacement of
populations from one country to another is often made
difficult by the growing number of hindrances to the
movement of migrants. Practices that are being pursued
at our border posts and the many roadblocks on our
roads are barriers and burdens for the population. As a
result of such practices and of the roadblocks, road
travel is needlessly prolonged and taxes the travel
budget of the people concerned, while also, of course,
impinging on their most fundamental rights.

Populations are thus obliged to bribe road safety
officers or those manning border posts, even when they
are in compliance with the legislation governing
movement from one country to another. Extortion and
abuse at the border posts have often provoked a revolt
among neighbouring populations, leading to crises
between two adjacent countries.

It should also be noted that the purpose of such
mobility is not always lawful. Movements also arise
because of large-scale banditry and cross-border crime.
Thus, as a result of the porous nature of our borders,
the lack of skill among border agents or the greed of
some of those agents, some criminals manage to
exploit this mobility in order to engage in unlawful
activities, or to evade the security forces. Thus, many
armed gangs are able to hide out or even disappear
after having committed abuses in a neighbouring
country. Developments in the trafficking of goods,
weapons, vehicles and human beings, especially
women and children, attest to the scale of the cross-
border problems experienced by West Africa.

The management of border areas is thus a major
problem, because, for the local populations residing
there, the borders, as drawn, cannot alter the centuries-
long relations and bonds of kinship shared with people
on the other side. Management becomes a problem
when farmland or a service-provider located on the
other side of the border is involved, thus requiring
daily crossings.

Such complaints and grievances have become
widespread among our populations, and the many
meetings of the security services of bordering countries
demonstrate our national Governments concern at this
state of affairs, which is a curb on economic
integration, which should chiefly benefit these
populations.

In order to meet those shortcomings, ECOWAS
has adopted a set of measures: the Protocol relating to
free movement of persons, the right of residence and
establishment, which includes three phases - right of
entry and abolition of visa, right of residence and right
of establishment; the Protocol relating to the definition
of community citizenship, which defines the conditions
for community citizenship; the decision establishing a
travel certificate for ECOWAS member States; the
decision regarding the establishment of a harmonized
immigration and emigration form in ECOWAS member
States; and finally, the decision relating to the adoption
of an ECOWAS passport.
In addition to those measures - whose
implementation has seen some significant progress -
ECOWAS has taken the initiative of developing a
programme called "border countries", whose main
objective is to accelerate the economic integration
process through local integration, enabling border
populations to share some goods and services because
of their socio-economic and cultural homogeneity.
With that programme, ECOWAS intends to begin, in
the context of regional integration, a new, broader and
more dynamic approach and a new local development
plan.

Addressing and resolving issues related to cross-
border problems is a major challenge for ECOWAS in
the context of its regional integration mission. It is
absolutely essential that those issues be taken into
account in ECOWAS programmes and policies in order
to establish lasting peace in the region, which alone
can secure an environment conducive to economic and
social development.

