Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the United Kingdom for convening today's
meeting and Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing. We listened attentively to the statements made
by Chairman Mogae and Ms. Sunday.

Recent events show that the situation in South
Sudan continues to be complicated. President Kiir has
put forward an initiative on holding a national dialogue
and promoting economic development. Meanwhile,
the Government of South Sudan is facing numerous
difficulties in implementing the peace agreement,
maintaining national stability and addressing the
humanitarian crisis and the famine.

China hopes that the international community will
provide assistance in the following four areas: first,
it should forcefully push for a political settlement of
the question of South Sudan, since that is the only
possible solution. The international community should
continue to put pressure on all the parties in South
Sudan to cease hostilities, return to the political
settlement track and effectively implement the peace
agreement. China welcomes President Kiir's initiative
on holding a national dialogue and hopes that all of the
parties in South Sudan will actively participate in that
process, settle their differences through dialogue and
consultations and promote reconciliation in a joint effort
to achieve national peace, stability and development.

Secondly, the role of regional and subregional
organizations should be brought into full play. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU) have done extensive
mediation work on that issue. The United Nations
should give full play to the comparative advantages and
respective roles of IGAD and the AU, step up efforts to
implement the joint statement signed by the three parties
IN January during the AU Summit and lend greater
support to mediation efforts led by Chairman Mogae
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
and AU High Representative President Konare, so as to
create synergy in seeking a resolution to the situation
in South Sudan.

Thirdly, we must enhance the capacity of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to fulfil its mandate. China is in favour of UNMISS
playing a constructive role in assisting all of the parties
in South Sudan to implement the peace agreement,
protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian access.
We hope that the Government of South Sudan will
actively implement the joint communique issued with
the Security Council, as well as the relevant Council
resolutions; and we support UNMISS in fulfilling its
mandate by cooperating with the deployment of the
regional protection force and increasing consultations
with the United Nations and IGAD, thereby properly
addressing any issues that might arise in the
cooperation process.

Fourthly, South Sudan must be actively helped
to combat the famine. We hope that the international
community will provide active support to the disaster
relief efforts of the South Sudanese Government,
encourage all of the parties in South Sudan to act in
the overall interest of the people and create favourable
conditions for the speedy delivery of disaster relief to
affected areas. The international community should
help the Government increase investment in agriculture
and infrastructure and enhance the Government's
capacity for self-reliance and disaster resilience so as to
promote sustainable economic and social development.

The Chinese Government has actively participated
in and promoted the peace process in South Sudan by
pushing for peace talks and dispatching peacekeepers.
China has made its contribution to the peace process
in South Sudan. Recently, the Special Representative
of the Chinese Government on African Affairs visited
Uganda, Kenya and South Africa, and exchanged views
with the countries in the region on the situation in
South Sudan. China will continue to play a constructive
role in restoring peace, stability and development in
South Sudan.

