Ms. Gunnarsdettir (Iceland): More than two
and a half years ago, the unrest in Syria began,
with unforeseen, horrific consequences. A country
is in ruins. Iceland condemns the use of chemical
weapons in Syria in the strongest possible terms. We
also condemn all other violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in the country,
regardless of the perpetrators. The latest report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/24/46) states that
the perpetrators of those violations and crimes, on all
sides, do not fear accountability and that referral to
justice is imperative. Iceland agrees, and reiterates its
request to the Security Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.

We welcome resolution 2118 (2013), which requires
the verification and destruction of chemical-weapon
stockpiles in Syria. We also welcome efforts to
convene a second Geneva conference in November.
In the light of the open debate on women and peace
and security in the Security Council last Friday (see S/PV.7044), Iceland would like to stress the importance
of women as mediators and their role at the negotiating
table. Women's participation in peace negotiations is
fundamental to ensuring results, and now is the time
to put our words into action and have women actively
involved in a Geneva conference, to ensure that their
rights will be protected and promoted in any future
political solution in Syria.

Journalists are our eyes and ears in conflict zones.
It is therefore vital that journalists be granted free
access, so that they can report without obstruction. They
have a right to the same protection as civilians, as the
Council recognized in resolution 1738 (2006). In Syria,
however, they are operating under extremely dangerous
circumstances, with 28 journalists killed in the country
last year. That has to change, and journalists' freedom
of movement throughout the country, as well as a
non-discriminatory visa policy for them, as called for
in the six-point plan, must be respected.

The situation in the Middle East cannot be separated
from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remains
a key issue. We welcome the renewed peace talks
between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine,
and commend Secretary Kerry for his commitment. It
is extremely important that the peace process provide
tangible results, while respecting the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination as well
as Israel's right to exist within safe and secure borders.
But time is short. The continuing settlement activities
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are an
obstacle to peace and may well make a two-State solution
impossible. The international community, including the

Security Council, must address the situation and do its
utmost to prevent ongoing violations of human rights
and humanitarian law on the ground. That includes
addressing the continuing settlement activities, which
are not confined to the construction of new homes for
settlers but also include new roads and infrastructure as
well as demolitions and eviction orders.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that this
time the negotiations must result in two States, living
side by side in peace and security. That is the only way
forward for both parties.

