Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, let
me start by thanking Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri
and his team for the very competent way they
conducted the work of the Council last month, and by
wishing you, Mr. President, every success in your
efforts during Lebanon's presidency of the Council and
assuring you of our constant support.
I thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his
comprehensive briefing on the activities of the

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) on Iran, and wish to congratulate him on his
very efficient stewardship of the Committee. I would
like to commend the work of the 1737 Committee,
particularly the review of the document on guidelines
and the ongoing update of the programme of work,
which are both very useful tools for improving the
efficiency of the existing regime.

I reiterate our full support for the Panel of
Experts, mindful of the vital role it has to play in
assisting the Committee. I would also like to express
my appreciation for the meaningful recommendations
they made to the Committee in May. I trust that some
of the Panel's valuable suggestions will soon be
translated into concrete measures. In this regard, I must
say that I continue to be convinced of the usefulness of
publicizing the final report of the Panel of Experts as
soon as possible, thus making important and helpful
information available to all United Nations Member
States.

Our concern over Iranian nuclear activities, as
well as over the development of its ballistic missile
capabilities, has not diminished during the past three
months. We took note of the mention in the last report
on Iran by the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Authority that, in response to an
invitation from the Iranian authorities, the Deputy
Director General for Safeguards, Mr. Herman
Nackaerts, recently visited the country. That is an
encouraging development, and I sincerely hope that
this initiative is meant to indicate that Iran has the
intention of significantly improving its cooperation
with the Agency.

But the pending issues that Iran has to clarify go
far beyond a single visit to the country by Agency
officials. The Director General's report stresses that
Iran has not suspended its enrichment-related
activities. In the meantime, the Agency is still waiting
for a thorough response to a number of pending
questions regarding those activities, and for further
information in connection with Iran's announcement
that 10 new Iranian enrichment facilities will be built
in the near future. The same opaque situation applies
with regard to heavy water-related projects; those
projects were not suspended and may begin to be
operational by the end of 2013.
We regret that to date Iran has not provided the
Agency with access to these facilities. In such

circumstances, it is impossible for the Agency to fully
affirm the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. In order to restore international
confidence, Iran must without delay grant unlimited
access to all its nuclear sites, equipment and personnel,
and show genuine willingness to provide the Agency
with previously requested documentation and all
relevant information, in accordance with Iran's
safeguards agreement and subsidiary arrangements.

