Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Syrian Government has examinedthe forty-
eighth monthly report of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and, yesterday morning, as
usual, we sent a formal letter to the Secretary-General
and to the President of the Security Council setting forth
the position of the Syrian Government on the report.

We arerealistic. We know wellthat theUnitedNations
is not a charitable organization. That is clear given that
it has been unable to implement the principles of the
Charter and international law since its inception - and
the Palestinian question is a case in point. There have
been other failures by the United Nations: in Iraq,
Libya, the former Yugoslavia, Grenada - for those
who have forgotten Grenada - Nicaragua, and the list
goes on. However, I hope we can preserve the United
Nations as an organization even as it continues to lack
charitability. I would now like to make the following
points.

First, the Syrian Government is fully committed
to the principles of international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as Syrian law and the Syrian
Constitution, all of which stipulate that the Syrian
Government has the responsibility to ensure the safety
and security of Syrian citizens and protect them from
terrorist groups.

Secondly, the current report, just like previous
reports, has a great flaw, namely, that the authors of
the report continue to rely on politicized sources, open
sources and unreliable figures. At the same time, the
report continues to ignore credible Government sources
and even the reports issued by the representatives of
the United Nations in Syria. Those representatives,
along with the reports they have submitted to the
United Nations in New York, acknowledge the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its cooperation on the
humanitarian issue. However, none of this information
that reaches New York appears to be mentioned in the
report, as if by miracle.

Thirdly, the Syrian Government condemns the
authors of the report - the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - especially
after the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), for their
failure to mention the Turkish aggression against the
Syrian city of Afrin. That aggression has claimed the
lives of many people, including women and children,
destroyed public and private facilities and has led to
the displacement of the city's inhabitants and a severe
shortage of humanitarian goods. However, Afrin is not
eastern Ghouta, eastern Aleppo, Fo'ah or Kefreya.

Fourthly, the Syrian Government fully rejects
the failure of the authors of the report to mention the
catastrophic impact of the so-called International
Coalition and its members. The Coalition, which
has claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians and
members of the Syrian forces who are fighting Da'esh,
committed two new massacres yesterday that claimed
the lives of 29 civilians and injured dozens, most of
them women and children, in the villages of Sha'fa
and Thahret Allouni in eastern Deir ez-Zor. It appears
that the International Coalition is focused on this part
of eastern Deir ez-Zor because it is home to civilians
who do not host Da'esh or Al-Nusra Front terrorists.
The Coalition has also destroyed the city of Raqqa,
as my colleague the representative of the Russian
Federation just noted. My Government calls once again
for dismantling this illegitimate aggressive Coalition
and for an immediately stop to its crimes against the
Syrian people.

The Russian military issued a communique today
saying that the areas under the control of the allies
and agents of the United States in Syria are witnessing
the worst humanitarian crisis currently in the country.
Those areas have become black holes, just like the black
holes in outer space.

With regard to the situation in eastern Ghouta,
the Syrian Government believes that the current
deterioration in the situation is due to the fact that
terrorist groups there have launched attacks against
residential zones and military targets. Up until
yesterday, they had launched more than 2,180 missiles
and mortars against the city of Damascus. Those attacks
claimed the lives of 66 civilians and injured 474 others.
Government forces have been forced to respond
to those attacks and to carry out their constitutional
responsibility in guaranteeing security and safety for
the citizens. My Government condemns the use, by
the authors of the report, of the term "besieged areas"
when considering the situation in eastern Ghouta, in
rural Damascus. Under pressure from influential
countries in and outside of the Council, they continue
to deliberately ignore the fact that people in eastern
Ghouta are besieged from within by the various armed
terrorist organizations operating there. Those terrorist
organizations are exploiting civilians and using them
as human shields. They are seizing and monopolizing
humanitarian assistance, distributing the aid to their
supporters or selling it at exorbitant prices, as was the
case in eastern Aleppo.

Syria regrets the failure of the authors of the report
to refer to the suffering of thousands of kidnapped
people who are in eastern Ghouta prisons and other
places where the terrorist groups are spread. The
kidnapped people include women, children and elderly.
These people were kidnapped from their homes and
places of work and have been subjected to the worst
forms of torture. There are civilians, including from city
of Adra and from Latakia, who were kidnapped from
their homes five years ago. The Syrian Government
also condemns the statements by the Secretariat and
reports of the Secretary-General, which continue up till
now to disregard the suffering of 8 million civilians in
the capital Damascus as a result of hundreds of missiles
and mortars launched daily from terrorist groups within
eastern Ghouta.

The accusations by the authors of the report, like
those of the Western countries that have influence
on them, that the Syrian Government is allegedly
besieging Ghouta have been consistently refuted. They
have proven to be unfounded, as we have seen in recent
reports noting that the Saudi regime provided "aid"
to eastern Ghouta in February. That proves, first, that
eastern Ghouta is not besieged and, secondly, that it is
possible to access it. In particular, the terrorist groups
in Ghouta continue to receive arms and munitions from
Governments that support terrorism, including Saudi
Arabia's so-called humanitarian assistance.

The Syrian Government is more committed than
anyone to protecting its citizens across Syria. In that
regard, it has taken all necessary measures to protect
its citizens and to respond to the attacks of terrorist
groups in eastern Ghouta. We have sought to protect
these civilians from the terrorists by establishing a
humanitarian corridor to ensure their exit from eastern
Ghouta. We announced the humanitarian corridor only
hours after the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) in
order to ensure the safety of civilians - in cooperation
with our Russian friends and allies. We have provided
them with shelter, food, medicine and medical care at
the expense of the Syrian Government, not the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The Syrian Government has also called on members
of the armed groups to lay down their weapons, cease
their terrorist activities inside residential areas and
engage in national reconciliation efforts. However,
those terrorist groups, including the Al-Nusra Front,
Jaysh al-Islam and Faylak ar-Rahman, have forcibly
prevented civilians from reaching the corridor, as some
members of the Council may know. They also sought to
target the humanitarian corridor after it was announced,
through the use of mortars.

As for the letter sent by the terrorist Mohamed
Alloush, it is a clear indication that he rejects the exit
of civilians from Ghouta. It is clear that he wants to
use them as human shields. There seems to be a new
trend in the United Nations to circulate a letter from
a terrorist group as an official document. That is an
innovation at the United Nations. There is no respect
for the Member States concerned.

We have followed closely the way resolution
2401 (2018) was adopted and today's statements and
briefings. We can clearly say that the main goal behind
the adoption of the resolution is neither to reach a clear
truce or ceasefire, as some may claim, nor to protect
civilians and meet their needs. The main goal was to use
the Security Council once again as a means to prevent
any progress by the Syrian army and its allies in the
fight against the terrorist groups that are targeting the
city of Damascus. I say that for the thousandth time.
How else to explain the fact that the resolution fails to
refer to any Council resolution on counter-terrorism?
Who can explain to us the strong resistance of some
States during the negotiations on the draft resolution
to any text that excludes Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and the terrorist groups affiliated with them from the
supposed ceasefire? For three days, the Council has
continued to negotiate the issue of whether to include
or exclude them.

The false humanitarian propaganda on the situation
in eastern Ghouta coincided with another campaign
under the supervision of the United States, claiming the
use of chemical weapons again in Syria, in areas under
the exclusive control of terrorists or, I should say, the
White Helmets. Today, The New York Times published
a Tin-Tin style, childish report claiming that there is
cooperation on the chemical issue between my country
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
article is a full-page report on the front page of The New
York Times. It seeks to tarnish the image of the Syrian
Government and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. It ends by saying that this information is
not substantiated.

"Though experts who viewed the report said
the evidence it cited did not prove definitively that
there was current, continuing collaboration between
North Korea and Syria on chemical weapons."

That is a word-for-word quote from The New York Times.

It seems that The New York Times is not up to date
on what is going on in the world. It seems that the New
York Times does not know that the American vessel,
the MV Cape Ray, destroyed the chemical arsenal
voluntarily submitted by the Syrian Government after
joining the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), as a full member. That is old information,
deja vu, as is said in French. However, it seems that The
New York Times has decided to address this issue today.

I will read a communique that we received just
now of information that I think should be taken into
consideration when addressing the issue of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. And I can tell the Council
that terrorists will use chemical weapons in Syria. On
the morning of 20 February, four days ago, three Turkish
trucks carrying chlorine entered Idlib governorate
through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. I think that The New
York Times should verify that information. Two trucks
stopped in the village onalb Loze in Idlib, and the third
continued its way to Al-Habit village in northern Idlib.
Information available to the Syrian Government points
to the fact that terrorists are currently preparing for a
chemical weapon using the substance of chlorine on a
large scale and to then accuse the Syrian Arab Army
of using such weapons. Those terrorists have clear
instructions from Western and Turkish intelligence to
fabricate a chemical attack before 13 March, because
it is on that date that the eighty-seventh session of the
Executive Council of the OPCW will be held.

According to the information I received just now,
the two trucks are currently in the school of Qalb Loze
village. Other cars and terrorists are also currently in
the school, which they have turned into a warehouse
for chemical weapons. As for the third truck, it is
currently in a centre belonging to the Hay'at Tahrir
Al-Sham, which is a Turkish agent, in the north-eastern
part of Al-Habit village. A vast number of terrorists are
currently unloading the truck there. In providing the
Security Council with this information, we affirm that
these terrorists, at the instructions of their operators,
will use these chemical weapons before 13 March.

The main responsibility for ending hostilities lies
with those countries that have real influence with
terrorist groups in Ghouta and other parts of Syria.
They should compel these terrorist groups to stop their
terrorist activities and allow civilians to leave those
areas, which are used by these groups as a base to
launch their terrorist attacks.

There is in this Organization a group of five
countries that are shedding tears over the humanitarian
situation in Syria. Unfortunately, some of them are
members of the Council. They have invited Member
States to watch a movie about the White Helmets, two
days from now in the Economic and Social Council
Chamber here at the United Nations. Some members
of the Council are advocating for a group that has been
designated as a terrorist group by the Council. I hope
that the Council will address the information I have
provided seriously and appropriately.

