Mr. Menon (Singapore): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his detailed report
(S/2007/50) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I would also like to thank
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for his
comprehensive briefing to the Security Council a short
while ago. Like others, I would also like to thank
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
for his statement.

The role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste has
been of great interest to my delegation. We have
supported United Nations operations in Timor-Leste in
various forms since the days of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, in 1999. A
Singaporean is currently one of the Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in UNMIT,
and we have 23 police and military officers on the
ground.

It is clear from the report that UNMIT has been
working hard in multiple areas. That includes the key
issues of security sector reform and support for Timor-
Leste's electoral process. Much ground has been
covered and all the pieces are in place for a successful
election. However, there are still many challenges that
the country has to grapple with. In our opinion, three of
those areas stand out as warranting priority attention.

First, priority must be placed on maintaining law
and order. We have seen how quickly gangs of young
people sprouted following the breakdown of law and
order last year. Fuelled by the easy availability of
illegal weapons and unemployed young people, those
gangs have been responsible for much of the violence
that has rocked Dili. If unchecked, they could seriously
undermine the electoral process and set back all the
important work that has been accomplished thus far. To
ensure a smooth election and expeditious
reconstruction after the election, no effort must be
spared in reining in and disarming those gangs, while
at the same time tackling the problem of
unemployment among young people.

Secondly, there must be no let up in security
sector reforms to integrate and strengthen the Timorese
police, the military and the Ministries of the Interior
and Defence. Every effort must be made to resolve the
mistrust and rivalry between those institutions.
Resources must be made available for reconstituting
and normalizing the forces of the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste and the Falintil-Forgas Armadas de Defesa
de Timor-Leste, as well as to build up their capacity to
maintain law and order.

Thirdly, we need to work on upholding the rule of
law. Strengthening the country's fledgling judicial
system, in terms of both capacity and capability, is
vital. That is one of the most daunting tasks that
confront new nations, and Timor-Leste is no exception.
We are therefore pleased to note that UNMIT and the
United Nations Development Programme are working
hand-in-hand with national and international partners
to secure the necessary resources and expertise for that
purpose. We are also pleased to note that, while the
Timorese Parliament has set up its own commission to
determine the causes of last year's crisis, it has
committed to implementing the recommendations of
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry in its
fight against impunity. That is an important
undertaking, as it brings proper closure to the
reconciliation process. It also signifies the
Government's resolve to uphold the rule of law and
sends a powerful message of deterrence to would-be
trouble makers.

Following full independence, in 2002, and the
three-year mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor, which ended in May 2005, we
may have been too quick in pronouncing success in
Timor-Leste. We were soon reminded of how delicate
nation-building can be. What we have now is a second
chance to get it right. UNMIT is a good start. It is a
question of commitment. We can help by giving
UNMIT strong support to fulfil its mandate.

Timor-Leste is at a critical juncture of its
development as a young nation. There is still much
work to be done, and the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend UNMIT's mandate by 12
months is reasonable. UNMIT must stay the course and
complete the tasks. We would even venture to say that
UNMIT should stay for as long as it is needed to do so.
To roll back prematurely will be to repeat history.

We also support the Timorese Government's
request for an additional formed police unit at a time
when maintaining law and order is so crucial. We
caution against that unit pulling out too soon after the
election. There is much that additional United Nations
police can contribute in the post-election environment,
especially in maintaining peace and assisting in the
police sector reforms.

Finally, we urge the United Nations to expedite
the staffing of UNMIT personnel supporting security
and judicial sector reforms. The present shortfalls in
staffing and expertise in some of those areas is a
concern, as they mean that more transgressors get away
unpunished.

