Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui for her usual comprehensive and detailed
briefing to the Council.

Equatorial Guinea has been following the positive
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with great interest. We thank the Secretary-General
for his recent report (S/2019/776) and reiterate our
gratitude to the Special Representative. We also thank
all the personnel of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations country team, the
troop- and police-contributing countries, regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and
non-governmental organizations for their efforts and
commitment to their work. And I commend the political
will of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Thanks to all those actors, positive winds
are blowing in the country.

It is as a result of the efforts of the international
community and the determination of the Congolese
people that today we are celebrating the recent positive
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, such as the holding of peaceful elections, a
peaceful transfer of power, the formation of the Senate
and Parliament, the appointment of the Prime Minister
and the formation of a new coalition Government.
Those are unquestionably steps in the right direction
towards lasting stability in that great country, whose
importance to every aspect of life in our subregion we
have emphasized on many occasions.

We should ensure that the international community
helps the Congolese Government so that it can secure
full control of the country's military forces and thereby
exercise its authority throughout its national territory
in order to defend its independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity. At the same time, we
also call for ensuring an atmosphere in the region
of good-neighbourliness, regional cooperation and
non-interference in the affairs of other countries, as
stipulated in resolution 2424 (2018). The cooperation
between MONUSCO and the Congolese armed forces
constitutes an important relationship that is essential to
the fight to eradicate armed groups in the country.

The presence of fighting and armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of Congo has resulted in serious
human rights violations, the forced displacement of
persons and a chronic humanitarian crisis with serious
consequences. Despite the assistance provided by
the Government and its international partners, we
remain concerned about the large number of people
who continue to be exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola. The latter in particular requires
technical and financial assistance from the international
community. In that regard, we commend the Secretary-
General's recent visit to the country.

Given that the Democratic Republic of Congo
possesses a vast array of natural resources and
significant mineral reserves, it is crucial to ensure
that it receive major support in the fight against the
illegal exploitation and commercialization of its natural
resources and in the consolidation and implementation
of certification mechanisms and protocols, so that
the benefits of those resources can contribute to
the country's development and the welfare of the
Congolese people. The Democratic Republic of Congo
should be able to maximize its massive potential, which
would undoubtedly have a very positive impact on
our subregion.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea firmly
believes that we need concerted efforts on the part of
the United Nations, the African Union and regional and
subregional organizations to address adequately and
in a coordinated manner the conflicts in the region in
general and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular. We commend the renewed political will that
the leaders of the region have shown in strengthening
ties between their countries, addressing their
differences through trust and dialogue and working
constructively to manage cross-border incidents in
order to advance cooperation and integration, with
a view to achieving the stability that is essential to
enabling the development and renewal that will lead to
prosperity in this key subregion of Africa.

In conclusion, we urge the African Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie, the
Southern African Development Community and
international partners to continue to develop synergies
with the member States of the International Conference
of the Great Lakes Region aimed at implementing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We
should not conclude without reiterating our gratitude
to MONUSCO for its arduous and excellent work in
a complex context. We wish it success in adapting
to the new circumstances, dynamics and positive
developments that are currently taking place in our
great brother country in Central Africa. In this place
and moment we can see the political class and the
Congolese people coming to maturity at the same time.

