Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, most
sincerely for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council alongside the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, my colleague and brother
Mr. Michael Keating. I welcome him to Somalia since
he has admitted that I am his senior, having arrived
there one week earlier than he did. It is my belief that
we shall continue to build together on the good working
relations already established by our predecessors in the
delivery of our shared mandates.

I am briefing the Council barely two weeks after the
deadly attack on the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) El-Ade base in the Gedo region and the
Lido attack. The attack in Gedo and previous attacks
on AMISOM. forward operating bases illustrate the
continuing threats that we all face in the fight against
Al-Shabaab. I pay tribute to all the AMISOM. uniformed
personnel who continue to exhibit professionalism,
tenacity and courage in the campaign to degrade
Al-Shabaab's capacity. I would also like to make
special mention of the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Once again, I would like to express my grief
and condolences to the families of all our fallen heroes
who have paid the ultimate price not only in the service
of Africa but also in the preservation of global peace
and security.

My briefing today will focus on the recent security
and political developments in Somalia. Since my
predecessor last briefed the Council in May 2015 (see S/PV.7445), we have continued to make considerable
security gains. AMISOM. and the Somali National
Army commenced renewed offensive operations,
code-named Operation Juba Corridor, in July 2015.
These joint operations are currently in their third phase
and are expected to be completed by March. The overall
strategic objective of the current operations remains to
considerably degrade the capabilities of Al-Shabaab
in each remaining stronghold. That would provide
the enabling environment for the advancement of the
much-needed political process.

The dislodging of Al-Shabaab from towns and
villages under its control has overstretched AMISOM
capacity, with the attendant security implications,
which Al-Shabaab is trying to exploit, as the attacks
in El-Ade and similar attacks in Lego and Janale
suggest. Al-Shabaab has changed tactics by launching
a combination of asymmetrical and direct attacks
on AMISOM. bases. In that regard, we have seen an
incremental growth of guerrilla warfare as well as the
use of improvised explosive devices in their attacks.
Overall, the security situation in Somalia has remained
somewhat fluid, volatile and unpredictable in some
aspects, despite the territorial gains that we have
achieved so far.

On the political front, I am encouraged by the
progress that the people and the Government of Somalia
continue to make in the state formation process, the
revision of their Constitution, and the preparation for
the holding of elections later this year. With regard
to state formation, earlier this month the Government
embarked on the process for the formation of the final
regional administration for Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe,
to which my colleague alluded earlier. We welcome that
initiative and continue to ask the Federal Government of
Somalia to take the necessary steps towards achieving
a positive outcome that would lead to the establishment
of this last regional administration.

In the area of elections, as expressed jointly with
Mr. Keating, we are very pleased that an electoral
model was unanimously agreed by the Government
just yesterday, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General just mentioned. That model is
based on a unique balance of representation between
clan and constituency and offers a hopeful outlook
for an inclusive electoral process. I continue to urge
the Council and other partners to support the Federal
Government of Somalia in the effective implementation
of this electoral model.

Based on the declared principles and time frame
of the election, I would like to commend the Federal
Government of Somalia for reaffirming its commitment
to respecting the constitutionally mandated terms
of the legislature and the executive, which expire in
August and September, respectively. This is consistent
with the African Union Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance. While the political progress
made is laudable, much more needs to be done in
the consolidation of this process, as well as in the
rejuvenation of the constitutional review process, which
remains a critical pillar of political stability in Somalia.

I would like to reassure the Council that the African
Union (AU) remains committed to supporting peace
and stability in Somalia amid the immense sacrifices
made and challenges that the Mission continues to
face. In that regard, I should like to urge the Council to
consider strengthening our partnership in the following
areas in order to further enhance the implementation of
the AMISOM. mandate.

First, I would like to emphasize that the Somali
National Army is central to the conduct of joint
operations with AMISOM, as well as to taking over
security functions in the recovered areas in order to
facilitate continued offensive operations. It is also of
note that the only viable process that will lead to the
achievement of the AMISOM. mandate in Somalia
and its subsequent exit strategy is the standing-up of
a capable, legitimate and inclusive Somali National
Army. In the same vein, I urge the Council to ensure
that the pledges made towards the Guulwade Plan are
fulfilled. The international community also needs to
be better coordinated in its support for Somali security
forces and otherwise.

Secondly,Iwouldliketostressthatbettercoordination
between the multiplicity ofpartners - and specifically
among AMISOM, the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia (UNSOS) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) - remains vital now
more than ever before. The Council will recall that
resolution 2245 (2015), adopted on 9 November 2015,
underscored the need to ensure operational effort
and cooperation between UNSOM. and AMISOM. so
that they are aligned with a common set of strategic
priorities. Under the new leadership of Mr. Keating and
myself, we are hopeful that there will be progress in
the strengthening and revitalization of the joint senior
leadership decision-making framework, and we are
already working on that. I also look forward to the
joint development of the quantitative compact between
the Head of UNSOS and myself, which is expected to
enhance the provision of support to AMISOM. Our
recent interactions with the Under-Secretary-General
for Field Support on the provision of timely and
flexible support to AMISOM. has been very positive
and encouraging.

Thirdly, the provision of additional enablers
remains central to AMISOM. operations. It will be
recalled that the Governments of Ethiopia, Kenya
and Uganda have pledged helicopters to AMISOM.
However, the tripartite letters of assist between those
troop-contributing countries, the AU and the United
Nations remain outstanding. We would like to urge the
Council to request the Secretary-General to facilitate
an expedited negotiation process that takes into account
the unique nature of AMISOM's offensive mandate.
That would allow for the deployment of those assets,
which are urgently required to boost the operational
tempo of AMISOM. and to dislodge Al-Shabab from
some places throughout Mogadishu.

Fourthly, the AU is committed to improving
AMISOM's strategy in Somalia. I am pleased to report
to the Council that the AU is currently organizing a
summit for troop-contributing countries, which is
expected to lead to a political commitment by the
various stakeholders on how to address, among
other issues, command and control, the provision of
additional enablers and enhanced overall coordination.
The summit will take place in due course later this year.

Finally, the decision of the European Union (EU)
to cut the allowances to the uniformed personnel of
the Mission by 20 per cent, starting this January, has
caused great concern. The African Union Commission
is making every effort to fill the gap created by the
EU decision. In that regard, the AU recently appointed
Mr. Donald Kaberuka as the High Representative for
the African Union Peace Fund, responsible for the
mobilization of additional resources for AU peace
support operations. Immediate steps are also being
taken to generate additional funds for AMISOM.
However, that is occurring in the context of an
economic downturn owing to the drastic decrease in
commodity prices. Hence, I would like to urge the
Council to consider various funding mechanisms
that would sustain the current support for AMISOM,
including through increased financial support by the
United Nations, individual Council members and other
relevant stakeholders, in the interest of global peace
and security.

