Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I would first like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and Mr. Hagai El-Ad,
Executive Director of B'Tselem, for their contributions.

We are deeply concerned about the military
escalation in Gaza. We condemn the firing of rockets
from Gaza towards Israel. All the parties must show
restraint and avoid provocations in order to prevent
any further escalation of violence. We are also very
concerned about the recent attempts we have seen
to delay and undermine the speedy and unimpeded
implementation of the United Nations package
of humanitarian interventions to Gaza, which is
important for the people of Gaza and for regional
stability. Norway chaired a ministerial meeting in
New York on 27 September of the international donor
group to Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC), which welcomed the United
Nations humanitarian package for Gaza and called
for its implementation as a matter of urgency, in
coordination with the Palestinian Authority. Norway
strongly supports those efforts and will provide
additional assistance to the United Nations.

Gaza is on the brink of economic, humanitarian
and social collapse. There is an urgent need for
improved access to clean water and energy, and for job
creation and the freer movement of people and goods
into and out of Gaza. Norway will continue to work
closely with the United Nations, the European Union
and key donors to ensure the full implementation of all
the elements of the humanitarian package. To succeed
in those joint endeavours, we urge all the parties to
do their utmost to support the international efforts. In
that regard, it is crucial for the Palestine Liberation
Organization to cooperate with the United Nations and
the international community.

Hamas bears a major share of the responsibility for
the dire situation in Gaza and must end its provocations
and politicking. It is the Palestinian Authority and the
international community, not Hamas, that are providing
assistance to the people of Gaza. Furthermore, the
Palestinian Authority should reinstate its governance
in Gaza and reunite Palestine under one authority.
In the meantime, however, it is counterproductive to
stop supporting Gaza financially and thereby further
impoverish the population. For its part, Israel should
restart fuel supplies to Gaza, expand the fishing zone
and abandon its system of extensive restrictions on the
movement of people and goods into and out of Gaza.

The AHLC meeting also called for urgent action
to mitigate the risks to the Palestinian economy. A
combination of major reductions in donor contributions,
significant revenue losses due to fiscal leakage and
continued restrictions on Palestinian access and
movement has led to a serious decline in the Palestinian
economy in 2018. There is a risk of a financial
breakdown next year unless we take concerted action
to address the fiscal issues, including between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel. A viable Palestinian
economy is a vital precondition for a two-State
solution, and donors must increase their contributions.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
indispensable. The Agency provides essential services
to the most vulnerable Palestinian refugees and
contributes to regional stability. It is vital that donors
remain committed to supporting it.

Recent developments in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank, including the decision to demolish the
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, are very worrying. The
location of Khan Al-Ahmar is strategically important
to the preservation of the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. Norway has been a consistent partner
in promoting peace and security in the Middle East for
decades. Our long-standing commitment to helping
to resolve the conflict between Israel and Palestine is
based on our firm support for a negotiated two-State
solution, even though today the hurdles seem more
difficult to overcome than ever.

