Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your able and wise leadership of the Security Council
throughout the month of July. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his very
in-depth briefing.

The Council is meeting today in the light of the
grave events that recently took place in the Middle East.
Some States in the region are undergoing deep-rooted
crises to which a political and humanitarian solution
has not been found. Other countries are wracked by
terrorism, while still others do not have the financial
capacity to help their citizens when they are in dire
need. The dangerous situation at the Holy Esplanade
and at the Al-Aqsa Mosque is escalating tensions and
risks exacerbating the crisis, threatening to plunge us
into an era of despair and allowing extremists to use
the situation to their own nefarious ends to further
undermine peace across the broader region beyond
Israel and Palestine.

Jordan would like to warn about the potential
repercussions of what has been happening
recently - and continues to happen - in Jerusalem,
which could lead to a destabilization of the region and
constitutes a serious threat to peace. That could have
a devastating impact on the region and could plunge
us into a religious war, which would open the doors
to further terrorism and exploitation of the roots of
the conflict for criminal practices, and not just in our
region but beyond. In order to address those tensions, a
number of emergency measures will need to be taken.

First, Israel must respect the historic and legal
status quo and must allow for full and immediate
access by worshippers to Al-Aqsa Mosque, without
any restrictions. It must also put an end to its unilateral
measures to impose a new reality on the ground in the
region, which are a violation of its international legal
obligations as the occupying Power.

Secondly, the international community must
shoulder its responsibilities and put an end to the
tensions by respecting the historic and legal status quo
of the holy sites and by compelling Israel, the occupying
Power, to respect the legal obligations incumbent
upon it.

Thirdly, the international community must unite
its efforts, including within the Security Council, to
prevent an escalation of the violence and prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control. It must do so
by tackling the deep-rooted causes that have led to
this tension, as well as recent events, including steps
taken by Israel to change the situation and conditions
on the ground.

More must be done to put an end to tension, to restore
peace and to prevent a deterioration of the situation.
Jordan is working to those ends. We are also working in
order to ensure that the holy sites are fully accessible.
We will continue our efforts with our partners and
our friends. Under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, we will not let up in our
diplomatic efforts. As the Custodian and sponsor of
Muslim and Christian holy places in East Jerusalem, he
will continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure
that the holy sites are respected, to guarantee peace
and to ensure that conditions conducive to peace and
stability are in place. Such steps will be taken with the
overarching goal of resolving the conflict on the basis
of a two-State solution.

I would like to underscore the appeal made by
Jordan that an emergency ministerial-level meeting of
Arab States be conveyed to consider possible pathways
and courses of action to respond to this issue. As the
historic Hashemite Custodian and sponsor of Muslim
and Christian holy places in East Jerusalem, Jordan will
continue its efforts to rebuff any attempt to undermine
the holy character of these sites. We will stand firm
against any act of aggression and any attempt to try
to cut of access to the Al-Aqsa Mosque or the entire
Esplanade of mosques. We will do so through all legal
and diplomatic means at our disposal. We will in no
way let up in our tireless efforts and determination
to find a solution to this conflict. The lack of such a
solution would cause us to remain in the vicious cycle
of violence and instability, would prevent people from
living in peace and prosperity and would not allow us to
realize the future that the peoples of the region deserve.

In the light of other events that have taken place in
the region, Jordan would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that putting an end to the Syrian crisis
will require a comprehensive political solution that
guarantees peace and stability and the unity of Syrian
territory. We have spared no effort in terms of our
participation in the political efforts under way to put an
end to the deaths and violence in Syria. As such, together
with the United States and the Russian Federation, we
have been able to put together an agreement to support
the ceasefire and to put an end to the escalation of
violence in south-west Syria. That is a crucial step
towards reaching a complete cessation of hostilities
in order to usher in stability in Syria. It is also a key
step towards a political solution that will preserve the
territorial integrity, the freedom, the independence and
the sovereignty of Syria.

We would like to reiterate our determination to
tackle terrorism and to destroy terrorist organizations
and their affiliates. In that regard, we reiterate that the
region will not know security and stability without the
eradication of terrorist organizations, which lead people
astray and employ what should be peaceful, religious
principles and beliefs for their own nefarious ends.

We would like to congratulate our Iraqi brethren for
their recent success, with the support of international
forces, in wresting control of Mosul from the clutches
of Da'esh. We also reiterate our full support to Iraq and
to its people as they seek to rebuild the city and their
country and bring about stability. We also appeal for
national reconciliation in Iraq in order to preserve the
stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
brotherly country and to ensure that it can build upon
what has been achieved thus far.

In addition, we support the efforts and actions of the
international coalition and the international community
to support the legitimate Government in Yemen to put
an end to the crisis on the basis of implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and resolution 2216 (2015).

In conclusion, we reiterate that more needs to be
done to address the core issue in the Middle East, that
is, the question of Palestine, which must be dealt with
in order to resolve all other issues in the region. Indeed,
a lasting, fair and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis is key to unlocking the other crises in
the region. That is why we must make serious efforts
to put an end to what appears to be an insurmountable
crisis that has dragged on for far too long, so as to
address Palestinian and Israeli concerns and resume
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine that
usher in lasting peace. In doing so, we must take into
account all final-status issues related to key national
interests, including those overseen by Jordan.

