Mr. Rosenblatt (United States): We also would
like to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing, and to
congratulate the Special Representative, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, and the Head of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in
Kosovo, Mr. Daan Everts, on their success in
organizing Kosovo's first general elections. By all
accounts, the voting was free and fair and generally
devoid of the violence that has plagued the region
during the last decade. We are encouraged that Kosovo
Serbs and other minorities opted to participate in
choosing their Government.

This is not a moment for long speeches about
what has been done up to now. The United States has
repeatedly expressed its strong support for Special
Representative Haekkerup's unceasing efforts to
implement resolution 1244 (1999). In many respects,
the results of the elections are a testimony to his
success. He has established a framework for
democratic and multi-ethnic governance consistent
with resolution 1244 (1999). He has improved security,
enhanced the rule of law and laid the foundation for a
constructive relationship between the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which played a constructive role in encouraging full
participation in the voting on 17 November.

We welcome the efforts of the Coordination
Centre and of the Yugoslav and Serbian Governments
to help ensure that Kosovo Serbs are represented by
competent leaders committed to the multi-ethnic
democratic model set forth by this Council. There is no
room in Kosovo's future for those from any ethnic
group who would support violence and criminality or
work in any way to undermine the rule of law and the
will of the people. Today we should direct our remarks
to the people of Kosovo, who should be congratulated,
and to their elected leaders, who face the challenge of
delivering good governance.

Prosperity will not be sustainable without
difficult economic reforms and strict respect for
transparency and the rule of law. Declarations on
Kosovo's future status are not the answer. The Council
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General have established the rules of the game and
expressed their unwavering support for resolution 1244
(1999) in its entirety.

We call on the new Government to rise to the
challenge before it and to work constructively with all
people of Kosovo to build a secure, democratic and
prosperous future for all its residents.

