Mr. Baja (Philippines): The recent positive turn
of events in Somalia merits the Council's attention and
consideration. We are grateful to the President for
convening this public meeting.

Today's meeting here in Nairobi with the main
stakeholders in the Somali peace process not only
serves to enlighten us about the current state of affairs
in the country, it also challenges the Council with
regard to what it can do for Somalia. My delegation
welcomes our guests and thanks them for their insights.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate President Yusuf on his election to the
Somali presidency. We congratulate as well the
representatives of the key players in the Somali peace
process - the Foreign Minister of Djibouti, the
representatives of Ethiopia and Kenya, the
representative of the African Union and the facilitator
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) - for the successful Somali National
Reconciliation Conference and for the successful role
they have played in the Somali peace process. IGAD's
patience and dedication in shepherding the process is
an example that we should all commend, recognize and
support. The political engagement of regional and
subregional organizations is invaluable to secure peace,
security and development. Those organizations
enhance the formulation of a regional vision of security
and participation in world affairs.

Work to assist Somalia needs to begin now, while
the Somali peace process is being fully completed, and
continue until a broad-based and inclusive Government
is set up and installed in Somalia. The international
community must support the Somali people as they
embark on reconciliation and reconstruction and the
re-establishment of peace and stability in their country.
At this time, the attention and assistance of the
international community should first be directed
towards the newly established Somali national political
institutions, for the viability of the Somali State
depends upon their proper and effective functioning.
Thus the support of the international community,
including the Security Council, is of paramount
importance in the consolidation and strengthening of
those institutions. The international community's
support should also be fully felt on the ground. We
encourage donors to contribute to the rebuilding of
Somalia and look forward to the full realization of the
peace-building framework envisaged in the Security
Council presidential statement issued in February 2004
(S/PRST/2004/3).

After supporting IGAD's efforts in the Somali
peace process, the international community must now
enlist the support of the African Union, particularly
with regard to its initiative to deploy a peace support
mission to Somalia. It will also be helpful to know
when the cabinet of the Transitional Government will
be fully constituted and whether there is a target time
frame for the relocation of the Transitional
Government to Somalia. As has been said, security is
the biggest obstacle preventing the Transitional
Government from relocating to Mogadishu. We have
heard what assistance is required from the Security
Council and the international community to that end. It
will also be helpful to know what steps the Transitional
Government is now taking on its own to address the
security problem in Mogadishu, as well as what impact
the arms embargo stipulated in resolution 751 (1992)
has on the security situation and on the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement programme.

