Mr. Mullet: Thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) to attend this debate.

This debate is a testament to the great
significance that the Security Council attributes to the
question of children and armed conflict. Over the past
decade, there has been universal recognition that
conflicts inflict far-reaching and devastating
consequences upon children. The landmark 1996 study,
"Impact of armed conflict on children", the Machel
study (A/51/306), highlighted the harrowing plight of
children in conflict situations.

As indicated in the concept paper before the
Council (S/2008/442), we in DPKO have stepped up to
the challenge, made considerable progress and

achieved tangible results. Since 2001, specific
provisions on child protection have been included in
over 12 peacekeeping mission mandates, and the
Security Council has adopted six resolutions on
children and armed conflict. The Council has also
repeatedly called for the integration of the protection,
rights and well-being of children affected by armed
conflict into all aspects of peacemaking. The Security
Council's resolutions have guided DPKO's work in the
area of children. In 2001, we deployed the first child
protection adviser, to Sierra Leone. Today, the
Department hosts over 60 child protection advisers in
seven peacekeeping missions, who work to ensure that
our missions adopt a child-conscious approach.
Through them, DPKO has achieved the following.

In virtually every mission with child protection
advisers, training on children's rights has been a key
activity. For example, in 2007 the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) conducted 126
training sessions for over 3,200 peacekeeping
personnel, including the police and civilians. In the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the Child Protection Section conducted
training for over 800 personnel, both uniformed and
civilian, in the last quarter of 2007 alone.

In 2005, the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire, in close collaboration with the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme and partners, initiated a dialogue with the
parties to the conflict, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions to end recruitment and use of child
soldiers. By 2007, over 1400 children had been
released from armed groups. Today, over 3,000
children have benefited from reintegration programmes
implemented by UNICEF and partners. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continues to lead advocacy efforts to release
children associated with armed groups in the east,
estimated to be at least 10 per cent of the estimated
25,000 troops in the region.

Child-protection advisors have played a critical
role in monitoring and reporting child-rights violations.
In countries where the monitoring and reporting
mechanism is being implemented, DPKO co-chairs the
United Nations country taskforce on monitoring and
reporting with UNICEF. This mechanism not only
contributes to holding perpetrators of child-rights
violations accountable, but also serves as a critical tool
to guide the response of child-protection actors to the
needs of children on the ground.

DPKO has also been effective in conducting
advocacy on politically sensitive issues. Through such
work, DPKO supports operational partners, who may
be unable to engage in overt political advocacy with
regard to Violations of child-rights without risking the
jeopardization of their long-term programmes on the
ground. The integrated mission approach also ensures
that we work closely and synchronize our efforts with
partners, such as UNICEF, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
children's issues.

As long as children continue to suffer from war
and its consequences, including weak justice systems, a
deficit in basic infrastructure and poverty, we cannot
falter in our effort or celebrate success. We must strive
to ensure an environment in which children's rights are
fully respected and their welfare is protected, i.e. a
peaceful and just environment in which they can
flourish and meaningfully contribute to their
communities.

DPKO is contributing to these efforts through the
very nature of its operations aimed at helping societies
begin to rise from the ashes of conflict and instability.
In this connection, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti has been actively working, through
the justice section and the United Nations police, in
close collaboration with UNICEF, on juvenile justice,
legal reform and capacity building of the police and
local judicial actors. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a new comprehensive law on the protection of
children was recently adopted by the national
assembly; it represents a product of intensive and
concerted advocacy efforts of all child-protection
actors on the ground.

These achievements have been made possible by
the mandate given to us by the Security Council.
DPKO is committed to protecting children in armed
conflict and is currently developing a departmental
policy to better guide our work in this regard.
Meanwhile, we will continue to look to the Security
Council for mandates with clear and robust provisions
for the protection of children.
