Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for giving
us three action points: action at the diplomatic level,
action in operational terms, and stepping up judicial
cooperation, all of which are very much at the core of
the issues we have to discuss, and which I will address
in the course of my statement.

I thank the Secretary-General for his strong
statement and for the ongoing commitment of the
United Nations to this cause. I would also like to thank
the four briefers, not just for their statements, but also
for their dedication to what is, by any standards, a noble
cause. New Zealand strongly supports the children and
armed conflict agenda, and reaffirms its support for
the Paris Commitments and the Principles on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups.
It also supports the development of the Safe Schools
Declaration. We share the outrage of UNICEF at the
many situations that we deal with day to day.

As you emphasized, Sir, the majority of those
who commit some of the most egregious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
against children listed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/339) are non-State armed groups. And,
for that, as the representative of Save the Children
emphasized, there must be consequences. There can be
no impunity. Good work has been done to address this,
with effective cooperation between the United Nations,
States and non-State actors, but we must do more. As
States, our own actions must match those we expect of
non-State armed groups. Whether it be agreeing on an
action plan, supporting the "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, or providing child protection training for our
peacekeepers, all 193 of us can do much better. We can
certainly do something.

For its part, the United Nations must effectively
implement its own human rights due diligence policy,
and it must undertake thorough vetting of its staff. As
you have proposed, and as the representative of Malaysia
also emphasized, child protection training should be
mandatory for all uniformed and civilian peace-keeping
personnel. More can be done to mainstream child
protection approaches across the whole of the work of
the United Nations. We would particularly welcome
the provision of guidance for mediators on addressing
conflict-related violations against children in ceasefire
and peace agreements, and the inclusion of relevant
child protection expertise in expert groups on sanctions.

Regional organizations also have a role to play. The
declaration agreed between the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children and the African Union is an excellent
example. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict made clear
to us, engaging non-State armed groups to prevent
abuses against children is complex and sensitive. They
have different motives, tactics, structures and degrees
of cohesiveness. Extremist groups can also often pose
particular challenges. However, experience does show
us that, in the right circumstances, engaging such
groups can produce results - particularly agreement
on action plans.

We therefore encourage enhanced cooperation
between governments, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and relevant child protection actors
to ensure that more of these action plans are agreed
with non-State armed groups. It is critical that we find
ways to incentivize their engagement - and there, civil
society often enjoys an access and legitimacy that is
denied to others. The example of Eric, given to us by
Save the Children, bears witness to that.

In our own Pacific region, New Zealand has
supported civil society envoys who can engage
communities most affected by day-to-day violence, and
can often address highly sensitive issues in a culturally
appropriate manner. The Asia-Pacific Group also offers
other examples of effective engagement, tailored to
local circumstances. We applaud, for example, that in
Myanmar the United Nations has agreed on an action
plan with State security forces. Engaging ethnic armed
groups can be more challenging, but civil society there
can often help secure commitments from armed groups,
particularly to release child combatants.

We must also address the causes that lead children to
join non-State armed groups, including socioeconomic
marginalization. In situations of protracted conflict,
joining armed groups can be a means of survival, or
a way out of poverty. It can also confer status on self
or family. To reduce the risk of rerecruitment, we need
comprehensive reintegration programmes, particularly
for girls, and children with disabilities. So we would
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, UNICEF and others to continue working on
that.

It is important that we continue to improve
child protection practices. We therefore propose
that, in collaboration with the United Nations and
other stakeholders, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General develop a working paper on
engaging non-State armed groups, drawing on the best
practices and innovative tools available, some of which
have already been identified in the statements made
today. That paper could form a basis from which we
can work to develop durable solutions to better protect
children in armed conflict, giving real meaning and
purpose to the present debate, and giving real meaning
to the phrase "children, not soldiers".

