Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
beginbythankingUnder-Secretary-GeneralLacroixand
the Police Commissioners for their valuable briefings
to the Security Council today. I also welcome the new
United Nations Police Adviser, Mr. Luis Carrilho,
and take this opportunity to thank his predecessor,
Mr. Stefan Feller, for his services. Let me also add
how encouraging and nice it is to see all these Blue
Berets here today in the Council. They are fundamental
as security providers and capacity-builders. They are
essential to the establishment of the rule of law and
contribute to long-term sustainable peace.

Landmark resolution 2185 (2014), the first
resolution devoted solely to United Nations policing,
was adopted by the Council in 2014. With resolution
2185 (2014) as the starting point and baseline, we
have today adopted resolution 2382 (2017) on United
Nations policing, which builds on its legacy. To further
enhance United Nations policing, we can draw on the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
on policing (S/2016/952) and the external review of
the Police Division from May 2016. From those solid
foundations, we can continue to enhance the role of
policing in preventing conflict, promoting the rule of
law and protecting civilians.
Since 1964, Sweden has continuously contributed
policing capacity to United Nations peace operations.
Swedish police officers are today present in eight
United Nations peace operations, and we are currently
assessing further contributions. While the challenges
within peace operations have evolved greatly over
the past 53 years, the value of police components
remains clear. Today, police components provide
operational support to national policing institutions
and to institutional reform. They also support capacity-
building and an integrated approach to rule-of-law and
security sector reform efforts.

That broad range of functions and activities serves
to highlight the unique and central role that United
Nations policing plays across the peace continuum,
linking and mutually reinforcing the development,
peace and security and human rights pillars. Building
effective, responsive and representative police services,
as a part of functioning rule-of-law institutions, is one
important cornerstone of building sustainable peace
and stable and resilient societies. For that reason, we
must be mindful of including the broader rule-of-law
and justice chain in our approach, and also contribute
corrections officers, prosecutors and judges to serve
alongside police officers in peace operations.

For example, in Liberia, a country where Swedish
police and corrections officers have served for over
a decade, there is an ongoing joint United Nations
Development Programme-United Nations Mission in
Liberia rule of law programme in place. Police and
other rule-of-law actors are working together there and
are supported by the United Nations global focal point
on police, justice and corrections to ensure a smooth
transition from the outgoing mission to the United
Nations country team. That will enable a continuation
of efforts to enhance community access to justice and
strengthen the capacity of security institutions.

In the Central African Republic, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic's police component have
worked together with Malian authorities to establish
a rapid response unit for sexual and gender-based
violence within the Central African Republic's national
police service. By working with national authorities
and other United Nations entities, the police component
has strengthened the capacity to address sexual and
gender-based violence within the country.

As we have said on numerous occasions before
in the Council, the mandates of our peacekeeping
operations need to be realistic, context-tailored and
flexible. That requires high-quality, context-sensitive
and inclusive analysis from the Secretariat. Integrating
policing advice as part of that analysis needs to be
standard practice in the process of developing mandates
and in their renewal.

As our briefers underlinedtoday, we need to continue
to increase the number of female police officers serving
with the United Nations. Doing so would ensure that
missions better reflect the communities in which they
work and enhance their effectiveness in the delivery of
mandates. Missions also need to strengthen their ability
to integrate and support the role of women in building
peaceful societies.

Sweden is strongly supportive of the Secretary-
General's efforts to reform the United Nations peace
and security architecture so that the United Nations
system is better able to deliver on its overarching
mission to prevent conflict and sustain peace. In the
light of the unique position of police at the intersection
between security and development, police functions
will be essential to achieving that objective.

Turning to our briefers today, I would like to pose a
few short questions, if I may.

First, in their view, how can policing advice be
better integrated into the formulation of mandates so as
to better support their activities in the field?

Secondly, in the light of the sharp focus on police
and the rule of law of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti, 1 would be interested to hear
about Commissioner Monchotte's key reflections so far
concerning the transitional work of the Mission.

Twelve thousand United Nations police officers
from almost 90 countries are now serving with United
Nations missions across the globe. By working with
national institutions, they serve and protect communities
and ensure respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Their work is central to delivering on the mandates
agreed by the Council and to supporting national efforts
to create prosperous, stable and peaceful societies. We
owe them our full support.

