Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like
to thank Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Ambassador Kairat Umarov and
Ms. Frogh for their informative briefings today.

Bolivia welcomes the progress made by the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan, which continues to
promote reform measures and emphasize security-sector
reform and the national dialogue process. We note the
complex situation in which the electoral preparations
are taking place and the willingness demonstrated by
the various political groups, which continue to come
together around the holding of parliamentary and
district council elections. We understand the difficult
prevailing political equilibrium; however, we trust in
the commitment to democracy demonstrated by the
people of Afghanistan to date.

On the other hand, Bolivia expresses its deep
concern at the instability in the security situation,
in particular the increased number of armed clashes
between Government and anti-Government forces.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1056), during the reporting period the number
of such confrontations increased by 62 per cent as
compared to the same period in 2016.

We also find it alarming that, as the report states,
it was only recently that one of the most violent weeks
occurred, where four complex attacks were carried
out by the Taliban throughout the country using sport-
utility vehicles as suicide bombs. These caused the
deaths of more than 100 people, including members of
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and
Afghan civilians. In that regard, we wish to highlight the
prioritization by the Government of the implementation
of its four-year plan for security sector reform as a key
component of its overall security strategy. We would
also highlight the efforts of the Government and the
people of Afghanistan in general in their fight against
terrorism and Da'esh.

With regard to the issue of internally displaced
persons and refugees, it is hardly encouraging that,
during the reporting period, approximately 33,000
people were displaced by the conflict. To date, the overall
number of displaced persons exceeds 318,000. We call
for joint efforts to assist the return and reintegration
of those who have been displaced to their places of
origin. We hope that international organizations will
continue to provide effective and tangible aid, bearing
in mind that the repatriation of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be voluntary, safe and in
dignified conditions, all while observing the principles
of international law.

Along the same lines, we highlight the work being
carried out by mine removal personnel, under the
leadership of the Afghan Directorate for Mine Action
Coordination and the United Nations Mine Action
Service. They have declared 15 communities free of
mines, which has allowed more than 230,000 people to
move freely within their communities and facilitated
the improvement of agricultural activities and access to
markets. We reiterate that anti-mine action, especially
in the area of defusing and removing anti-personnel
mines and other explosive remnants of war, is essential
for the displaced civilian population to be able to return
to their homes.

Bolivia also wishes to echo the Secretary-General's
observation that the only path to lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan is a negotiated solution with the

constructive participation in diplomatic efforts forpeace,
with a view to promoting the interests and welfare of all
Afghans. In that regard, we call on regional partners
to reinforce their commitment to robust cooperation in
promoting stability and prosperity, thereby fostering
an environment conducive to dialogue. Along the
same lines, we are encouraged by the statements made
during this past period at the meetings held in various
cities, such as Ashgabat, Baku, Brussels, Moscow and
Samarkand, among others. The importance of regional
cooperation was underscored, along with the need for a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.

Similarly, Bolivia considers it very important to
carry out a Security Council Visit Afghanistan so that
this organ can gain first-hand information, allowing it
to strengthen its cooperation with Afghanistan.

Finally, we wish to express our support for the
political dialogue in Kabul. We are convinced that
this process must be inclusive and guided by and for
Afghans, making it clear that there is no military
solution to the conflict.

