Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the report by the Senior Advisory Group (see S/2011/85) on the review of international civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict. We welcome the
briefings by Jean-Marie Guehenno, Chair of the Senior
Advisory Group for the review of international civilian
capacity, and by Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support Susana Malcorra. I also thank Ambassador
Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
his statement.

As communities emerge from conflict, they often
face a critical shortage of capacities needed to secure
sustainable socio-economic development, lasting peace
and security and much-needed stability. More often
than not, we have seen that countries emerging from
conflict lack the very basic capacities to run a
Government. They experience setbacks in their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes and are confronted with distressed
economies. This state of affairs increases the likelihood
of relapse into conflict.

International civilian capacities will require
strengthening in providing support in the following
areas: political processes; the re-establishment of
national institutions; the reform of judicial systems; the
promotion of respect for human rights; transitional
justice mechanisms, including truth and reconciliation
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes; the integration of armed forces; and, more
important, economic recovery.
Today's debate gives us an opportunity to explore
how the United Nations and international players,
including the donor community, could better utilize
existing international civilian capacities and resources
to complement existing local and national capacities in
countries emerging from conflict.

It the light of this, my delegation welcomes the
recommendations made in the report of the Senior
Advisory Group. These recommendations are
important, as they are aimed at strengthening national
ownership, broadening and deepening the pool of
international civilian capacities and improving the
appropriateness, timeliness and effectiveness of United
Nations support.

The United Nations has traditionally focused on
humanitarian and peacekeeping operations, and there
has been little success in supporting and enabling the
national capacities that are essential for enduring
peace.

My delegation would like to focus on only two of
the main recommendations in the report, namely,
national ownership and building partnerships.

Given the effects of conflict, local capacities may
be weakened, thus making them unavailable or scarce.
In other situations, although ravaged by conflict, there
will still be more national capacity than is at first
apparent. Such latent capacities must be protected and
nurtured. My delegation would like to emphasize the
salience of ensuring that national capacities are central,
and not just an appendage in post-conflict
reconstruction. The failure to tap into capacities that
are already in place, or to nurture and strengthen such
capacities where they are lacking, will create a
dangerous dependency syndrome, which will continue
to stretch the meagre resources of the international
community.

By developing international civilian capacities,
we will be encouraging sustainable development as the
key to ensuring that countries do not relapse into
conflict. We need to acknowledge that we have not
sufficiently tapped into existing international
capacities, in particular from the global South and the
North. As we seek to broaden and deepen the pool of
civilian capacities and experts, we also need to utilize
the comparative advantage of regional and subregional
organizations and leverage the crucial but often
neglected capacity of women.

South Africa recognizes the importance of both
national ownership and building partnerships. In order
to develop local capacities, my Government has begun
capacity-building programmes for countries emerging
from conflict. For example, in addition to our recent
humble contribution in Burundi in the area of election
management, as recognized by Mr. Guehenno today,
we have, over the years, contributed to the training of
over 1,500 officials of the Government of South Sudan
in cross-cutting fields including diplomacy, public
service and public finance and management. We have
also entered into a triangular partnership with
Germany, to provide training in South Sudan on
correctional, judicial and legal services.

As is always the case, the development of
national and international civilian capacities in the
aftermath of conflict will not succeed without the
provision of predictable, flexible and sustainable
sources of funding. My delegation looks forward to
further interactions on the report on civilian capacities
as Under-Secretary-General Malcorra takes forward the
report's recommendations.

