Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for having organized this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, nearly two
months after the end of the hostilities in Lebanon.

We offer special thanks to Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority, for the information he has
provided to the Council.

Today's meeting gives us an opportunity to take
stock of the evolving situation following the important
and stately ministerial debate held here a month ago on
the same issue. With respect to the question of
Palestine, my delegation reaffirms the critical necessity
of resuming talks with a View to opening direct
negotiations between the principal parties to the crisis.
The current deadlock can only strengthen extremist
06-57842
positions and foment violence in a region that has been
prone to instability for decades.

Unfortunately, the situation is characterized by a
factor that has become routine - the incessant
incursions of the Israeli army into Gaza and the West
Bank, particularly in heavily populated areas. That is
of great concern insofar as such armed actions have
serious consequences for the lives of civilians.
Similarly, the extremely difficult humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian population in the occupied
territories, created by restrictions of all kinds imposed
both by the international community - which refuses
to assist the Palestinian authorities - and by the Israeli
Government - which is withholding revenue from
customs duties owed to the Palestinian Government -
is an intolerable tragedy.

On the other side, the ongoing launching of
Qassam missiles into Israel from Palestinian territories
is a source of serious concern to us.

As we said recently, the Council must clearly
indicate to the parties that there is no solution based on
the use of force. The only valid option - a political
and diplomatic settlement - must now be vigorously
revived. The role of the Middle East Quartet remains
essential in that respect, and the Security Council
should see to it.

The acceptance of conditions set by the Quartet
relating to the Hamas Government's renunciation of
violence, recognition of Israel, and adherence to
agreements previously concluded must be reaffirmed.
To that end, the creation of a Government of national
unity in Palestine could help to mitigate certain
difficulties linked to the recognition of Israel and
thereby avert inter-Palestinian clashes, which are not
the least of the paradoxes of the current situation. My
delegation strongly encourages the Palestinian
protagonists to embark on a process leading to internal
political consensus, and welcomes the tireless efforts
of States to promote that goal.

Confidence-building measures should be
undertaken forthwith. In that respect, Corporal Shalit
should be released without delay. Similarly, Israel
should give positive consideration to the release of
Palestinian prisoners detained in Israel, particularly the
ministers and parliamentarians arrested following the
latest crisis. Israel should also show great restraint in
its military activities in Gaza and the West Bank, and
help to alleviate the Palestinian humanitarian crisis by

releasing Palestinian assets generated by customs
duties and taxes levied on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority.

The situation in Lebanon took a positive turn
with the cessation of hostilities following the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 1701 (2006). That can
be seen in the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
southern Lebanon, the deployment of Lebanese forces,
the deployment of a strengthened United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, and the courageous onset of
reconstruction in Lebanon.

However, the implementation of that resolution is
a matter for serious concern, because of breaches
observed on the ground and constant Violations of
Lebanese airspace by Israeli aircraft. We urge the
parties to the crisis to display the greatest level of
restraint and not to succumb to provocations, which
would undermine the search for a lasting ceasefire.

We also call on the various Lebanese parties to
reach consensus solutions to unresolved problems,
such as the disarmament of Hizbollah. The question of
the establishment of diplomatic relations and of the
demarcation of borders with Syria must be resolved by
Lebanon and Syria in a sovereign fashion.

My delegation appreciates Syria's good
cooperation in the investigation to determine
responsibility for the repugnant criminal act that led to
the deaths of former Prime Minister Hariri and 22 other
people. We also welcome the progress achieved by the
International Independent Investigation Commission
created by resolution 1595 (2005).

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms the need
for a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Middle East crisis, with the assistance of the
international community and the involvement of the
States of the region. Mechanisms exist for this and are
well known: we need to implement the Road Map, the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

