Ms. Bishop (Australia): Thirty-nine Australians
were among the 298 men, women and children whose
lives were tragically taken when Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 was brought down over eastern Ukraine,
just over 12 months ago. Among our number were six
children, two religious leaders, two doctors, a number
of teachers, an award-winning fiction writer and a
promising aerospace engineer. They were loved ones
who by a cruel twist of fate became victims of an
atrocity - the downing of a civilian aeroplane flying
in commercial airspace on a routine flight. Millions and
millions of people around the world place their trust in
the security of civil aviation as a matter of course each
and every moment of each and every day.

Those who perished aboard Flight MH-17 were
precious; each one mourned by heartbroken families
and friends. I have spoken to the Australian families
over the past year, and again as recently as the
12-month anniversary of this tragedy on 17 July. Their
loss is incalculable; their grief inconsolable. They are
desperate for answers. It is vital for them that those
responsible for the deaths of their cherished ones be
held to account for those actions.

Together with the Netherlands, Malaysia, Ukraine
and Belgium, Australia requested that the Security
Council establish an independent, international
tribunal to prosecute those responsible for bringing
down Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. The friends and
families of those on board that ill-fated flight deserve
justice. That is what the unanimously adopted resolution
2166 (2014) of 21 July last year demanded.

Our draft resolution and accompanying tribunal
statute were designed to do nothing more and nothing
less than translate into action that demand for
accountability enshrined in resolution 2166 (2014). Our
motivation was and is to provide justice to the families
and to deter those who would threaten the safety of
international civil aviation, for we must ensure that
this never happens again. In a world with an increasing
number of violent terrorist groups and other non-State
actors, many with sophisticated military capabilities, it
is inconceivable that the Security Council would now
walk away from holding to account those who brought
down a commercial aeroplane.

The veto only compounds the atrocity. Only one
hand was raised in opposition, but a veto should never
be allowed to deny justice. The recital of discredited
contentions and the anticipated excuses and obfuscations
of the Russian Federation should be treated with the
utmost disdain. The exercise of the veto today is an
affront to the memory of the 298 victims of Flight MH-
17 and their families and friends. Russia has made a
mockery of its own commitment to accountability
enshrined in resolution 2166 (2014).

If Russia has evidence relevant to this matter, surely
Russia would want it heard by a wholly independent and
impartial tribunal set up by the Security Council, of
which it is a member, and with a registar, prosecutor and
judges appointed by the impartial Secretary-General.
The tribunal would have operated in accordance with
the highest international standards under the auspices
of the Security Council, of which Russia is a member.
It has been alleged that our request for the Council to
act is premature, but the establishment of a prosecution
mechanism before the completion of a criminal
investigation is wholly in keeping with the Council's
own practice. The findings ofthe criminal investigation
must be able to be delivered to a prosecuting authority
that can conduct its own investigations.

In unanimously adopting resolution 2166 (2014)
last year, the Council demanded that those responsible
be held to account and that all States cooperate fully
with efforts to establish accountability. Resolution 2166
(2014) sent a definitive message that there would be no
impunity for those responsible. Today, one member has
prevented the Council from fulfilling its commitment
to the friends and families of the victims of Flight
MH-17 and to the international community. Those
responsible may believe that they can now hide behind
the Russian Federation veto. They will not be allowed
to evade justice.

Australia deeply appreciates the support the draft
resolution received from the overwhelming majority
of Council Members, as well as from other grieving
nations. I make this pledge to the families and friends
ofthose aboard Flight MH-17 - Australia will continue
to do everything we can to ensure that the perpetrators
of that barbaric act are held to account. While we have
found the Security Council's door closed today, we
have also found that the commitment to justice in the
international community is strong. On the back of this
support, Australia, together with the other members of
the joint investigation team, will decide on an alternative
prosecution mechanism to ensure that truth does prevail
and that those responsible for this unspeakable act are
brought to justice. Council members may rest assured
that there is no end to our determination in this regard.

Twelve months ago, the tragedy of MH-l7 shocked
the world. Russia has used today's vote to seek to
politicize our quest for justice and should rightly
be condemned. In defiance of today's veto, we will
ensure that the demand in resolution 2166 (2014) for
accountability and the cooperation of all States is
implemented in full.

