Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too believe that
it is important for the Security Council to debate the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission. South Africa
would have aligned itself with the statement to be
made by the distinguished representative of Jamaica on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and regret that
he will not be able to participate in this debate.

We would like to thank the Chairperson of the
Commission's first Organizational Committee,
Ambassador Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins, the
Permanent Representative of Angola. We also wish to
extend our gratitude to the contribution made by the
Chairs of the country-specific configurations, the
Netherlands's Ambassador Frank Majoor, on Sierra
Leone, and Norway's Ambassador Johan Lovald, on
Burundi. The Working Group on Lessons Learned,
chaired by Ambassador Gallardo Hernandez of El
Salvador, has also started very important work, from
which this Council could have benefited. All of their
work has made a difference in the lives of the people of
the two African countries, which have just emerged
from conflict.

We believe that the Commission is poised for
even more success under the leadership of Japan's
Ambassador Yukio Takasu, the newly elected
Chairperson of the Commission's Organizational
Committee.

In its first year, under the excellent leadership of
Angola, the Commission was able to operate within a
flexible framework, in order to develop working
relationships with all its various partners and
constituencies. In that context, the Commission
adopted provisional rules of procedure, provisional
guidelines on the participation of civil society and a
country-specific format to consider the cases of
Burundi and Sierra Leone. The processes for
developing integrated peacebuilding strategies were
also launched.

It is important that the Commission continue to
be driven by member States. In that context, the
Organizational Committee must continue to be the
focal point of all the Commission's activities and
decisions, and its central role should be strengthened.
In other words, we believe that the Organizational
Committee of the Commission must be the master of
its own procedures.

In the year ahead, under the able leadership of
Japan, the Commission must work towards more
practical and concrete outcomes from its efforts to
promote peace consolidation. The success of the
Commission will be judged by its ability to make a real
difference on the ground, far away from New York, in
places such as Freetown, Bujumbura and beyond.

The ultimate success of the Commission's work
lies in the transformation of all of its plans and policies
into concrete actions. The main challenge facing the
Commission is to maximize its impact on the ground in
full alignment and cooperation with the policies and
strategies of the national Governments.
On the issue of national ownership, we should
ensure that the countries emerging from conflict have
full ownership of peacebuilding processes for the
benefit of all their people. In that regard, we believe

that the concerned countries must be allowed a genuine
national ownership in identifying priorities for
peacebuilding. In addition, while there is no argument
that the Commission has an advisory role, the
Commission should be prepared to listen to the
priorities, needs and Views of the country under
consideration. After all, the primary clients of the
Commission are the countries emerging from conflict.

The Peacebuilding Fund was created for the
specific purpose of assisting in the facilitation of
peacebuilding activities. In this context, the Fund was
understood to be a catalyst for attracting much-needed
official development assistance and resources,
particularly at times when there may be little hope of
success towards recovery. It is for that reason that we
hope that there will be clarity on the role of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

Quick-impact projects and a sufficient injection
of predictable resources in a country emerging from
conflict is crucial to ensuring stability and
development on the ground. For that reason, the
invaluable support provided by the donor community
to the activities of the Commission needs to be
consolidated and enhanced if we are to succeed in
achieving peace, security and development, in
particular in the early post-conflict stages.

However, it should be made clear that the
Peacebuilding Fund cannot and should not replace
regular official development assistance. The simple
reason is that the Peacebuilding Fund will never raise
enough contributions to rival the United Nations
Development Programme or even the World Bank. Its
role is simply to be a bridge and a catalyst for
attracting long-term development aid to countries that
have emerged from conflict.

The Commission needs to further strengthen its
relationship with relevant organs and institutions,
including the General Assembly, the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and regional and
subregional organizations. The African Union
continues to play its role in the peacebuilding field,
including through the adoption of a post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy. It is for that
reason that we hope that in the year ahead the
Commission will strengthen its cooperation with the
relevant subregional bodies on the African continent.
The African Union and regional economic
communities, including the African Development
Bank, have a key supportive role to play in
peacebuilding efforts. The ability of the Commission to
coordinate with those bodies can only improve the
lives of people on the ground.

Finally, my delegation has followed with interest
the debate about whether so-called criteria should be
developed for countries that are referred to the
Commission. We believe that the criteria for countries
to be included on the Commission agenda are already
contained in the resolutions that created that body. Any
further so-called criteria will have the undesirable
effect of micromanaging the work of the Commission's
Organizational Committee. In that context, South
Africa strongly supports the request by the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to be included on the
agenda of the Commission.

