The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the President of
Equatorial Guinea.

It is an honour and source of great satisfaction
to welcome the representatives of Heads of State and
Government, dignitaries and guests and to thank the
Secretary-General forjoining us in this special meeting
ofthe Security Council devoted to the issue ofpeace and
security in Africa and, more specifically, the question
of mercenary activities as a source of insecurity and
destabilization in Africa.

We consider the election of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea as a non-permanent member of
the Council and our assumption of the presidency of
the Council, which we are initiating today, as a sign
of the confidence of the international community in
our country and our policies. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Member States that have placed
their trust in us. Since we began our term as a member
of this high-level decision-making body, we have
endeavoured to be proactive, objective and constructive
in addressing the urgent issues on the Council's agenda,
while remaining true to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Today's meeting is especially significant for
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea because it is
devoted to a subject that is one of the key concerns
and challenges that affect peace, security and stability
on the African continent. Armed conflicts have been
a feature of humankind since the beginning of history
and have varied greatly in terms of their motives,
implications, contexts and actors. Yet there is one
curious phenomenon that is common to all civilizations
and all wars in every historical period but has somehow
escaped the regulation of the modern world, namely,
the phenomenon of mercenary activity.

The African continent finds itselfin a very difficult
situation in the face of the threat of mercenary activity
and other phenomena, such as terrorism, trafficking
and trade in illicit arms, piracy, poverty, the spread
of endemic diseases and natural disasters caused by
climate change, which are interacting to create chaos
and insecurity and seriously delay the development of
African countries.

Most African countries have never experienced
peace or socioeconomic development since gaining
their independence more than 50 years ago, despite
their great economic potential in natural resources.
Africa remains the least developed continent. The
mercenary phenomenon is one of the potential causes
of that lagging behind. The hidden interests of
mercenaries have been striving to prevent Africans
from enjoying the enormous benefits of having control
over our own destinies. That is why to date stamping
out that phenomenon has also been an integral part of
the struggle for our sovereignty. That evil phenomenon
has gradually set new goals, such as controlling our
natural resources and technology for development, to
be part of the global geostrategic struggle.

We note that almost all the conflicts in Africa are,
or have been, punctuated by the presence and activities
of those veritable soldiers of fortune. Mercenary
threats are latent in all their forms in our subregion of
Central Africa, as well as throughout the whole African
continent. The persistent existence of mercenaries
on the continent poses significant challenges, such
as violations of human rights, obstacles to the self-
determination of peoples, violations of international
humanitarian law, misery, plundering of the wealth
that belongs to the people, assassinations of political
leaders, overthrows of legitimate Governments and
other obvious criminal activities. In the case of
Central Africa, its features are particularly attractive
because its natural wealth and strategic location have
made it a propitious target for those unscrupulous
criminal networks.

Mercenary activities in Africa have been devastating
and constantly lead us to face major challenges, such
as obstacles to the self-determination of our peoples.
The negative consequences of that phenomenon are
indicative of the danger and threat that mercenary
activities pose to peace and security on the continent.

My country, Equatorial Guinea - a peaceful
country - began to be attractive to the interests of
mercenaries since the discovery of oil in the 1990s. It
is thanks to the peace we enjoy that we have been able
to reach unprecedented levels of overall development.
We are aware that mercenary activities would lead
only to a reversal of such development and cause
bloodshed among our brothers. The Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore strongly
condemns the existence of mercenary activities on the
African continent.

Equatorial Guinea could have suffered the same
horrors and calamities as the mercenary wars if the
five attempts to invade the country through the use of
that diabolical system of foreign intervention had been
successful. We would like to point out that, over the
last 24 years, we have been victim of five attempts
at mercenary incursions, the ultimate objective of
which was to overthrow the legitimate Government of
Equatorial Guinea, with the sole intention of seizing
the country's resources and depriving the people of
them, to support their own hidden interests.

Those elements carried out activities that were as
diverse as they were violent, in the form of robbing
banks, attacks on the residence of the Head of State
and even an assassination attempt on me, together with
my entire family, in December 2017, among others. We
are grateful to the Governments of Angola, Zimbabwe
and Cameroon for their cooperation in defeating those
attempts to invade.

We are aware that, as long as our countries
still have their natural resources, they will remain
attractive bait for those groups. That is why, once
again, Equatorial Guinea wants to alert this high-level
organ that mercenary groups still continue to act with
absolute impunity in Africa, thereby endangering the
security and stability of our countries. We urge the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, as
well as the partners and friends of Africa, to confront
mercenarism, just as they do terrorism and piracy,
because they are all the same.

In the statement I delivered during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session
on 17 September 2005 (see A/60/PV.10), I called for
greater attention to be paid to the phenomenon of
mercenarism by convening a special session of the
General Assembly. We believe that such a step could
have generated global awareness of the issue and,
possibly, led the interests behind the phenomenon to
consequently reconsider their activities. It also could
have served as a preventive measure that could have
spared the international community and this organ from
subsequently having had to deploy some peacekeeping
operations in our region. I would like to reiterate that
same appeal today, as well to point out the urgent need
to update legislation on mercenaries so as to cover all
the permutations that have evolved.

It is important to analyse the root and causes of
this phenomenon and seek lasting solutions that can
reinforce the stability and development of our countries.
That includes finding out who are intellectually
and materially responsible for this phenomenon, its
executors and origins; in other words, it involves
getting to the bottom of the matter. The international
community must be involved in this issue, just as it is
involved in counter-terrorism.

In spite what I have said, the absence ofprosecution
of this phenomenon under international law is strange,
as is the fact that the perpetrators are not held criminally
responsible. That creates a vacuum in international law
and impunity for these groups. I would like to take
advantage of the opportunity afforded by this debate
to recall the international instruments that deal with
mercenaries, which reflect the concern of the United
Nations and the African Union, both of which agree
that mercenary activity is such an important factor in
global violence and destabilization that it is imperative
to eradicate that activity. I would like to underscore
the following documents: the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries, of4 December 1989; the Organization
of African Unity Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa, of 1977; and all the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. The substance and spirit
of existing international legislation on mercenaries is
in line with the concerns of the Government of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea and, I dare say, of all
of Africa in general. However, there is still a long way
to go, and we must do it together and in a spirit of
solidarity. Only in that way will we be able to optimize
our achievements in this essential area.

Finally, we understand that the contractual
relationships that might be established in accordance
with international law between legitimate Governments
and private security and defence companies that have
been legally established in their respective countries
have a legal status and cannot be equated with the
activities of banned unscrupulous groups.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Cote d'Ivoire.

