Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2016/840), covering the period from
9 March to 20 September. I am overjoyed to deliver this
briefing on the Great Lakes region under the Senegalese
presidency of the Security Council, which attests to
the importance that Senegal continues to attach to the
consolidation of peace and stability in that region.

(spoke in English)

During the period under review, the signatory
countries continued overall to make efforts to implement
their commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, despite outstanding
challenges, including the continued presence and
activities of negative forces in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Yet, there have been renewed efforts to tackle
this persistent problem. The cooperation between the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was enhanced in carrying out joint operations against
negative forces in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including against the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF). In addition, the representatives of the guarantor
institutions of the Framework Agreement - the United
Nations, the African Union (AU), the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR)
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) - conducted a series of initiatives, including
regional consultations and field visits, to support efforts
to neutralize the negative forces.

These led, first, to the convening in Kinshasa of
two evaluation meetings of the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations in May and June between
representatives of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and a delegation of the former
Mouvement du 23 mars; and secondly, the holding of
a meeting, convened by my Office, of the Ministers of
Defence of some States members of ICGLR and SADC,
in Nairobi on 20 July, to discuss ways and means of
strengthening ongoing efforts aimed at neutralizing
negative forces. Furthermore, in implementation of
a recent decision of the ICGLR summit in Luanda,
concerned countries of the region have also been
working on the establishment and operationalization
of a joint follow-up mechanism to address the growing
threat posed by ADF in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and across the region.

Progress was also achieved in strengthening
judicial cooperation in the region and in investigating
and prosecuting cases of violations of human rights,
including sexual and gender-based violence. I am
pleased to note in this regard that, as a result of the
joint efforts of my Office, ICGLR, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Great Lakes Regional judicial
cooperation network will be launched in Nairobi on
10 November. The network, comprising representatives
of States members of the ICGLR, with the support
of regional and international organizations, will
contribute to combating impunity in the Great Lakes
region by building trust and confidence among member
States and promoting the effective implementation of
the regional commitments on judicial cooperation.

Supporting women, youth and civil society has
continued to be an important objective to my Office, as
demonstrated by the convening of an important meeting
of the Women's Platform for the Framework Agreement
in Goma on 12 July.

During the period under review, considerable
efforts were deployed to promote inclusive dialogue
processes in the region, including in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In liaison with my
colleague Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Sidikou, and in accordance with resolution
2277 (2016), we have taken a number of initiatives and
deployed sustained efforts, including through regular
engagements with national stakeholders, as well as
regional and international actors, and the establishment
of the international support group to promote inclusive
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as facilitated by Mr. Edem Kodjo on behalf of the
African Union.

I have also been following closely the situation
in Burundi. On 17 October, I visited former President
Benjamin Mkapa in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, to seek
his candid assessment of the status and the challenges
faced in the inter-Burundian dialogue. I encouraged
him to pursue his efforts aimed at creating conditions
for inclusive dialogue under the auspices of the East
African Community. I am pleased to note that the
facilitator intends to intensify his formal and informal
contacts with Burundian stakeholders and the leaders
of the region. I further encouraged the efforts of the
East African Community on the occasion ofa meeting I
had with President Museveni in Entebbe on 19 October.

Less than a week ago, I was in Luanda for the
seventh high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism on 26 October, chaired by President
Jose Eduardo dos Santos. This seventh meeting had
a symbolic value, as it was the first to be hosted by
a signatory country. The meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in Luanda was held as a result
of the reform process of the governing structures of the
Framework Agreement, initiated last year and endorsed
by the sixth meeting of the Mechanism in New York in
September 2015 and by the sixth Ordinary Summit of
ICGLR in June 2016.

I am pleased to report that there was a good high-
level participation in the Regional Oversight Mechanism
in Luanda, which demonstrates the continued interest in
and commitment to the Framework Agreement. I wish
to express here my sincere gratitude to President Dos
Santos for hosting this important event and for setting
in motion the process to strengthen the ownership
of signatory countries in the implementation of the
Agreement. I wish also to thank President Denis Sassou
Nguesso of the Republic of Congo for the offer to host
the next high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in 2017. Other signatory countries have
also expressed interest in hosting future meetings of
the Mechanism and its Technical Support Committee.

The Regional Oversight Mechanism meeting
reviewed and endorsed the progress report on the
implementation of the commitments under the
Framework Agreement, which was extensively
discussed by the Technical Support Committee and
the meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs. It also
discussed challenges in dialogue and elections processes
in the region, notably in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism welcomed the signing on 18 October of the
comprehensive political agreement on the organization
of peaceful, credible and transparent elections in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo; called on all parties
to seek peaceful solutions to the political crisis, in line
with the constitution of the country and resolution
2277 (2016); and, in this respect, encouraged the
Government and other stakeholders to take additional
confidence-building measures.

I seize this opportunity to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue to engage with all
political stakeholders, including those who reject the
recent round of talks and the resultant agreement, and
to take additional confidence-building measures with a
view to seeking an inclusive process. I equally urge all
stakeholders to pursue their political objectives through
peaceful means and dialogue.

Concerning the situation in Burundi, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism called on all Burundians to
seek peaceful solutions to addressing grievances and
to commit to inclusive dialogue, and extended full
cooperation to the East African Community facilitator
with a View to expediting the dialogue process.

The conflict situations in South Sudan and
the Central African Republic also featured in the
discussions at the Regional Oversight Mechanism. In
particular, the Mechanism recognized the potential
of the presence of elements of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movemen/Army in Opposition (SPLM-IO)
to further exacerbate existing tensions and the security
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The leaders urged the region, the States member of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the AU
and the United Nations to assist the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in finding a durable
solution for the removal of the SPLM-IO elements
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo as soon
as possible.

On the Central African Republic, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism welcomed the efforts of the
Government to promote reconciliation and called on
all armed groups to engage in dialogue with national
authorities so as to ensure peace and stability. In a
statement made on that occasion, the Prime Minister
of the Central African Republic expressed support
and appreciation for the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, in a context of renewed
tension in some parts of the country.

With regard to the negative forces, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism endorsed the recommendations
adopted at the 20 July meeting of Ministers of Defence
and welcomed the establishment of the joint follow-up
mechanism on the ADF. Furthermore, the leaders of
the region encouraged efforts aimed at promoting the
role of women in peace and development processes;
welcomed the declaration of the Framework Women's
Platform, issued in Goma on 12 July; and directed
their respective national institutions to follow up on its
effective implementation.

Finally, the Mechanism welcomed efforts aimed
at promoting regional economic integration, including
the successful holding of the first Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference, held in Kinshasa in
February 2016, and encouraged follow-up actions to
promote the role of the private sector in support of
peace and stability in the region.

It is my hope that the decisions taken by the
Regional Oversight Mechanism Summit last week will
be followed by vigorous and decisive action on the
part of all stakeholders. This is particularly crucial as
developments in the region, including challenges related
to elections and the threat posed by negative forces,
continue to highlight its fragility. Concerted efforts
are needed to avert any reversal of the commendable
gains achieved thus far. For my part, I will continue to
work with the countries of the region, the guarantors
and other stakeholders to ensure appropriate follow-
up action of the decisions of the Summit, enhance
the implementation of the Framework agreement and
encourage cooperation in the region.

(spoke in French)

I should like to conclude by thanking Council
members for their unstinting support for the Great
Lakes region and for my efforts as Special Envoy.
As the Council is aware, my Office was the subject
of a strategic review carried out by the Department
of Political Affairs pursuant to resolution 2277
(2016). I hope that the Council will welcome the
recommendations emanating from the review, which
are aimed at strengthening the smooth functioning
and effectiveness of the Office so as to enable it
better to assist this dynamic and complex region in
the implementation of the Framework agreement and
the achievement of its goals of bringing about lasting
peace, security and stability.

