Mr. Fall: First of all, Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for the appreciation expressed by you and
your colleagues in the Security Council for the work
done by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region. I will
convey those congratulations to my colleagues, as well
as to the other part of the joint secretariat, which is the
African Union (AU).

I am sure that the debate that has just taken place
will contribute immensely to helping the countries
realize the importance for them to work very quickly
for the speedy ratification of the Pact and for its full
implementation.

Questions were raised about good governance
and the fight against corruption. I must say that from
the beginning the issue of bad governance - lack of
democracy - has been central to the discussions that
led, first, to the adoption by the Dar es-Salaam summit
of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration, which underlines the
importance of lack of democracy and lack of good
governance as factors that explain the conflicts and
wars that affected the region for the last decade. For
that reason, the cluster on democracy and good
governance is one of the most important within the
Conference.
Several protocols and projects are dealing with
the fight against lack of good governance and lack of
democracy. They include the protocol on democracy

and good governance, the protocol on judicial
cooperation among the members of the Conference, the
protocol on prevention of crimes against humanity,
crimes of genocide and so on, and the protocol on
illegal exploitation of natural resources. All these
protocols are really focusing on the centrality of good
governance and good democracy and on the fight
against corruption as a pillar for the stabilization of the
region.

Among the projects is the regional centre for
democracy, good governance and human rights, and
several forums that offer a framework through which
women, youth and civil society regionally can meet
regularly, discuss issues and put pressure on their
Governments to respect democracy and good
governance and to fight corruption.

Another question concerned the conditions for the
Pact to be implemented and the obstacles to
implementation. As for the first part of the question,
according to the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes region, it is only when
8 of the 11 countries of the region have ratified the
Pact that implementation will be enforced, 30 days
after the last ratification. We proposed that because one
had to find a balance between full ratification of the
Pact by all 11 countries - which is what we expect -
and, on the other hand, avoiding the fact that failure by
one country to ratify the Pact would mean its not
entering into force. So that was the balance between
unanimity versus the right of veto of one country and
the simple majority. We believe that if the
commitments taken by both the heads of State and then
the heads of parliaments are respected, the Pact could
enter into force very soon.

Concerning the obstacles, these are somehow
related to the bureaucracy of ratification, because so
long as the treaty has not been duly ratified, there is no
obligation for a Government to implement it. However,
countries committed themselves during the Nairobi
summit to doing their utmost not to affect their
commitment to ratification.

I think that cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is central to the Pact's
implementation framework, and the proposal to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is critical.
I take this opportunity, once again, to underline
the importance of the cooperation we have had with the
African Union. This is the first time we have had a
joint secretariat. It is not a decision taken by the United
Nations or by the African Union, but it is a de facto
decision that was taken by my Office and that of the
African Union to call ourselves, together as family, a
joint secretariat. I must also say that both the African
Union Chairman, President Konare, and its
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Said Djinnit, have been constantly involved in
cooperative efforts towards the success of the
Conference, as illustrated by the next meeting of the
AU Peace and Security Council on the outcome of the
Nairobi summit.

Of course, speakers in this morning's Council
meeting have alluded to some concern in the region -
in Darfur and in Uganda, and on the circulation of
small arms and light weapons. As far as the
negotiations in Juba between the LRA and the
Government of Uganda are concerned, as this Security
Council knows, President Chissano is currently Visiting
the region and talking to the interlocutors, and the
Department of Political Affairs is happy to announce
that President Chissano will brief the Security Council
next week on the outcome of his demarche. Darfur, of
course, is a very important concern. We believe that we
have to combine the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement and facing the humanitarian situation in
Darfur. Lastly, but not least, on the subject of small
arms and light weapons, I am glad to inform the
Council that the European Parliamentarians for Africa
(AWEPA) and the Congolese authorities are organizing
a wide-ranging meeting in Brazzaville on 28 and
29 March 2007 to tackle this issue, especially within
the Congo.

The role of the United Nations in the
implementation has also been central to today's
discussion. Beyond the political and diplomatic role of
this Security Council, it is important that the United
Nations be equipped to articulate a strategy to
accompany the implementation of the Pact, both at the
institutional and operational levels. I am glad to say
that, even before the summit, within the Steering
Committee, where all the United Nations agencies are
represented in Nairobi, each agency was encouraged to
articulate its own strategy and then come together to
merge their different strategies into a whole United
Nations system strategy to accompany the
implementation of the Pact. The United Nations
Development Programme has already finalized its
regional strategy for the implementation of the Pact,
and all the agencies are working on that issue.

The Group of Friends and the European Union have
also been alluded to. I would like to take this opportunity
to again underline the fundamental role that the Group of
Friends has played during the whole process of preparing
for the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. I have just returned from The Hague, where a
few days ago the Group of Friends held a meeting
devoted to how best to support the Conference secretariat
and Ambassador Mulamula during the establishment of
the secretariat and until June 2007. The Group of Friends
should have met again by that time to consider its future
as the Group of Friends for the Great Lakes region.

The European Union has also been actively
involved, especially through Mr. Aldo Aiello, its Special
Envoy to the Great Lakes region, and I would also like to
take this opportunity to pay homage to him for his
actions.

Last but not least, the issue of financial
requirements for the implementation of the Pact has also
been central to our discussions. I would like to take a
symbolic approach. The cost of implementing projects
and protocol in the context of the Conference on the Great
Lakes Region is about $2 billion. That is a lot of money.
And of course, the responsibility of the Governments of
the region is pivotal - it is crucial. But the international
community cannot hide behind that central responsibility
and avoid its own responsibility. The $2 billion is
important, but let me say that it represents about two
years of the functioning of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As an African, I believe that the firefighter
approach that the international community, including the
United Nations, generally adopts by deploying
peacekeeping forces is crucial - but it is not enough. It is
better to prevent, it is better to reconstruct so as to prevent
the resurgence of conflict. In that framework, $2 billion is
not very important.

