Ms. King (Australia): We wish to thank you, Sir,
and to thank Germany, for your continued leadership on
this Vital subject. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2012/261). Regrettably, it makes
for sobering reading, detailing the depth and extent of
the deplorable violations of children's rights occurring
around the world. Australia welcomes the continuing
attention paid to this issue by the Secretary-General
and the United Nations system, and the Secretary-
General's continue provision of annual reports on such
an elemental humanitarian concern.

Australia would like to thank Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her steadfast work and to
congratulate Leila Zerrougui on her appointment as
the new Special Representative on Children and Armed
Conflict. Australia is strongly supportive of her mandate
and we encourage the Security Council to receive
regular briefings from her, including on emerging
situations of concern. We also commend the ongoing
work of UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other partners in the field. The active
efforts of the United Nations have raised awareness of
this issue, and have built understanding, capacity and
accountability. We welcome the Council's expanded
set of triggers for listing perpetrators, as well as the
introduction of designation criteria for grave violations
against children in four sanctions committees. We urge
other committees to adopt similar measures.

Australia also welcomes the mainstreaming of
children's protection into country-specific action
taken by the Council. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism, to which Australia continues to contribute,
is an invaluable tool in adding to our understanding
of country situations. Action plans are helping to end
violations against children, and we welcome the signing
of new action plans in Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Myanmar, Somalia and South Sudan.
In Chad, we note the significant decrease in the number
of reported cases of child recruitment, and applaud the
Government for funding, with the United Nations, a
joint protection of civilians strategy. We encourage
other affected States to conclude child protection action
plans and to devote the necessary resources to their full
implementation.

Ending impunity and creating a culture of
accountability is also crucial to ensuring non-recurrence.
The convictions of Thomas Lubanga and Charles Taylor
are important symbols to the world that justice can be
delivered.

While Australia recognizes the significant progress
that has been made, we remain deeply concerned
that grave Violations continue to occur, including in
Syria, where the independent commission of inquiry
has found evidence of targeting, arbitrary arrest and
detention, torture and sexual assault of children by both
Government forces and shabiha members. Regrettably,
as Ambassador De la Sabliere noted in his 10-year
report, little progress has been achieved with non-State
actors. Australia calls on the Security Council to
take appropriate, targeted action against persistent
perpetrators.

Sustainable funding is essential to assisting States
to strengthen their child protection frameworks, build
resilience and promote peace and security. Australia
is providing support for prevention and reintegration
efforts alike. They have included training, education
and development opportunities for former child soldiers
and children affected by armed conflict in Nepal,
Liberia, Uganda and South Sudan, as well as support
to Watchlist to build the capacity of non-governmental
organization partners in monitoring, reporting and
response activities.

In conclusion, the Council has taken significant
steps in recent years to highlight the importance of
protecting children in armed conflict. But actually, we
can never do enough to protect children. They are, after
all, the future.

