Mr. O'Brien: As this is my first time before the
Council since the very sad and sudden news of the
passing of the former Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation, Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, I
want to convey my deep respect and sympathies to his
family, to the Russian people and the Government, and
to all his diplomatic colleagues.

Three years ago to the day, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2139 (2014). Next month we will
mark a grim anniversary - six years of war that
have devastated a nation, its people and its children.
Syrians have seen their country reduced to rubble and
their loved ones killed and injured. The majority of the
population - some 13.5 million people - are in dire
need of protection and humanitarian assistance. Nearly
85 per cent of Syrians live in poverty, with more than
two-thirds of the population living in either extreme
or abject poverty. Over 12.8 million people in Syria
require health assistance, and more than 7 million
are food-insecure amidst rising prices and food
shortages. Households spend up to a quarter of their
income just on water. Total wheat production in 2016
was 1.3 million metric tons, a reduction of 45 per cent
relative to 2015, and 63 per cent relative to pre-crisis
levels. The destruction of essential infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, the devaluation of the
currency, the impact of sanctions, rising food prices,
the shortages of food and electricity, as well as a lack
of clean water, have exacted a high toll on the majority
of Syrian families and communities throughout the
country.

In 2016, the rate of displacement continued
unabated, with an average of over 5,000 people
displaced per day between January and December,
some more than once. Over half of all Syrians have
been forced from their homes since 2011, 6.3 million of
whom are internally displaced. More than 4.9 million
have registered as refugees in neighbouring countries,
and nearly 1.2 million Syrians have applied for asylum
in Europe.

The children caught up in this war have fared the
worst. They have been killed and maimed, lost parents
to the violence, suffered physical and psychological
trauma, been forced into early marriages, and
fallen years behind in school. Recruitment - very
often through indoctrination, abduction, arrest and
coercion e has been widespread in all areas, with
90 per cent of the 217 surveyed subdistricts in Syria
reporting its occurrence.

The lack ofeconomic and educational opportunities,
the experiences of violence, displacement, profound
distress, family loss and the deprivation ofpsychosocial
needs - such as a sense of purpose, control and
significance - have all been major drivers of
vulnerability. Child labour, owing to the widespread
devastation of livelihoods and family separation, was
reported in 82 per cent of surveyed subdistricts across
the country, including its most dangerous and hazardous
forms, namely, begging, smuggling, scavenging,
recruitment and the use of children in the conflict and
illicit activities.

Moreover, with the war entering its sixth year,
5.82 million children and young people, from preschool
to secondary-school age, including more than 118,000
Palestinian refugee children, are in need of education
assistance inside Syria. An estimated 1.75 million
children, or almost one third of school-age children
between 5 and 17 years old, are out of school. A further
1.35 million are at risk of dropping out. Syria's formal
education system has lost a total of 150,000 education
personnel and seen 7,400 schools - one in three
in the country - damaged, destroyed or otherwise
made inaccessible. Owing to severe poverty, parents
and caregivers can no longer consider their children's
education a priority, with ever-increasing numbers
having to remain out of school in order to support
their households.

As we move ahead in 2017 towards what I hope will
be a year that brings positive change to Syria, we must
continue to remember just how much has been lost and
the abyss from which Syria will have to emerge. Let me
say that even if a political agreement were to be found
tomorrow - which, of course, we all wholeheartedly
desire - humanitarian needs will remain critical
for months, if not years, to come. I therefore cannot
emphasize strongly enough my support for all efforts to
see the guns fall silent. I am, however, concerned about
ongoing significant attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure that are being conducted with seeming
impunity. They include bombardments and air strikes
in Idlib and Dar'a, and besieged locations in the eastern
Ghouta area, most notably in Duma, Harasta, Zamalka,
Jobar and Arbin.

Earlier this month, the Government of Syria and the
Russian Federation announced the opening of several
corridors for civilians wishing to leave eastern Ghouta,
one of which is through the Al-Wafedin camp. We are
monitoring the situation closely, but we are concerned
that the situation in eastern Ghouta may become even
more tense in the coming period, should military
operations increase. We are also gravely concerned
about the situation in the Al-Waer neighbourhood of
the city of Homs, which has been exposed to heavy
aerial bombing and artillery shelling in recent days,
reportedly resulting in more than 20 civilian casualties,
many ofthem children. The shelling also affected Al-Bir
hospital, the only semi-functioning medical centre in
besieged Al-Waer, as well as the civil defence centre
and the ambulance centre, which resulted in the death
of a first-aid worker. Life in Al-Waer, which the United
Nations has not been able to reach since 26 October, is
becoming increasingly dire, with tens of thousands of
people in need of immediate humanitarian assistance
after suffering under numerous reported air strikes in
recent weeks.

To the south, a substantial increase in conflict
around Dar'a city was recorded on 12 February. As
a precaution, all schools and universities, in both
Government areas and those controlled by non-State
armed groups, have been temporarily closed owing to
the heavy clashes, aerial bombardment, and artillery
shelling. On 19 February, Jaysh Khalid Bin Al-Walid,
an affiliate of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), commenced an attack on Free Syrian Army
positions on three fronts, looking to break out of the
Yarmouk valley. Since the morning of 19 February, it
has taken over Tseel, which has an estimated population
of 34,000, Jlein and Masaken Jlein, with a combined
population of 9,200, and Edoin, with a population of
4,900. Most of the residents of those villages are now
reported to be under curfew, limiting their ability to
flee. Along with Free Syrian Army affiliates, Jaysh
Khalid Bin Al-Walid has reportedly beheaded at least
one local council leader in the areas it has newly taken
over. Many staff of non-governmental organizations
were unable to flee before the Jaysh Khalid Bin
Al-Walid advance and have now gone radio silent in
those villages. Attacks have also taken place elsewhere
in Dar'a governorate, with air strikes reportedly hitting
six medical centres and health points on 15 February in
Saida, Yadouda, Naima, Nasib, Al-Jiza, and Al-Ghana
Al-Sharkia, causing severe damage to facilities and
putting some of them out of service. The Al-Balad field
hospital in Dar'a also appears to have been hit by an air
strike and put out of service.

Owing to the increase in fighting in Rif Damascus,
Idlib, Dar'a and other governorates, humanitarian
access to some of those areas has been further limited.
In Idlib, infighting between the Al-Nusra Front, also
known as Jabhat Fateh Al-Sham, and non-Nusra groups
has resulted in restricted humanitarian programming
and civilian movement. On 24 January, United Nations
assistance through the Bab al-Hawa border crossing
point was suspended for a day as a result of increased
insecurity, and humanitarian actors restricted their
programming for most of the last week of January,
affecting 2 million people in Idlib governorate,
including 900,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs).
To the south, the Ar-Ramtha border crossing point
has been suspended since 13 February, owing to the
intensified attacks in and around Dar'a city. Fighting
in the south has also displaced more than 10,000 people
from Dar'a city, many of whom have moved to farms
and villages south-east of the city. More are likely
to be displaced in the coming days if the violence
continues. The displacements put further strain on a
population already deeply affected by the conflict. In
addition, ongoing movements into Idlib and the western
Aleppo countryside, owing to evacuations and local
agreements, are increasing the humanitarian needs in
many of these locations.

In the besieged four towns of Al-Zabadani,
Al-Fuah, Kafraya and Madaya, which were last reached
on 28 November, the situation is catastrophic, with
more than 64,000 civilians trapped in a cycle of daily
violence and deprivation, where malnutrition and the
lack of proper medical care persist. The situation is
compounded by the tit-for-tat arrangement between
the four towns, which encumbers humanitarian access
by imposing painstaking negotiations that are rooted
in political and opportunistic considerations rather
than humanitarian principles and obligations. Five
people have died in Madaya and Kafraya in the past
few days, among them a mother who died while giving
birth. Another 80 people must be urgently evacuated if
their lives are to be saved. They and others are in dire
need and cannot wait any longer. I truly hope that the
members of the Council and of the newly established
joint group will manage to unlock this horrific gridlock
on the four towns and compel the parties on the ground
to enable immediate humanitarian assistance, including
medical evacuations, without any further delay.

I continue to be gravely concerned about the fact
that military operations against ISIL continue to result
in civilian suffering. In recent weeks, for example,
air strikes and fighting around both Al-Raqqa and
Al-Bab have resulted in numerous civilian casualties
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, as well
as displacements. To date, the United Nations has
received reports of approximately 300 civilians killed,
mainly owing to air strikes and improvised explosive
devices. Civilians have also been subjected to gunfire,
with ISIL fighters shooting at civilians who try to leave
towards areas controlled by non-State armed groups
and, in some cases, non-State armed groups shooting
at civilians who appear to have been mistaken for
ISIL elements.

As various parties pick up the pace to enter Al-Raqqa
and Al-Bab, and as ISIL retreats, bridges, water
systems and other elements of civilian infrastructure
are being attacked and destroyed. Syria's Tabgah dam
on the Euphrates River is a strategic facility that holds
about 14 billion cubic metres of water for drinking
and irrigation purposes and produces about 2.5 billion
kilowatts of electricity a year. Such a facility must be
protected from the effects of the ongoing conflict in
the eastern and northern regions, where any damage or
misuse of the dam could potentially cause significant
flooding across Raqqa and even as far as Deir ez-
Zor, should the dam fail. Heavy flooding would likely
have catastrophic humanitarian consequences in
downstream areas, submerging huge swathes of
agricultural land, and affecting hundreds of thousands
ofpeople who already face critical problems in meeting
their immediate needs. And as fighting moves into
urban areas, there is grave concern that there will be a
significant increase in civilian casualties. In recognition
of the fact that civilians trapped in areas controlled by
listed terrorist groups are already facing human rights
abuses and humanitarian suffering, efforts to retake
such areas must be undertaken with the utmost care
for the plight of the many hundreds of thousands of
civilians trapped in those locations.

As we all know, the United Nations and its
implementing partners reach millions of Syrians via
regular and cross-border programming each month.
The lack of safe, unimpeded and sustained access
remains, however, the greatest obstacle to reaching
people in need in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. The
cumulative reach of humanitarian actors to besieged
and hard-to-reach areas through inter-agency convoys
and airdrops increased from 620,000 in 2015 to more
than 3.3 million in 2016.

Yet, despite this considerable improvement,
humanitarian actors are all too seldom able to deliver
life-saving assistance and protection services in a
timely, effective, sustainable and strictly needs-based
basis. A review ofinter-agency cross-border convoys in
2016 showed that a lack of predictable access prevented
the implementation of two-thirds of the requests
initially approved by the Government of Syria. These
were primarily due to administrative, security and
operational constraints. During the second half of 2016,
inter-agency convoys were only allowed to proceed
during the last 10 working days of the month, and those
convoys that did deploy had medical items routinely
removed. In fact, 67 of the 99 inter-agency cross-line
convoys in 2016 had a significant number of medical
items removed.

As previously stated, in December last year, only one
convoy was deployed throughout that month, to Khan
al-Shih reaching 6,000 people, despite the fact that the
United Nations had received initial approvals to reach
almost 800,000 people in hard-to-reach and besieged
locations. Similarly, in January, only a single convoy
could be deployed, delivering aid to 40,000 people in
Mu'addamiyah al-Sham. And so far, in February, only
two convoys have been able to deploy - to Talbiseh on
5 February delivering aid to 84,000, and to Ar-Rastan
on 12 February with assistance to 107,500 people.

Insecurity has also forced the United Nations to
abort two convoys in as many days to Al-Waer just
this past week. Some 50,000 civilians in Al-Waer are
facing ever-worsening humanitarian conditions and
have not received humanitarian assistance for 117 days.
On 19 February, the loaded convoy was forced to turn
around owing to the security situation on the ground,
including an incident in which a person was injured
owing to a shot by a sniper. On 20 February, prior to
reaching Al-Waer, the loaded the convoy was unable to
proceed owing to ongoing shelling and sporadic fire. On
its way back to the warehouse, several trucks filled with
humanitarian supplies were diverted by civilians and
unknown armed elements to a Government-controlled
area. The drivers and trucks were temporarily detained
and some drivers were reportedly roughed up, but have
since been released, but without their humanitarian
supplies. Everyone, I am pleased to say, is safe and
accounted for.

I condemn this incident in the strongest possible
terms and I am shocked at the blatant disregard for the
protection of humanitarian workers and humanitarian
assets. The United Nations will continue to try to
reach the 50,000 people in need in Al-Waer with
multisectoral assistance, as soon as conditions allow.
I call on all parties to ensure the safety and security
of humanitarian workers and assets at all times, in
line with their responsibilities under international
humanitarian law.

I once again urge all Member States with influence
to ensure that a zero or near-zero implementation
rate does not occur again in the weeks and months
to come, whether that is because of administrative,
security or operational constraints. The United Nations
and its partners are ready and capable of delivering
humanitarian assistance in challenging conditions to
300,000 people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas per
week, in addition to regular programming supporting
millions. We must be given the chance to do so, as the
lives of many depend upon regular and unimpeded
deliveries of humanitarian assistance. What we need are
timely approvals and simplified approval procedures.

In this regard, and in response to the request of the
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
in early January, as well as sustained advocacy at the
level of the Humanitarian Task Force, we received
commitments on the part of the Government of Syria that
procedures for cross-line convoys would be simplified.
The Syrian Arab Red Crescent was to now act as the
main entry point for the facilitation of convoys with
Government entities. We are now waiting to receive the
final proposed procedural changes in writing for review.
We sincerely hope that these changes will effectively
address some of the bureaucratic bottlenecks that have
caused the many delays in the past.

Let me also reiterate that cross-border assistance
from Turkey and Jordan continues to represent a core
element ofthe humanitarian response. This is especially
important since the needs are growing as local
agreements are sending more people to the north, as
well as to some locations in southern Syria - locations
which are already strained by the current IDP
population, with 900,000 IDPs in Idlib governorate
alone, for example. Consequently, the United Nations
and its partners' cross-border deliveries have steadily
increased since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014)
in July 2014. That same year, 624 trucks were inspected
before crossing the border into Syria, of which 172
trucks crossed into Syria via Ar-Ramtha, Jordan, and
120 trucks via Bab al-Salam, Turkey, and 332 trucks
via Bab al-Hawa, Turkey. One year later, numbers rose
to more than 4,882 trucks and last year, in 2016, 6,587
trucks were inspected, of which 1,278 trucks crossed
the border point of Ar-Ramtha, 495 trucks entered Syria
via Bab al-Salam, and 4,814 trucks via Bab al-Hawa. I
would also like to specifically point out that the bulk
of our humanitarian response has been implemented
by a vast panoply of non-governmental organization
partners on the ground. They must be protected at all
times and under all circumstances.

Let me conclude, ifI may, by saying this. The eyes
of all Syria and the eyes of all the world are looking
to Geneva. As has been stated so many times already,
there is no humanitarian or military solution to this
conflict. A genuine political commitment to peace
will be needed if 2017 is to offer any different prospect
than the death and destruction of the past six years.
Millions of battered and beleaguered women, men and
children depend on meaningful action and constructive
engagement by the Syrian parties and their allies,
starting tomorrow at the intra-Syrian negotiations in
Geneva, to assure Syrians that an end to the conflict
may finally be within reach.

