Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
Let me first of all thank India for organizing this
important and timely open debate. The working methods
of the Council affect not only Council members, but the
United Nations membership as a whole. Therefore, we
much appreciate this opportunity to discuss the issue.

There have been improvements in the Council's
working methods over the past years. We note that
since the last open debate on this topic (see S/PV.6672),
in November 2011, there has been increased attention
to this matter.

The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions has intensified its
work under the excellent stewardship of Portugal. The
Council has also held consultations on how to improve
the management of the Council's programmes and
sessions. Those are all positive developments.

That momentum has not only applied to the
inner workings of the Council. The draft resolution
(A/66/L.42/Rev.2) introduced to the General Assembly
by the so-called group of five small nations (8-5) at the
sixty-sixth session fostered a thorough discussion on
central aspects of working methods. The 8-5 countries
deserve much credit for their dedication and long-
term commitment. We look forward to their continued
contribution to this debate.

The key aspect of any discussion on working
methods is transparency. We would therefore like to
underscore the need for regular, informative briefings
to non-members of the Council. Interactive wrap-
up sessions at the end of each presidency enhance
information-sharing and openness. We encourage
Council members to consider organizing such briefings
on a regular basis.

Making the Council's annual report more analytical
and forward-looking would also enhance transparency.
A closer connection between the monthly reporting and
the annual report is encouraged. It is also important to
share regular updates on the scheduling of meetings of
the subsidiary bodies in order for the wider membership
to stay better informed about the matters they address.

The Nordic countries are eager to contribute
to a culture of transparency. In that regard, we fully
support the work of Security Council Report, which
provides valuable insight and analysis about Council
activities to the wider membership. Furthermore,
the Finnish workshop, which celebrates 10 years this
year, aims at giving new members of the Council an
in-depth orientation to the practice, procedures and
working methods of the Council. The reports from
those workshops are distributed to all United Nations
Members as official documents of the Council.

Efficiency in the Council's work is important.
Conflicts today are more complex, and the Council's
agenda is increasingly stretched. Therefore, we welcome
the note issued by the President of the Council in June
(S/2012/402). The agreement to change the periodicity
of mandate renewals is positive in that regard. We also
welcome the ongoing discussion on penholders and the
appointment of chairs to the subsidiary bodies.

The quality of open debates could be further
improved by ensuring that outcome documents reflect
input from all participating countries. Concept papers
could direct the focus of the debates to the questions
on which the Council would like to consult the larger
membership. We also welcome the discussion on the
order of speakers. We welcome the Council's increasing
use of videoconferences for briefings from the ground,
and we encourage the Council to develop the concept
further.

The Council should continue to actively seek
ways to improve its ability to prevent conflict and to
solve long-term conflicts on its agenda. We encourage
the Council to put special emphasis on prevention
and to find new, innovative ways to tackle emerging
conflicts at an early stage. We welcome the use of
horizon-scanning and encourage the Council to further
develop and regularize the practice.

Enhanced cooperation with other United Nations
bodies and partner organizations, including the Bretton
Woods institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, is essential. For example, the Council
should regularly seek the advice of the chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission configurations by inviting
them to participate in relevant Council meetings,
including in connection with mission mandate
renewals. In addition, troop- and police-contributing
countries should be more closely engaged at all stages
of decision-making about peacekeeping operations.

The Council has made good progress in developing
cross-cutting thematic issues, for example, women and
peace and security. The Council should now go further
and systematically link country-specific situations
and horizontal themes. That is important both from
an operational point of view and a normative one. The
Nordic countries welcome the significant progress
achieved in enhancing due process both for listing
and delisting procedures of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. We
recommend that those fair and clear procedures be
extended to other sanctions regimes also. While the
mandate of the Ombudsperson has been strengthened,
we suggest it be extended for an unlimited period.

Much has been done to improve the work and the
working methods of the Council, but much remains to
be done. We call on the Council to start implementing
the two presidential notes, S/2006/507 and its update
S/2010/507, and the innovations contained therein, in
a more systematic manner. In that light, we strongly
encourage the Council to continue holding annual open
debates on its working methods.

