Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, allow me first to
convey heartfelt congratulations on behalf of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and for
the effective way you are conducting the business of
the Council.

My delegation is honoured to take part in this
important meeting on the report of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa. My delegation is
happy that, for the second time now, the Council has
taken the initiative to travel to Central Africa. We take
this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
high quality of the contributions made by all Council
members under the leadership of Ambassador De La
Sabliere, Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations. The mission came at the right time,
following the first summit of heads of State in the
framework of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, held in Dar es Salaam on 19 and
20 November 2004, which concluded with the solemn
adoption of the Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.

For the States of the region, the Declaration's
adoption represents great hope for stability, peace and
democracy in the region. Even more, it underlines the
political will of the leaders of the region to begin a new
era of good-neighbourliness, collaboration and
cooperation in order to rebuild those countries affected
by a long period of war, to develop their economies
and to ensure the return of a pluralist democratic
system in the region, which will ensure genuine
economic, social and cultural development through
political stability.

Our study of the report of the Security Council
mission to Central Africa (S/2004/934) leads my
delegation to make the following observations. My
delegation notes with satisfaction and a sense of
encouragement that the members of the Council
recognize the progress made in the region since the
Council's last visit, in June 2003, in particular the
efforts made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
since the June 2003 mission, especially the
establishment and functioning of all transitional
institutions, such as the Parliament, the Government of
National Unity and the integrated high command for
the armed forces and the police service, as well as the
five institutions supporting democracy and territorial
integrity. All those institutions are ready to begin
operations and consult with one another in their careful
preparations for the transparent, free and democratic
general elections to be held next year. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo wishes to reinforce that
irreversible trend in order finally to emerge from the
quagmire in which it was stuck to join the ranks of
modern democratic States that participate in the
development of universal civilization. In that context,
members of the Council were reassured at the highest
level of the State that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is determined to hold free elections in
accordance with the agreed timetable.

Unfortunately, despite the progress made and the
intensive consultations between Rwandan and
Congolese authorities to establish a climate of trust,
cooperation and understanding in which to peacefully
resolve any possible dispute that might arise while
tackling the problem of members of the former
Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe,
Rwanda continues to make threats towards the
Democratic Republic of Congo, thus jeopardizing all
bilateral agreements signed between Rwanda and my
country in New York and elsewhere, as well as other,
multilateral agreements. This is clearly a deliberate
attempt to prolong insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to disrupt
the transition process under way and prevent the
holding of elections, in particular by contributing to the
emergence of militias and dissident factions, which is
what led to the events of Bukavu in early June 2004.

A few days ago, immediately following the Dar
es Salaam Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes region and just
when members of the Security Council were visiting
the region and when the Summit of la Francophonie
was under way in Ouagadougou, President Paul
Kagame of Rwanda, scorning the peace efforts in the
Great Lakes, issued a declaration of war under the
pretext of pursuing so-called negative forces. He then
took the action of redeploying Rwandan troops in
certain localities of the provinces of North and South
Kivu.

My country notes that President Paul Kagame of
Rwanda has demonstrated his willingness to take the
responsibility of unleashing hostilities against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in violation of all
concluded agreements and of the principle of the
inviolability of borders, in accordance with Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Constitutive Act of the African Union.

We appeal to the great sense of responsibility of
members of the Council to condemn Mr. Paul
Kagame's arrogant and irresponsible attitude towards
the international community, as those statements were
made before the Rwandan senate barely one week after
the signing of the Dar es Salaam Declaration, which we
consider to be of historic importance in ensuring peace
in Central Africa. In that context, I stress that all
Governments of the Great Lakes region, including that
of Rwanda, committed themselves to adopt non-
aggression pacts and to promoting the establishment of
a regional mechanism to establish a zone of lasting
peace.

The President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila, addressed
the nation in order to inform the Congolese people
about the repeated acts of aggression that our country
has suffered at the hands of Rwandan armed forces
under the command of Mr. Paul Kagame. In his speech,
President Kabila described the successive stages of the
war that Rwanda has waged against my country since
1998 under the false pretext of pursuing ex-FAR and
Interahamwe combatants in the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The President of
the Republic has demonstrated the good will of the
Congolese authorities since 1999, cooperating closely
with the Rwandan authorities and the international
community in order to eradicate those elements from
Congolese territory, in accordance with the Geneva
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 1969
Convention of the Organization of African Unity
Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa. His action was also based on the Pretoria
Agreement of 17 December 2002 and the tripartite
agreement signed by Rwanda and Uganda in New York
in October 2004. In other words, the entire legal
arsenal has been mobilized in accordance with the
norms of international law to achieve a peaceful
settlement of the crisis caused by the presence of ex-
FAR and Interahamwe elements in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

All regions of the country, including in particular
its eastern area - the provinces of the Kivus, Maniema
and Orientale - aspire to live in peace and security
within their borders. All incursions by foreign forces,
including those of Rwanda, will require the
Government of National Unity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to strictly implement Article 51
of the Charter, which stipulates that nothing in the
Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs
against a Member of the United Nations, until the
Security Council has taken measures necessary to
maintain international peace and security.

While endorsing the Council's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2004/45) issued yesterday,
7 December 2004, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo intends to strengthen its security
measures along the Rwandan border in order to protect
the civilian population, because information coming
from the Kivus describes acts of violence, inhuman and
degrading treatment and massacres that have targeted
several thousand civilians, including women and
children separated from their families, who have been
subjected to cruelty at the hands of Rwandan soldiers.
Those soldiers are known for their legendary cruelty
and practice a scorched earth policy, destroying
everything they find in the villages and causing
massive displacements of the population, which seeks
to flee those barbaric acts and massacres. Humanitarian
personnel on the ground have also raised the alarm
about the fact that those displacements will have
serious consequences.

On the basis of that analysis, my delegation
appeals to all countries that cherish peace and justice to
lend their unwavering support to the efforts deployed
by the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on
behalf of the international community with the goal of
ensuring peace, security and the establishment of
democracy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Those efforts are most solidly supported by the
Transitional Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which pursues the sole, praiseworthy
goal of establishing in the country the rule of law and
the republican values of equality, justice and peace. My
delegation stands ready to cooperate closely with the
Security Council to attain those goals.

