Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
to say how pleased my delegation is to see you, Sir,
presiding over this public meeting on Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and to thank you for having taken the initiative
to hold the meeting. I also thank you for your lucid
analysis of the situation, following your recent visit to
the region. I should also like, through you, to thank
Ambassador Peter van Walsum, for the outstanding
way in which he has been presiding over our Council
this month. We also wish to thank the entire team of
the Netherlands in the Security Council.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, deserves
tribute and congratulations for his steadfast support for
and dedication to the peaceful settlement of conflicts in
Africa, in particular that between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
and we thank him for his very instructive statement
today.

The signing of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities between the Government of Ethiopia and the
Government of Eritrea represents a very important
achievement and a decisive step towards the peaceful
resolution of a tragic conflict that should never have
taken place between the two countries. That
Agreement, signed on 18 June 2000 and reached
through the intensive efforts of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and President Bouteflika, made it
possible for the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea (UNMEE) to be deployed rapidly and
expanded.

We welcome the appointment of the Force
Commander, Major General Patrick Cammaert - an
appointment that does honour to your country, Mr.
President. We also welcome the positive role being
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Legwaila, who is working with
the leaders of the two parties and with the OAU. We
hope that these contacts will help to dispel the distrust
that exists between the former belligerents and bring
them to the negotiating table.

UNMEE, the most recent mission to our continent
but one of a new generation of missions, remains a
decisive element for guaranteeing a permanent
ceasefire and creating the conditions necessary for a
lasting settlement. Its deployment cannot be a pretext
for political and diplomatic paralysis. In this respect,
my delegation endorses the appeal of the Secretary-
General to Ethiopia and Eritrea to continue to
demonstrate the political will that they showed in
signing the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities. We
believe that such political will will be judged by the
progress made in the proximity talks. We also invite
the parties to continue their efforts to achieve a
negotiated and lasting peace. We believe that the
demarcation and delimitation of the border as soon as
possible will be an important step in that direction.

As we said after the signing of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, and as we repeated after the
deployment of UNMEE, the United Nations and the
OAU must continue to cooperate closely at every level.
However, in order to restore peace, the OAU needs
assistance and support if it is to play its proper role in
preventive diplomacy and the rebuilding and
consolidation of peace.

The peoples of Ethiopia and Eritrea were sorely
tried by the conflict between the two countries. The
drought has exacerbated the situation. My delegation is
particularly troubled by the large number of internally
displaced persons and refugees in the region. It will be
important for UNMEE to establish and maintain close
cooperation with the humanitarian workers in the
region. We welcome the clear progress made with the
signing of the tripartite agreement. However, we urge
the international community to provide generous
financial aid, bilaterally or through the United Nations
teams in the two countries, in order to provide relief to
the population.

My delegation remains concerned about the
presence of landmines and other explosive devices.
This situation is still an obstacle to humanitarian
activities, reconstruction and, in particular, the
deployment of UNMEE. We call upon the international
community to give technical and financial assistance to
the two countries, which in turn should cooperate so
that demining activities can be carried out.

In conclusion, Mali calls upon the two parties to
continue to show their commitment to peace,
development and prosperity, for the sake not only of
the two peoples concerned, but for the region and
Africa as a whole.

My delegation is at your disposal, Mr. President,
for the finalization of the presidential statement.

