Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Countries around
the world, especially in South Asia and in the wider
Middle East, continue to face the threat posed by
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Today's news reports
provide us with another stark reminder of that fact. We
must therefore ensure that the existing sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban remains a
relevant and effective tool in countering terrorism.
Security Council resolution 1822 (2008) and, in
particular, resolution 1904 (2009) are important steps
in the evolution of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime. Those resolutions have improved the 1267
Committee's procedures and provide effective
instruments to ensure that the Committee's
consolidated list of individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida and the Taliban remains dynamic and
accurately reflects the current threat.

In today's briefing I would like to focus on the
implementation aspects of resolutions 1822 (2008) and
1904 (2009). A more detailed version of this statement
will be distributed today and will be made available on
the Committee's website (http://www.un.org/sc/ committees/ 12 67/chairmanbriefings . shtml) in due
course.
5
As the Council is well aware, resolution 1822
(2008) directed the Committee to conduct, by 30 June
2010, a review of all 488 names on the consolidated
list at the date of adoption of that resolution. The
review process is one of the key priorities of the
Committee and, in view of the workload and the
approaching deadline, the main focus of its current
work.

I would like to give an overview of the current
status of the review process and the progress achieved
so far. The Committee finished the first phase of the
review by sending all 488 names to the respective
designating States and States of citizenship and/or
residence or States of incorporation/location for
review. The review letters were sent between
December 2008 and November 2009, and States were
given a period of three months to review the entries
and reply to the Committee. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the many States that have
provided the Committee with their answers and
relevant information.

Unfortunately, although resolution 1904 (2009)
had requested States to respond to all outstanding
review letters no later than 1 March 2010, not all States
have been able to provide responses on time. While it
is possible for the Committee to review names even if
responses are not received by that date, we believe it is
essential that Committee members be aware of all
available information and of the positions of all States
concerned in order to have the full picture of each case
and to be able to take well-founded decisions.

The Committee is currently going through the
final phase of the review: each name is placed on the
agenda of a Committee meeting, introduced by the
Monitoring Team and discussed among Committee
members. The Committee evaluates all available
information and considers whether the listing remains
appropriate on the basis of the criteria for listing set
out in relevant resolutions. In this final phase, the
Committee has so far discussed a total of 154 entries.
In 95 cases, the listing was confirmed as remaining
appropriate, while 24 names, including well-known
cases such as Vinck and Sayadi, Nada and Barakaat
International, have been de-listed as a result of the
review.

Five deceased individuals have also been
removed from the consolidated list. When discussing
possible de-listings of deceased persons, the main
question is whether the death is officially confirmed
and whether it can be ensured that the remaining assets
will not fall into the hands of other listed persons. It is
therefore of the utmost importance that States provide
the Committee with the necessary information and
contribute to the Committee's decision-making. For 35
names, the review in phase three is still pending, as the
Committee is of the view that further information is
necessary to conclude its consideration.

I am personally committed to ensuring that the
review process is conducted seriously and thoroughly.
The Committee will make its utmost effort to meet the
deadline and complete, or at a minimum initiate, the
final phase of review for all 488 names on the list by
30 June 2010. We therefore have intensive weeks
ahead of us, but I am confident that all Member States,
and in particular the members of the Committee, share
our commitment to finalizing this important task.

Resolution 1904 (2009), adopted by the Security
Council on 17 December 2009, substantially improves
the procedures under the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regimes in terms of due process. On 1 February of this
year, I introduced the main new elements of resolution
1904 (2009) in an open briefing to all Member States.
Today I will therefore only highlight some of the key
aspects.

The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson is the most significant innovation of the
resolution. For the first time ever, individuals and
entities subject to sanction measures will have the
opportunity to present their cases to an independent
body, which will be assisting the Committee when it
considers de-listing requests. The Ombudsperson shall
be an eminent individual of high moral character,
impartiality and integrity with high qualifications and
experience in relevant fields, such as the legal sphere,
human rights, counter-terrorism and sanctions. The
Ombudsperson shall perform his or her tasks in an
independent and impartial manner. The Ombudsperson
will replace the focal point established pursuant to
resolution 1730 (2006) for de-listing requests regarding
the consolidated list, while the focal point will
continue to receive de-listing requests for other
sanctions regimes.

I am happy to inform the Security Council that by
the end of April a number of excellent candidates had
applied for the position of Ombudsperson. Pursuant to
resolution 1904 (2009), the Ombudsperson shall be
appointed by the Secretary-General in close
consultation with the Committee. The Committee is in
the process of finalizing its consultations and will
convey its views to the Secretary-General in the next
few days.

Resolution 1904 (2009) introduced several
provisions with a view to improving the quality of
listings and to increase transparency regarding
information relevant for States and listed individuals
and entities. One major achievement is that the
narrative summaries of reasons for listing will be made
available on the Committee's website at the same time
that a new listing is published on the list.

To ensure that the consolidated list remains
dynamic and adequately reflects the current threat
posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, additional review
processes have been introduced. Every six months, a
review of deceased persons will be conducted. There
will also be an annual review of entries that lack
identifiers. Finally, there will be an annual review of
names on the consolidated list which have not been
reviewed in three or more years.

Committee members may place holds on matters
that are under consideration. So far, there has been no
clear procedure and no time limit for such holds.
Resolution 1904 (2009) introduces a new procedure for
pending issues: holds now have a time limit of six
months, and this period can only be extended on a
case-by-case basis and in extraordinary circumstances.
In addition, the Committee will have to review all
existing holds by 31 December of this year.

Resolution 1904 (2009) can only be effectively
implemented if the working methods of the Committee
are adapted to the new procedures. In recent months,
the Committee has worked intensively to adapt the
Committee's guidelines so that they reflect the
provisions of the new resolution. I am pleased to
announce that the Committee is currently concluding
the revision of the guidelines, which we hope will be
adopted in the coming days. We are convinced that the
guidelines will be an important tool for conducting the
Committee's work in a more effective, efficient, fair
and transparent manner.

Regarding the consolidated list and all relevant
data, I would like to refer to our written statement. I
would only like to inform the Council that on
12 January this year, the Committee made available on
its website new standard forms for listing to be used
when proposing the inclusion of individuals and
entities on the consolidated list.

As far as outreach is concerned, on 1 February of
this year I held my latest informal open briefing for all
Member States in which I discussed the new provisions
of resolution 1904 (2009). I intend to hold the next
open briefing at the beginning of July and to use that
occasion to provide the membership with information
about the status and outcome of the review.

At the beginning of June, I plan to participate in a
meeting of special services, security agencies and law
enforcement organizations to be held in Yekaterinburg,
Russian Federation. I also have the intention to
intensify the dialogue between the Committee and the
authorities of Afghanistan, so as to raise issues relevant
for the 1267 Committee, in particular regarding the
review of the consolidated list.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the Committee welcomes the Security
Council's encouragement set forth in paragraph 36 of
resolution 1904 (2009) for Member States to send
representatives to meet the Committee for more in-depth
discussion of relevant issues or for voluntary briefings
on their efforts to implement the sanctions measures.
The Committee is ready to listen to ideas and concerns
and looks forward to continuing its cooperation and
dialogue with all Member States.

Before concluding, I would like to use this
opportunity to thank the members of the Monitoring
Team and the Committee secretariat for their
invaluable contribution to the work of the Committee.
The important additional workload created by the
review process and the drafting of narrative summaries
poses a particular challenge to all colleagues involved,
and I would also like to thank them for their personal
commitment.

In my previous briefing I mentioned that the 1267
sanctions regime has encountered increasing criticism
by a number of States and individuals because of
procedural and human rights concerns. By resolution
1904 (2009), the Security Council addressed many of
those concerns and thus significantly contributed to
strengthening the fairness and effectiveness of the
regime. At the same time, the Committee continues to
be aware of remaining challenges and, as mentioned in
resolution 1904 (2009), is committed to continuing to
improve its procedures as required in order to
introduce further elements of fairness and transparency

for placing individuals, groups and entities on the
consolidated list and for removing them, as well as for
granting humanitarian exemptions.

After the review pursuant to resolution 1822
(2008), the Committee will continue to address the
weaknesses of the consolidated list. In order to fulfil
this task, the Committee depends on cooperation with
and contributions from Member States, which are
responsible for providing the Committee with relevant
information. I would therefore like to call on all
Member States to contribute to this collective effort.

The implementation of resolution 1822 (2008)
constituted an important stage in and a major
achievement of the Committee's work, and the review
process has contributed and is contributing towards
both improving due process requirements and
strengthening the regime. The new resolution 1904
(2009) reflects the lessons learned during the review,
and I would once again like to thank Member States
involved for their support and contribution.

With the appointment of the Ombudsperson in the
near future, the Committee will move to the next stage
of its work. It is essential that this process be continued
by further improving the Committee's procedures and
working methods while ensuring fair and clear
procedures, and thereby make the 1267 sanctions
regime a stronger and more effective tool.

