Mr. Oshima (Japan): I join others in thanking
Mr. Qazi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, and Mr. John Bolton for their
informative briefings on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
Multinational Force (MNF), respectively.

Over the past several months, we have witnessed
serious developments and crises in the Middle East,
including in Lebanon and Gaza. However, those
challenges in no way diminish the importance of Iraq
for the overall stability of the region and beyond.

Iraq has completed the political process
prescribed in resolution 1546 (2004). It is our hope that
Iraq will continue on the path towards a free,
democratic and stable State promoting national
reconciliation and development as a prosperous and
responsible member of the international community
under a democratically elected Government.

Meanwhile, the Iraqi Government and people are
confronted daily with mounting complex internal
challenges in achieving national reconciliation,
ensuring security in communities and promoting the
country's reconstruction and development. Of
particularly serious concern is the continuing
widespread violence, sectarian and inter-communal
tensions and clashes and terrorist attacks and
insurgency, with many civilian and other killings and
casualties compounding instability and causing large-
scale displacement of people. As Iraqi society
undergoes such a severe and difficult phase, and while
acknowledging the importance of respecting ownership
of the process by the Iraqi people themselves in
establishing responsible governance in the pursuit of
its new nation-building, the broader international
community must also continue to provide the necessary
support, in partnership with the Iraqi Government and
people, to assist them in their efforts. In that regard, we
welcome the ministerial-level meeting on Iraq to be
held on 18 September under the auspices of the United
Nations.

Japan commends the important role that UNAMI
has been playing in the Iraq process in the current
challenging circumstances and expresses once again its
strong support for the Mission's activities.

In the current situation, we place importance on
three areas of UNAMI's activities, based on its
mandate: first, the promotion of national dialogue;
secondly, assistance in the constitutional and electoral
processes; and, thirdly, facilitation of coordination and
delivery of reconstruction and development assistance.
We believe that combined efforts in those three areas
will help promote national reconciliation and improve
the living conditions of the Iraqi people, which, in turn,
will lead to a de-escalation of tensions in society.

Political stability and an improvement in security
are prerequisites for economic reconstruction, and
these elements are closely interlinked. We therefore
appreciate the efforts made by the Iraqi Government to
promote the national reconciliation plan and the
Baghdad security plan. We welcome the fact that Iraqi
forces are gradually assuming responsibility for
security in substantial areas of the country thanks to
the progress being made in the training of the Iraqi
security forces by the Multinational Force.
Furthermore, Japan appreciates the growing ability of
those two forces to work together to ensure security in
the country.

We welcome the fact that the Iraqi Government
played a lead role in convening the conference on
national reconciliation in Baghdad, recognizing the
need for regional support to achieve peace and stability
in the country. We welcome also the initiative and
efforts of the Arab League for the convening of a
conference on Iraqi national accord.

In addition, we welcome, as another positive step,
the visit of Prime Minister Al-Maliki of Iraq to some of
the neighbouring countries, namely Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates and Iran, with a
view to ensuring good-neighbourliness and stability in
the country and the region.
Japan fully supports the International Compact
with Iraq. We support the strong role that the United
Nations, through UNAMI, has been playing as co-chair
of the Compact process. Japan hopes that the Compact
will be finalized and adopted by the end of this year.

After determining that the expected goals had
been achieved, with the formation of the new
Government in Iraq, Japan concluded its humanitarian
and reconstruction support activities through the
deployment of its Self-Defence Force contingents as
part of the Multinational Force. Japan, however,
maintains its commitment and engagement to provide
the needed support in Iraq, mainly in the following
three areas.

The first area is airlift support activities through
Japan's air Self-Defence Force assets, for the benefit of
the United Nations and the Multinational Force. We are
pleased to report that the airlift services for the
transportation of United Nations personnel and cargo
began recently, and we hope that it will be useful in
supporting the expansion of UNAMI's presence and its
activities inside Iraq.

The second area is support for Iraqi
reconstruction. To date, various projects worth $1.5
billion in grant aid have been completed, mainly for
reconstruction of basic infrastructure and improvement
of security. Additional aid of up to $3.5 billion through
a soft loan window, largely for further improvement of
infrastructure and other economic and social projects,
is in the pipeline for steady implementation.

The third and final area involves engagement in
the Iraq Compact. We believe that the success of this
process requires the following three elements: first,
that the Iraqi Government should assume full
ownership of the process and clearly articulate its
national vision; secondly, major donors and regional
partners should be fully engaged in the Compact, so
that the broader international community can assist
Iraq effectively and in close partnership and
coordination; and, thirdly, a framework should be
established under the Compact that will set tangible
goals towards political and economic stability.

To that end, Japan will continue to actively and
continuously engage itself in the Compact process, in
cooperation with the United Nations and other parties.

Japan's policy on support and assistance to Iraq
was conveyed recently to Prime Minister Al-Maliki and
Foreign Minister Zebari by Foreign Minister Aso
during his visit to Baghdad last month.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Japan stands

ready to continue to work with the people and the

Government of Iraq and the rest of the international

community so that Iraq can overcome its present

difficulties and make strides towards becoming a
democratic and stable State.

