Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is deeply alarmed by
the further escalation of the Palestinian-Israeli
confrontation. The growing wave of terrorist acts and
retaliatory measures further destabilize the situation in
the Middle East.

The leaders of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must do all they can without delay to stop
the escalation of tensions and to prevent the situation
from spinning definitively out of control. No reasons
can justify the increased use of force that is claiming
new victims among the Palestinian civilian population.
At the same time, it is necessary to adopt strict
measures to prevent the criminal acts by extremists to
kill Israeli citizens.

We stress the need for a speedy start to the work
of the fact-finding committee to establish the facts
behind the tragedy and to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to that end. In the light of the
continued deterioration of the situation, it is also
essential to step up international assistance in the
implementation of earlier agreements in order to break
the chain reaction of violence. This will require
coordinated steps on the part of the sponsors of the
peace process and other interested parties.

Recognizing its responsibility for the fate of the
Middle East settlement, Russia continues to strive
energetically for a speedy settlement to the conflict,
which is wreaking terrible harm on Palestinians and
Israelis alike. These tasks are the subject of the
ongoing concern of the President of Russia, Vladimir
Putin, and Foreign Minister Ivanov, who are
maintaining close contacts with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and their colleagues in the
United States, the United Kingdom, France, Israel and
the Palestinian leadership.

The Security Council and the Secretary-General
must keep the situation in the West Bank and Gaza in
sharp focus, particularly in the context of protecting the
civilian population. They must seek truly to assist an
end to the violence and the return of the parties to the
negotiating table. At the same time, in seeking a rapid
normalization of the situation, we must not lose sight
of the need to resume the regional negotiating process.
It is essential for lessons to be learned from current
events and for effective measures to be adopted to
consolidate the very architecture of the peace process
in order to make it more stable and irreversible, given
the close interrelationships between all the components
of the Middle East knot.

The path to a comprehensive settlement lies
through the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Madrid
principles, the bases for achieving peace in the region.

