Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom thanks the Prosecutor for her twenty-second
report to the Security Council and for her briefing
today.

The United Kingdom shares the Prosecutor's
concern regarding the situation in Darfur and calls on all
sides to reach a political solution. In June, in resolution
2228 (2015), the Council was deeply concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation,
but as the Prosecutor's report notes, there are continued
reports of aerial bombardments, inter-tribal clashes,
widespread allegations of serious sexual violence
against women and gender-based crimes, forced
displacement and militant settlers. We are particularly
concerned by reports of attacks on civilians by the
Rapid Support Forces. Civilians are hearing the brunt
and we call on all parties to refrain from violence
against civilians and to end abuses and violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

The United Kingdom is also concerned by reports
of abductions and attacks on humanitarian and aid
workers and peacekeepers. Such attacks must cease and
the perpetrators be held to account. It is also essential
to ensure unfettered humanitarian access.

The United Kingdom regrets that the four persons
subject to arrest warrants not only remain at large in
the Sudan, but also continue to occupy high-ranking
positions in the Government of the Sudan. The United
Kingdom calls on the Government of the Sudan, which
bears primary responsibility for implementing the
warrants, to arrest and surrender those individuals to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), in accordance
with its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).

The United Kingdom is also disappointed that
President Al-Bashir continues to travel regularly across
international borders to States both in Africa and
beyond. We call on all States, whether or not they are
ICC States parties, to cooperate fully with the Court in
respect to President Al-Bashir and all Sudanese persons
against whom arrest warrants are in force. States
parties, of course, have a legal operation to cooperate
under the Rome Statute. In that respect, we note the
ongoing judicial proceedings in South Africa and the
Court regarding the events surrounding President
Al-Bashir's attendance at the African Union summit
in June and the Pre-Trial Chamber's request for South
Africa to submit its views for the purpose of the ICC
proceedings. But it is important that all States support
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).

The United Kingdom regrets the lack of response
from the Sudan on the execution of the arrest warrant
against Mr. Banda, and we note the subsequent
non-compliance decision, dated 19 November 2015,
which will be transmitted to the Council. The fact
that that is the eleventh finding of non-cooperation
communicated to the Council, and the fourth in respect
to the Sudan, is extremely concerning. We urge the
Council to take effective follow-up action in relation to
non-cooperation so as to ensure that the Court is able
to fulfil the mandate that we have given it to refer the
situation in Darfur.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Prosecutor's
affirmation that, despite those difficulties, her Office
has not abandoned its investigations and continues to
expend all efforts to obtain the necessary assistance
from States to execute the outstanding warrants and
investigate alleged crimes committed in Darfur. We
welcome the various investigative steps taken by the
lawyers and investigators assigned to the Darfur
cases and the monitoring of allegations of ongoing
crimes. While recognizing the Court's resource
constraints - which, in part, reflect the resource
constraints of States parties - the United Kingdom
urges the Court to continue its work in improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of judicial proceedings
in order to make the most of the resources available.
We fully support the efforts of the Prosecutor and her
Office to ensure that the perpetrators of those terrible
crimes are held to account and to end the climate of
impunity.

