Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): The
periodic consideration of the situation in Kosovo
illustrates the Security Council's commitment to
finding a solution to a question that remains a matter of
concern. Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno's description of
recent developments in the situation in the field
contained very useful information, for which we thank
him.

The Council's public meeting on 24 April 2002
(see S/PV.4518) enabled us to assess the progress made
and the challenges that must be overcome. As we said
earlier, the success of the peace process in Kosovo will
depend on bearing in mind the interests of all elements
and groups in the province as well as the objective of
ensuring regional stability. In that regard, we have
taken note of the comments made by the Government
to the effect that it intends to serve the interests of all
Kosovars.

My delegation feels that the appointment of Mr.
Nenad Radosavljevic to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, as adviser on
matters related to repatriation and the integration of
ethnic minorities, gives cause for hope that the refugee
question will be resolved. My delegation therefore
welcomes the outcome of the meeting held in Pristina
on 28 May 2002 between Mr. Steiner and Mr. Covie on
the questions of Mitrovica and the return of refugees.
We encourage pursuit of those contacts in order to
resolve pending problems.

Moreover, the Kosovo Assembly's challenge of
the border Agreement concluded in February by
Yugoslav authorities and the authorities of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has raised serious
concern on the part of the international community. My
delegation wishes to renew its support for the
statements made by the President of the Security
Council on 22 and 24 May 2002 and to invite parties to
promote dialogue. We take note of Mr. Steiner's
commitment to implement regulations pertaining to the
executive branch of the provisional institutions of self-
government in Kosovo. We hope that regulations
issued in that regard will be respected.

We welcome the assumption of office of the first
ministerial Cabinet in Kosovo, which also marks the
establishment of a real multi-ethnic Government in the
province. We hope that this institution will assume its
rightful responsibilities in order to build a democratic
society respectful of the law and of ethnic differences.

On another front, the organization of municipal
elections, to be held next October, merits attention. We
welcome the information just provided to us by
Mr. Guehenno regarding the determination of the
various ethnic groups to make these elections a
success. We encourage this process and we hope that
the newly elected officials will make a positive
contribution to resolving the various problems within
their purview.

I cannot conclude without renewing my
delegation's repeated appeals and highlighting the fact,
first, that the leaders of Kosovo must work more
constructively and cooperate fully with UNMIK and
KFOR to ensure respect for equality and the
establishment of a multi-ethnic Kosovo in a viable
social, economic, political and cultural environment.
Secondly, the establishment of a climate of security
depends on the establishment of a reconciliation
programme based on tolerance and mutual respect,
taking into account the interests of all Kosovars.
Thirdly, strengthened cooperation among the elected
officials of Kosovo, UNMIK and the Belgrade
authorities will also signal confidence in the pursuit of
activities that are under way.

