Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The illegal so-called international coalition
led by the United States, in another flagrant violation
of international law, international humanitarian law
and human rights instruments, has committed yet
another crime against innocent Syrian civilians. On
13 and 14 October, the coalition's warplanes targeted
residential areas in the Syrian city of Hajin, in Deir
ez-Zor governorate, using internationally banned
white phosphorus bombs and killing a number of
civilian martyrs and injuring others, including women
and children.

It is now clear to all that this coalition has fought
everything but terrorism. Its practices make it clear that
its goals are in harmony with those of terrorist groups.
It has sown chaos, death and destruction. The coalition
has defied State authority and helped the Da'esh terrorist
organization to move its troops to the area east of the
Euphrates in order to carry out its acts of aggression
in Syria. If it is to preserve its credibility, the Security
Council must launch an immediate investigation into
these crimes so as to prevent their recurrence, end
the illegal presence of United States and other foreign
forces in Syria and stop them carrying out their plans to
undermine Syria's sovereignty and unity.

Military and political groups have been established
without the participation of the Syrian Government.
They are suspect because they do not serve the
interests of the Syrian people. On the contrary, they
defy the Syrian State and support terrorism under
political pretexts. The creation of the Brussels group
and the small group, or any other entity in which the
Syrian Government does not participate, can only be
counterproductive and will not help to achieve progress
on the political track, which is supposed to be Syrian-
led.

Syria is not under anyone's authority. There will
not be another Karzai in Damascus. When a meeting
was held in Marrakech on 12 December 2012 for the
so-called Group of Friends of the Syrian People, at
the initiative of France, at the time the Group included
137 members. Today it has only 12. It failed because it
was never a friend of the Syrian people. It is as simple
as that. That is why the Syrian Government does not
recognize any road map that it is not a party to and that
it does not approve. The United Nations must not be
part of any political group that stands against Syria and
the Syrian Government, because those groups are being
created outside the authority of the Security Council by
political Powers that support terrorism in Syria and in
the region.

The countries that have supported the terrorist war
against Syria for the past seven years have convened
Council meetings for the purpose of grandstanding, and
have exploited the United Nations in an unprecedented
manner. There have been hundreds of meetings on
Syria, formal and informal, Arria Formula and side
events - all kinds of meetings. Those meetings have
been held every time the Syrian army has been able
to defeat the armed terrorist groups, in order to bring
political pressure to bear on the Syrian Government
and hinder its progress.

Today we are seeing a new chapter in this policy
of blackmail. Following the achievements and progress
in Astana, and after the Syrian Government's positive
engagement with the outcomes of the Sochi Congress,
those same countries sought to create an illegal group,
known as the small group, outside the authority of
the Security Council, with the aim of blocking any
progress in Astana or Sochi, turning back the clock
and hindering the political process. The Sochi process
is the only one that has borne fruit, and the reason is
simple: the Syrian Government was part of the process,
and that is why it succeeded. Those countries have tried
to portray the group as angelically innocent by giving
the impression that all of its members are committed
to reaching a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Syria.

I wonder how that group, whose members include
countries that have financed and supported armed
terrorist groups in Syria, can claim to protect Syrians. I
will not go into detail about the actions of every State.
The Council is well aware of them. I also wonder how
this entity, which includes members that have financed,
trained and supported terrorists in Syria and committed
multiple acts of aggression against it, can claim to
be protecting Syrian lives. How can a group whose
members include countries that supply terrorist groups
with chemical weapons claim to be protecting Syrians?
When I spoke about this issue yesterday in a statement
before the First Committee (see A/C.l/73/PV.8), I
named the country that provided those terrorist groups
with chemical weapons. I am referring to Turkey. How
can this group, whose members include countries that
have issuedjihadi fatwas in support of terrorism, claim
that it is protecting Syrians? Is the Council aware of the
fact that the Al-Nusra Front has refused to implement
the Russian-Turkish agreement, which ended three days
ago in Idlib? It refused to do that.

Is the Council aware that the leaders of the Al-Nusra
Front - and I am not trying to insult Egypt; I respect
its Permanent Representative - are mostly Egyptians
and Turks, sent by Morsi to Syria to carry out their
jihad in Syria?

The religious leaders of the Al-Nusra Front are now
at odds with its political leaders. Its religious leaders do
not want to implement the Russian-Turkish agreement
because they want the bloodshed to continue.

How can a group that has countries among its
members that occupy parts of our territory claim
that they are going to protect Syrian lives? There are
American, British, French and Turkish forces on Syrian
territory. How can the small group, which calls itself
an international coalition, assist us while it occupies
parts of our land? How can a group whose members
have Syrian blood on their hands claim to protect
Syrian lives?

Instead of preaching to the Council, we ask it for
answers. We need clear answers and a specific position
taken by the Security Council against the presence of
illegal foreign forces on our land. We need it to take a
position against terrorism and against sponsoring and
financing terrorism. We need a position that respects
the Syrian Government, instead of one that creates
vacuum by pushing for a failed State, thereby helping
to spread terrorism across the region.

I find it necessary to remind some members of
Chapter 1, Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which states that "Nothing contained in
the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations
to intervene in matters which are essentially within
the domestic jurisdiction of any State...". Perhaps this
Article belongs to the charter of the planet Mars rather
than the United Nations, because some members seem
to have forgotten about it.

The Syrian Government has emphasized its
readiness to positively respond to all initiatives that
would help the Syrians end the crisis, as long as they
respect national principles, including the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and unity
of Syria and its people; give the Syrian people the
exclusive right to determine the future of their country
without any foreign interference; and reject the
presence of terrorism on Syrian territories. All of these
beautiful words appear in Council resolutions on Syria.
I did not make them up. That is what Security Council
resolutions state. They have also been mentioned in
statements made today in this Chamber.

The Syrian Government engaged positively and
with openness in the Geneva discussions, the Astana
process and in the Syrian National Dialogue Congress,
held in Sochi. However, the other parties stalled. They
rejected dialogue, invested in terrorism and foreign
interference and sought to undermine Syrian sovereignty
and resilience. Today, we listened to the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands as he outlined a
number of conditions. He said that it is too early to
talk about reconstruction, too early for the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees, too early to
lift the unilateral and coercive economic measures, too
early to address the humanitarian situation in certain
parts of Syria and therefore too early to end terrorism.
Despite everything, the Syrian Government continues
to positively engage in implementing the outcomes of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi on
the formation of a constitutional committee to review
the current Constitution. We do not want a constitutional
vacuum because Syria is not a failed State.
The Syrian Government presented a practical and
comprehensive vision on the composition, prerogatives
and working methods of the committee and submitted to
the Special Envoy a list of representatives supported by
the Syrian State. We underscore in that regard that the
mandate of the Committee is limited to reviewing the
articles of the current Constitution through a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned process. We stress that the Special
Envoy must respect his mandate as a facilitator of the
committee. No preconditions should be imposed on
it nor should its recommendations be prejudged. The
Committee must be independent since the Constitution
and all relevant matters are Syrian issues to be decided
upon by Syrians themselves. We will therefore not
accept any proposal that interferes in the internal
affairs of Syria or that leads to that end. We stand ready
to work actively with friendly countries to launch the
committee along the parameters I have just mentioned.

My country welcomed the agreement reached in
Sochi on 17 September with regard to the city of Idlib
because we are committed to stopping the bloodshed.
The agreement came as a result ofintensive consultations
between Syria and Russia and with full coordination
between the two countries. We hope that it will bear
fruit and that the Turkish regime will uphold its side of
the deal. We stress that the agreement is time-bound and
includes clear deadlines. It complements all previous
agreements on the de-escalation zones that resulted
from the Astana process. Just like any region in Syria,
the city of Idlib will return to the fold of Syrian State
sovereignty. In order to achieve sustainable and durable
peace in Syria, all illegal foreign forces, including
Turkish, American, British, French and Israeli forces,
must leave the Syrian territories. We consider all of
them to be occupying forces. Their presence on Syrian
land runs counter to the Charter, international law and
relevant Council resolutions on Syria.

The Syrian Government has never interfered
in the internal affairs of any Member State. It has
always sought to respect and uphold the principles of
the Charter and of international law. On behalf of my
country, I stress today that we will block any attempts of
provocation and escalation that undermine our relations
with the Arab region and the world. As a result, we
have sought to re-open the Nasib border crossing with
Jordan. We will also open other border crossings, with
Iraq, very soon.

The progress made by Syria and its allies in the
war against terrorism has led to new developments in
Syria and the region, which must be taken into account
in any discussion on my country. It is time for those
parties and Powers that support terrorism to review
and reconsider their positions and join an international
effort to stop supporting this heinous terrorist war.
Supporting terrorism is a threat to international peace
and security in the long and short run. It is time for all
those detached from reality to wake up, let go of their
fantasies and come to their senses. They must realize
that they will not achieve politically what they failed to
achieve through terrorism.

In conclusion, my country continues to seek a
political solution that would allow Syrians themselves
to make decisions about their future without foreign
interference, in a manner that ensures Syria's
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Based on our
respect for the role of the United Nations in facilitating
Syrian dialogue, my country has invited the Special
Envoy to Syria in the coming days to hold discussions
on issues related to his mandate.

