Ms. Lee (Singapore): We would first like to
express our appreciation to the Chinese presidency of
the Council last month, and we join others in
welcoming your presence, Sir, as you preside over our
debate today. We appreciate the significant and
constructive role Colombia has played in the small
arms debate, most recently through the sterling work of
Ambassador Camilo Reyes during last month's
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Thanks to his able
leadership and that of Ambassador Carlos dos Santos
of Mozambique, who chaired the Preparatory
Committee process, we have today a watershed
Programme of Action to guide our national, regional
and global efforts to tackle the problem of illicit small
arms. Although some countries have expressed
disappointment that the Programme of Action does not
go far enough, we believe that it is nevertheless the
beginning of a process and a good foundation to build
upon.

Today's debate is timely in focusing on the
Council's role regarding the small arms issue. In this
regard, we thank the Colombian delegation for its very
comprehensive background paper in document
S/2001/732. As previous speakers have also pointed
out, the problem of illicit small arms is multifaceted
and overlays many other issues, including conflict
prevention, peace-building, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, sanctions
enforcement and sustainable development, just to name
a few. That is why the Security Council needs to act in
tandem with the General Assembly to address the small
arms problem on all these fronts.
In order to complement national and regional
efforts, we believe that the Security Council should
place special emphasis on countries that are most
affected by the problem of illicit small arms and light
weapons - in other words, those conflict and post-
conflict situations where such weapons continue to
wreak havoc. With that in mind, we would like to
briefly highlight two key areas where we think the
Security Council can play a vital role.

First, we must find better ways of implementing
arms embargoes mandated by the Security Council. In
this regard, we welcome the recent establishment of a
monitoring and assistance mechanism for the sanctions
on the Taliban in Afghanistan. This is a step in the
right direction. As the Singapore delegation proposed
during last month's Conference, a related initiative that
could improve monitoring would be the establishment
of an international database of authorized arms traders
as well as a blacklist of traders convicted of illicit arms
trafficking. As stated in paragraph 28 of the Secretary-
General's 1998 report on dealing with the proliferation
of arms in Africa,

"The goal of public identification of international
arms merchants and their activities has proved
elusive, but perhaps no other single initiative
would do more to help combat the flow of illicit
arms to Africa". (S/1998/318, para. 28)

It is time to set up such an international database
to properly identify legal traders and, perhaps more
importantly, to make known the convicted illicit arms
traders. This database will go a long way in addressing
the problem of illicit arms proliferation, not just in
Africa but throughout the world.

The second area I wish to highlight is the
reference in the Programme of Action for the inclusion,
where applicable, of provisions for DDR in the
mandates and budgets of peacekeeping operations. My
delegation welcomes this emphasis on DDR, as it will
lead to a more holistic and effective approach. Put
bluntly, stopping the supply of illicit small arms will be
ineffective if we do not also mop up the excess arms
still in circulation.

No one will dispute that disarmament in a post-
conflict situation is inherently a dangerous and difficult
affair. In many countries engaged in, or emerging from,
armed conflict, the possession of a weapon is closely
linked to power, identity and status. It is therefore not
surprising that many ex-combatants and dispossessed
young men in post-conflict situations are reluctant to
give up their arms. But the Council must address this
as a priority issue, as the persistence of such arms
impedes post-conflict peace-building and
redevelopment.

In addition, the easy availability of small arms
also threatens the security of United Nations personnel
and peacekeepers. According to the 2001 Small Arms
Survey, 456 international peacekeepers and United
Nations staff were killed by small arms between
January 1992 and March 1997. Perhaps some of these
456 lives could have been saved had there been more
effective DDR.

For these reasons, we feel that it is vitally
important to factor the DDR dimension into our
peacekeeping considerations, to try to put a stop to the
circulation of illicit small arms in affected States.

In conclusion, we think that the Security Council
has a duty to work in partnership with the international
community, including, where appropriate, civil society,
to deal with the intractable problem of illicit small
arms. By focusing on key priorities, we can make
significant headway in resolving this problem.

