Ms. Palacio Vallelersundi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Like hundreds of millions of citizens the
world over, I have been following the words of the
inspectors, of Mr. Blix and of Mr. ElBaradei with great
care and attention and with an eagerness to hear just
one sentence - an affirmation of active, immediate
and complete cooperation by Saddam Hussain's
regime. The inspectors have not been able to make that
affirmation.

Indeed, what resounds as far as I am concerned is
the last sentence in Mr. Blix's statement today:

"Today, three months after the adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002), the period of
disarmament could still be short, if immediate,
active and unconditional cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA were to be
forthcoming." (supra)

That has not been forthcoming. That is what has been
observed.

It is true that there have been some advances, to
which I will refer. But, above all, what we see is a long
list of areas of non-compliance and unresolved issues
that were mentioned in Mr. Blix's 27 January report
and that have not received any clear response. Let us
recall the questions of the VX precursor, the 6,500
chemical bombs and the 8,500 litres of anthrax. We
have been told that, as regards the missiles, the
inspectors have unanimously concluded that the Al
Samoud 2 missile is longer in range than is permitted
under resolution 687 (1991) and is therefore a
proscribed system. We are told that the clarifications
provided on the Al Fatah system are not sufficient. We
are told that the casting chambers could be used to
produce motors for long-range missiles. We are also
told that illegally imported machinery is intended for
the Al Samoud 2 system and is thus also proscribed.

I have taken due note of the fact that in the field
of chemical and biological weapons, the documents
submitted on VX and anthrax do not provide new
evidence and do not resolve the pending issues. In
addition, a list of persons who have participated in the
destruction of chemical weapons has been provided,
but there has been no list of persons involved in the
destruction of biological material. As far as interviews
are concerned, Dr. Blix told us that a number of
persons have refused to be interviewed privately, and
that such private interviews are essential to get
information. The question is, "Why?"

In short, all the questions remain - above all the
most important question, namely, is cooperation
voluntary or are these superficial concessions or claims
of such concessions, because time is pressing and
because a further review is about to be conducted in the
Security Council? Are the concessions a result of the
inspections themselves? Or are they the result of
international pressure, including the credible threat of
the use of force?

That being said, I would like to put forward a few
thoughts on some proposals that have recently been
circulated to change the inspection system. The
question relates to the political will of Saddam
Hussain's regime, and the answer can only be yes. For
that purpose, we do not need more inspections or an
increase in the means available to the inspectors. It is
not a question of a change in composition or in
structure, because the message that would easily be
seen is that the Security Council has changed the terms
of reference. The message would be: the more non-
compliance there is from Saddam Hussain, the more
radical changes the international community needs to
make. That is not the spirit or the goal of resolution
1441 (2002), which, as has been recalled here, was
unanimously adopted by the Security Council. We
would be sending a message of weakness on the part of
the Council. We would send the message that we are
prepared to rework the terms of reference of resolution
1441 (2002), and the Council would thus lose
credibility.

On behalf of my Government, I wish first of all
sincerely to express our deepest gratitude for the work
of the inspectors. I wish once again to express my
Government's support for their work. Spain has
continued to work for peace and security. It is in this
way that the concerns that I have voiced should be
understood.

Spain is resolutely in favour of a solution to this
crisis being found within the United Nations and within
the Security Council. It is for this that we have been
working and are continuing to work. But Spain is
aware that peace and security are ensured through
respect for and compliance with Security Council
resolutions and that the time will come, if that change
in political attitude - that change of will to cooperate
on the part of Saddam Hussain's regime - does not
take place, when the Council will be obliged to assume
its responsibilities in the interest of the peace and
security of the world.

