Mr. Pham (Vietnam): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for organizing today's important
debate and for your leadership as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on this
subject (S/2012/261). I am also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Executive Director of
UNICEF for their briefings.

Viet Nam welcomes the significant progress
achieved over the past year on the signing of action
plans to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and to secure their release. We are encouraged by
the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 1998
(2011), and the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 66/139 on strengthening collaboration on
child protection within the United Nations system,
which all 10 members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations co-sponsored. At the same time, my
delegation remains concerned that, with armed conflicts
escalating in many parts of the world, children continue
to fall Victim to killing, maiming and all other sorts
of violence and, most currently, the appalling trend of
using boys and girls, some as young as eight years old,
as suicide bombers and "victim" bombers. The work
of the United Nations on children in general, and on
children and armed conflict in particular, is therefore
among its most important activities.

In that context, Viet Nam attaches great importance
to the protection of children affected by armed conflict,
and strongly condemns all violations of international
law committed against children in conflict situations.
Viet Nam is pleased that the issue of children and
armed conflict continues to receive the attention it
deserves on the agendas of the United Nations and the
Security Council. Viet Nam supports the continued
efforts of relevant United Nations bodies to protect
children affected by armed conflict in accordance with
their respective mandates. Back in 2008, during our
tenure in the Council, Viet Nam organized an open
debate on the issue of children and armed conflict with
a View to strengthening the commitment and efforts
of the Security Council, the United Nations and the
international community at large towards achieving a
long-term and sustained solution to the issue of children
affected by armed conflict.

In fulfilling those aims, Viet Nam shares the
View that there is a need for a preventive strategy that
addresses the root causes ofarmed conflict by promoting
sustainable development, poverty eradication, national
reconciliation, good governance, democracy, the rule
of law and respect for and protection of human rights,
and the reintegration and rehabilitation of children
associated with armed forces and armed groups. The
role of UNICEF, all relevant United Nations agencies
and the other actors of the United Nations system is
therefore indispensable. In order to ensure the successful
implementation of such a strategy, coordination among
those agencies and actors should be enhanced to
maximize scarce resources, avoid duplication of works
and strategically address issues of common concern.

It is also important that we not forget that States
bear the primary responsibility for protecting their
civilians, including children, in armed conflict. The
United Nations should encourage and help States to
exercise that responsibility. Therefore, the monitoring
and reporting mechanism established by resolution
1612 (2005) should operate with the participation of
and in cooperation with national Governments, and all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities within
the framework of the mechanism must be designed
to support and supplement the capacity of national

Governments for the protection and rehabilitation of
children.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our continued
commitment to working with Council members and
the international community to defend and promote the
best interests of children affected by armed conflict.

