Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): With
this unanimous vote today, the Council is again
underlining the complete faith it puts in the United
Nations Special Commission. The Special Commission
was created by the Council and we have a responsibility
to make sure it has all the resources it needs to meet its
goal, which is essential to the future peace and security of
the region.

I want to salute the hard work of the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in formulating this mechanism. They brought
together experts from a number of countries, including the
permanent members of the Council, and have spared no
effort in explaining to those experts all the considerations
that went into the mechanism. They have patiently
answered and taken account of all the questions and
concerns raised by States throughout that two-year-long
process. Indeed, all those States that participated in the
Special Commission's and the IAEA's long consultation
process ought to consider themselves co-drafters of the
mechanism.

We know that the Special Commission and the
IAEA will continue this consultative process and that they
will be diligent in providing States with all the
information necessary to implement the new reporting
requirement. We put our complete trust in those two
bodies in deciding when States can proceed with the
effective implementation of the mechanism.

The mechanism was mandated by the Security
Council in resolution 715 (1991) to be an integral part of
the ongoing monitoring regime established by that
resolution. It will immediately help the Special
Commission in monitoring the low volume of current
imports to Iraq, which include some dual-use items. In the
longer run, it will be essential if the Council is one day
to be convinced of something we still very much doubt,
namely, Iraq's commitment not to develop weapons of
mass destruction again. In that sense, this very technical
step is a prerequisite for the lifting of sanctions, but the
only step that will truly bring us closer to the lifting of
sanctions will be a new Iraqi attitude of cooperation -

 

with the IAEA, the Special Commission and the Council -
in meeting all Iraq's obligations.

