Mr. Burian: As the Chairman of the 1540
Committee, I have the honour to brief the Security
Council on the most recent activities undertaken by the
Committee. I will also outline its future efforts to
promote compliance by all States with resolution 1540
(2004) through the achievement of the implementation
of its requirements.

First of all, let me inform the Council about the
current status of reporting on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). As of
20 September 2006, 132 Member States and one
organization had submitted their first national reports
to the Committee. Fifty-nine States have yet to submit
their first report - Montenegro, which recently joined
the United Nations as an independent State, submitted
its first report together with Serbia. I would like to use
this opportunity to call on all States that have not yet
done so to send the Committee their first reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Facilitation of reporting and conducting outreach
activities to promote States' implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) will remain
among the top priorities of the work of the Committee.
With respect to reporting, the Committee intends to
approach again all Member States that have yet to
submit a first report, through a letter with the matrix
and relevant legislative database attached, in order to
facilitate the preparation of their first national reports.

In response to the request by the Committee
following its examination of first national reports, 84
States have so far provided additional information. As I
have already mentioned, the conduct of outreach
activities to promote the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is one of the top priorities in the work of
the Committee. In this respect, the Committee, with the
support of Member States and the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, continued throughout the
reporting period its outreach activities to promote
States' implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006).

The first seminar on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the Asia-Pacific region was
held on 12 and 13 July 2006 in Beijing, China. The
seminar was attended by 70 participants from 23
countries of the region, other States, members of the
Security Council and international organizations such
as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and others.

The Chairman of the Committee and two
Committee experts attended the seminar and made
presentations on the following topics: the status of
regional implementation of resolution 1540 (2004);
prohibitions in resolution 1540 (2004) vis-a-vis
international treaties and conventions; implementation
measures to account for, secure and physically protect
nuclear, chemical and biological materials and their
means of delivery; implementation and national
experience related to export controls; and how to use
the matrix as a planning tool for providing and
receiving assistance.

Within the outreach activities programme the
Chairman of the Committee addressed the eighteenth
United Nations Conference on Disarmament Issues,
held in Yokohama, Japan, from 21 to 23 August 2006.
In my presentation, I provided a broad overview of the
Committee's activities and reviewed the current status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

This autumn, the Committee will organize or
participate in several important outreach events. Two
regional seminars on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), in Africa and in the Latin American and
Caribbean region, will be organized in November this
year in Ghana and Peru, respectively.

The workshop in Accra, Ghana, will be the first
seminar on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in Africa. It will be held on 9 and 10 November
2006 and is co-sponsored by the European Union with
the support of the Department for Disarmament
Affairs.

The second seminar, on implementing resolution
1540 (2004) in the Latin American and Caribbean
region will be held in Lima, Peru, on 27 and
28 November 2006, again co-sponsored by the
European Union with the support of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and its Regional Centre in Lima.
This seminar will be a follow-up to the regional
seminar held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in September
2005 , and discussions will focus on major developments,
challenges and lessons learned since then.

In addition, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) will hold a workshop
in Vienna on 8 November 2006 on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The primary focus of the

workshop will be on furthering the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by identifying how OSCE
members can develop their own national
implementation plans.

The Committee will continue its practice of
informing intergovernmental organizations outside the
United Nations about its work, at relevant meetings
and conferences. The Committee will make full use of
these opportunities to address, in particular, issues of
implementation and reporting. I also wish to express
his gratitude to Member States, the OPCW and the
IAEA for their support in the Committee's outreach
activities.

Now, let me briefly offer some information about
other activities of the Committee. First of all, let me
speak about the database. As part of its efforts to
promote information-sharing concerning States'
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee developed a database to provide additional
information on laws, regulations and other measures
related to States' implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to facilitate the exchange of information on
the implementation efforts of States. The Committee is
continuously updating this legislative database. The
database is available on the Committee's official
website. It contains links to public sources of relevant
information about legislative and other regulatory
measures of States that have submitted reports
regarding the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The Committee will encourage States to make
appropriate use of the background information
provided through that database, as well as of legislative
advice provided by international organizations, when
enacting national implementation laws and measures.

I turn next to cooperation with other relevant
Security Council committees and relevant international
organizations. The 1540 Committee and its experts
continue to maintain close cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1267
Committee. As part of those efforts, the groups of
experts of the three Committees have prepared and
submitted to their respective Chairmen a joint paper on
a common strategy dealing with non-reporting and
late-reporting States based on the useful experience
gained from the New Zealand assistance programme.
The Committee will continue to interact and cooperate
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to facilitate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

Thirdly, the Committee will continue to act as a
clearing house on assistance, including by collecting
up-to-date information on this issue and by informally
contacting States to inquire whether they might be
interested in receiving information on offers and
requests for assistance. In its future work the
Committee, through its experts, will also continue to
identify national practices in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) that might be used in providing further
general and specific guidance, upon request, to States
seeking legislative assistance in implementing the
resolution. The Committee will invite both States
making offers of assistance and States requesting
assistance to take a proactive approach on a bilateral
basis, including making use of offers by international
organizations, in order to contribute to capacity-
building.

Last but not least, the Committee is currently
considering a draft programme of work, which will
cover all aspects of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006). It will also reflect the recommendations
contained in the report of the Committee to the
Security Council (S/2006/257) of 25 April 2006.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Committee, I look
forward to the cooperation of all States as the
Committee goes forward with its future work. I would
like to thank all members of the Committee, as well as
the Secretariat and the experts, for their active
contribution to the work of the Committee and their
valuable support.

