Mr. Axworthy (Canada) (interpretation from French):
The escalation of violence this week in Jerusalem, the West
Bank and Gaza has deeply shaken Canadians. We are very
much alarmed by the number of Palestinians and Israelis
who have lost their lives in recent days, and we would like
to extend our condolences to the families of those who have
been killed or wounded.

We are extremely concerned also about the future of
the peace process in the Middle East. A lasting peace can
be based only on confidence.

(spoke in English)

The tragic events of this week and the tensions of the
past months have served to shatter the trust that has been so
painstakingly built up over many years, a trust vital to the
success of the peace process. Restoring that trust must be
the very first priority. In the meantime, a terrible price has
been paid in human suffering, and we must all acknowledge
that.

We know that nothing is to be gained from
apportioning blame. We hope that out of the present
suffering, Israelis and Palestinians alike will agree that
violence is not the answer. We issue an urgent appeal for
leaders throughout the region to do all in their power to
restore calm and bring the violence to an immediate end.
We all need to support these leaders, and accept that there
is only one road, and that is the road of peace. We call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to return to the negotiating
table in the coming days and we very much hope that
Prime Minister Netanyahu and Chairman Arafat will soon
meet.

Both parties can demonstrate their commitment to
peace by honouring and fully implementing the existing
agreements on Palestinian autonomy. We would like to see
the start of serious negotiations between the Syrian and
Lebanese Governments, and the Israeli Government.

What is critical now is avoiding any further
measures that will provoke further violence and suffering.
We urge the Government of Israel to reverse its decision
to open a new entrance to the Hasmonean tunnel, and we,
too, deeply regret the recent demolition of the Palestinian
community centre. The Israeli Government must move
forward with speedy and substantive steps to implement
the Oslo agreements, as it has said it intends to do. We
urge the Israeli Government to demonstrate that
commitment by avoiding any further initiatives to change
the status quo on matters subject to permanent-status
negotiations. Expanding existing Israeli settlements, or ill-
considered actions in Jerusalem or elsewhere, are not
appropriate steps in this climate. We urge the Palestinian
Authority and the Government of Israel to exercise
maximum calm and restraint in the prevention of
violence.

It is vital that confidence be restored and that Israelis
and Palestinians alike see that there is a real commitment
to the serious and early implementation of those
agreements. Unilateral actions cannot resolve these very
sensitive questions; only negotiations can. Our goal is a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
based on the principles laid out in United Nations
Security Council resolutions over a generation - notably
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

It is also true that the international community has
a responsibility to the peace process in the Middle East.
We must ask ourselves today if we are prepared to
continue the struggle for peace and if we are doing all
that every member here can possibly do. It is our duty to
speak out in the cause of peace and to consider, as
members of the international community, any initiatives
that would aid the parties to build confidence, such as a
renewal of the Madrid process.

Canada's involvement in the efforts to secure peace
in the Middle East dates back almost 50 years. My
predecessor, the late Lester B. Pearson, received a Nobel
Peace Prize for his efforts during the Suez crisis in 1956.
Since that time, Canada has contributed to every United
Nations peace-keeping operation in the Middle East.

Canadians do not want to see the accomplishments
of the last several years destroyed. Our active
involvement in the peace process has helped, along with
that of many others, to build peace. We have accepted the
challenge of chairing the refugee Working Group. We
have and will continue to support the economic
development of the region, including direct aid to the

 

Palestinians. We urge all parties to continue preparations
for the third North Africa and Middle East economic
summit in Cairo in November, building on the successes of
those held in Casablanca and Amman.

The Madrid Conference in 1991 heralded a new era in
the Middle East. Since then, we have seen leaders of
exceptional courage step forward and accept the challenge
of building peace in the Middle East. Those foundations of
peace have been painstakingly built, often with great
sacrifice. Let us ensure they are preserved and the
deliberations of this Council today are a very important
start for that rebuilding to take place.

