At the outset, let me express my sincere gratitude to the Estonian presidency for convening today's open high-level debate via video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive and insightful speeches. My country aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union. I would also like to add a few remarks in my national capacity. Armed conflicts continue to have a deleterious impact on the civilian population worldwide. That troubling trend is thoroughly reflected in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/366). While we welcome the report and embrace its recommendations, we remain disturbed by the hardships that have been systematically borne by civilians during armed conflicts, including killing and maiming, sexual violence, denial of humanitarian access, and forced displacement. It is particularly worrisome that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further compounded existing challenges in the protection of civilians. With the whole world entangled in an unprecedented health crisis, instead of caring for war- affected communities, one of the permanent members of the Council has seized new opportunities to advance its strategic interests in conflict situations, thereby inflicting further suffering on ordinary citizens. The blueprint for reducing civilian suffering, however, rests on the simple notion of respecting international humanitarian and human rights law and ensuring accountability for grave violations in that regard. Therefore, it is up to us, the United Nations, to break the vicious cycle of disregarding international law, which claims thousands of civilian lives, or to continue in the same vein. In that connection, Georgia spares no effort to ensure respect for international humanitarian and human rights law at the national and international levels. That is why the four 1949 Geneva Conventions are part of Georgian legislation. Georgia's Inter-Agency Commission of International Humanitarian Law, a standing governmental body, leads efforts and coordinates the work of relevant entities aimed at ensuring respect for international humanitarian law. One of the key areas of the Inter-Agency Commission is the promotion of international humanitarian law through different types of outreach and educational activities, including in cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In close cooperation with the ICRC, the Georgian military personnel's educational training programmes incorporate the key aspects of strengthening the protection of civilians during armed conflict. Furthermore, we are particularly thankful to the ICRC for providing assistance to Georgia in locating the whereabouts of missing persons, as well as in identifying and handing over their human remains to their families. When it comes to the question of accountability, Georgia is committed to fully cooperating with the International Criminal Court on investigation into crimes committed during Russia's full-scale military aggression in 2008, which represents the Court's first case regarding Europe's legal geography. However, the occupying Power's lack of cooperation and refusal to allow access to the occupied regions promotes impunity. Georgia's commitment to strengthening the universal application of international humanitarian law also includes an endorsement of global initiatives, such as the Safe Schools Declaration, which is a key instrument for taking concrete action to achieve safe schools for all; the French-led political declaration on the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in armed conflict; and, most recently, Bringing international humanitarian law home: A road map for better national implementation of international humanitarian law, adopted at the thirty- third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent. Yet in spite of the Government of Georgia's efforts to strengthen the protection- of-civilians framework globally as well as nationally, we are continuously prevented from extending protection to the population residing in the Russian-occupied regions of Georgia - Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. The protracted occupation of these two regions by the Russian Federation leaves ethnic Georgians continually deprived of such basic human rights as the freedom of movement, freedom to own property, the right to health and the right to education in their native language. To make matters worse, ethnically based human rights violations, such as killings, abductions, torture and inhumane treatment, have become an everyday reality for thousands of ethnic Georgians living in the Russian-occupied regions, as well as in areas adjacent to the occupation line. Moreover, even throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Russian occupation forces have, against the norms and principles of international law and contrary to the call of the Secretary General for an immediate global ceasefire in the world's conflict zones, been continuing to install barbed-wire fences and so-called border signs, while digging so-called anti-fire trenches along the Russian occupation line in the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. The Russian occupation forces have been continuing the closure of the so-called crossing points, which has blocked and impeded humanitarian access to the conflict-affected people living in the Russian-occupied regions of Georgia, thereby further aggravating the humanitarian and human rights situation on the ground. Only last week, the so-called process of borderization was simultaneously taking place in as many as 13 villages in the vicinity of the Russia-occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/ South Ossetia. It is alarming that, owing to the irresponsible and inhumane closing of the so-called crossing points along the Russian occupation line, thereby preventing humanitarian access to the Russia-occupied regions of Georgia, the dire humanitarian situation on the ground has been worsened and the death toll of innocent people living in the conflict-affected areas of the country continues to rise. Just a few days ago, on 20 May, yet another ethnic Georgian resident of the Russian-occupied region of Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, Mr. Jumber Miladze, died owing to the Russian occupation regime's disallowance of his medical evacuation until the most critical moment, bringing to 14 the death toll of ethnic Georgians since the closure of the occupation line in September last year. The severe security, human rights and humanitarian situation on the ground is particularly alarming, given that the Russian Federation allows no international monitoring mechanisms entry into the two occupied regions of Georgia. Against this background, it is imperative that the Russian Federation, as the occupying Power that exercises effective control over the two occupied regions of Georgia - Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia - end the humanitarian crisis by allowing immediate and unconditional access of health and humanitarian services to these Russian-occupied territories, which as a result of the spread of COVID-19 are in extraordinary need of assistance. Important first steps towards meeting the basic protection needs of civilians living in the Russian-occupied regions of Georgia would include urging the Russian Federation to immediately cease its provocations against Georgia and respect its international obligations, first and foremost, by starting the implementation of the EU-mediated 12 August 2008 Ceasefire Agreement and withdrawing its occupation forces from Georgia's territory. This only can be achieved with the joint supportive efforts of the international community. Unfortunately, as has already been mentioned, cases of dire humanitarian crisis are happening in many parts of the world today, not just in Georgia, and civilians are being affected on a daily basis by armed conflict, exposed to conditions in which grave human rights violations are being committed and living in constant fear of aggression and the resumption of hostilities. As has been stated numerous times, the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic makes the terrible plight of conflict- affected civilians even worse. We all know that the world will not be able to avoid humanitarian emergencies in future if we cannot tackle the basic humanitarian needs of conflict-affected areas in the world today. Therefore, and in conclusion, I would like to reiterate my call on the international community to join together to urge all parties that are involved in armed conflicts or are exercising effective control in conflict areas to ensure complete, immediate and unconditional removal of any impediments to humanitarian workers' access and delivery of assistance to civilians living in conflict-affected areas. For its part, my country once again welcomes the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and states that it stands ready to contribute to efforts aimed at mobilizing international community support for strengthening the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts.
