Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the briefings delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. J an Kubis,
and by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin.

I begin my statement by underscoring the important
role that the United Nations has played in the vote
counting after accusations of electoral fraud in the
second round of presidential elections in Afghanistan
on 14 June. Further, we join the Secretary-General
in emphasizing the bravery and determination of the
millions of men and women who participated in the
two rounds of elections, either as voters, candidates,
campaign workers or observers.

The efforts of the Afghan people to bring about
a peaceful, transparent and democratic transition in
leadership have been exemplary. However, as indicated
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
all of those efforts could end up meaning nothing if a
Government of national unity is not formed as quickly as
possible. For that reason, the international community
continues to be called upon to play a crucial support
and facilitation role in creating contexts for dialogue
among all Afghans. It is important to promote dialogue,
inclusiveness and consensus among Afghans; it is an
essential factor when it comes to building a country
that is able to stand on its own with solid democratic
institutions and where the rule of law is in force.

With respect to the political process, Chile supports
the process of national reconciliation, which is targeted
at and led by Afghans with the aim of bringing peace
and stability to the country and, naturally, in the region
as a whole. We express our firm support for the active
role of the High Peace Council in promoting efforts to
achieve national reconciliation. Equally important is for

the new Government to respect its public commitments
and to conclude a political agreement on a Government
of national unity. We also hope that the international
community will support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan and work with them to create
an environment that is conducive to the reconciliation
process.
A modern, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan
depends to a large extent on the success of the process
of reconciliation in the framework of a global strategy
for the protection and promotion of human rights, as
well as access for all Afghans to education, health
services and work. It is therefore a priority to ensure
that progress made by Afghanistan in human rights
since 2001 be accelerated and consolidated.

It is the irrefutable responsibility of the Afghan
Government to ensure the full implementation of the
law on the elimination of violence against women
so that the perpetrators of such violence are held
accountable for their acts. Equally important is for the
international community to continue to participate in
long-term partnerships with Afghanistan, supporting
the country's efforts during the transition period and
beyond 2014.

We reiterate our appeal to the international
community to continue to support the Afghan people
in its efforts to strengthen its capacity to overcome the
country's security challenges.

In conclusion, we express sincere appreciation
for the work of Mr. Kubis and wish him the greatest
success in future.

