Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
the Polish presidency for organizing this meeting with
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Force Commanders
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation

in Darfur, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. I thank them for their
informative briefings, which have provided us with
additional insight concerning the many obstacles that
must be overcome in order to restore peace and security
in countries affected by deadly conflicts.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of the thousands of men and women deployed
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. My delegation pays
tribute to those peacekeepers who have lost their lives
in the service of the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations. Their sacrifices compel us - regardless of
our differences on certain aspects ofpeacekeeping * to
step up cooperation in our work to make the hope for
peace and security of millions of people throughout the
world a reality.

Given the information provided to us by the various
briefers, my delegation would like to make several
observations concerning the host State's consent and
the mandates and resources ofpeacekeeping operations.

Undeniably, peacekeeping operations are not
intended to replace, but rather to support, the
authorities of the host State within the framework
of a crisis-exit strategy based on an inclusive and
credible political process. Wherever United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the authorities of host States
and all stakeholders in a crisis - as in Sierra Leone,
Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia - succeeded in committing
to dynamic cooperation based on mutual trust and
achieving realistic and consensual goals, they were
able to create the conditions necessary for a successful
transition, thereby paving the way forward for post-
crisis reconstruction and national reconciliation. We
therefore believe that quality relations among the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Force Commanders and all stakeholders involved in the
process of exiting a crisis, including local populations,
are key, given that they create the conditions necessary
for acceptance and firm national ownership of United
Nations action.

Clearly, the emergence of non-State actors with
political and territorial claims, who are sometimes
responsible for actions that run counter to the goals
of peace and stability, is one of the major challenges
facing the implementation of the principles on which
peacekeeping is based - namely, the consent of the
host State, impartiality and limiting the use of force to
situations involving self-defence. Those new challenges
call for us to develop sustainable multidimensional
responses and to ensure - despite the constantly
changing nature of operational environments - support
for the political process aimed at ending the crisis, which
remains the cornerstone of peacekeeping operations.

The difficulties brought up by the Force
Commanders give us reason to believe that the
effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations depends upon
defining clear mandates and setting achievable goals
based on a thorough assessment of the environment and
the operational limitations specific to every individual
mission. Unspeakable acts of violence carried out, in
particular by armed groups, against Blue Helmets,
humanitarian workers and civilians are a recurring
challenge that compel us to develop mandates, the
robustness of which must be commensurate with the
complexity and asymmetrical nature of the environment
in which any given peacekeeping mission is deployed.
Those mandates must provide United Nations forces
with the agility, flexibility and mobility necessary to
move into areas in which violence or warning signs of
violence directed against the civilian population exist.

It is also important to note that mandates must
not only be flexible but also sequenced so as to enable
missions' priorities to adapt progressively to changes
related to the host country's sociopolitical and security
environment. For example, the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire, which was initially
centred on security needs, subsequently shifted its
focus on support for maintaining and sustaining peace,
thereby enabling better planning for the definitive
withdrawal of the mission. Of equal importance to the
flexibility and realistic goals of mandates, providing
adequate human, financial and material resources is
essential to ensuring the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. With regard to human resources in
particular, we believe that the Santos Cruz report offers
a realistic approach to needed adequate troop training
prior to deployment and an assessment framework,
which enables filling the gaps observed in theatres of
operations through capacity-building.

Moreover, the issue of financing peacekeeping
operations, which my country would like to see
predictable and sustainable, is as important as
providing equipment that meets the requirements of
peacekeeping in asymmetrical environments through
triangular partnerships.

United Nations missions are made up of a mosaic
of contingents and staff members who, although
inspired by their common search for peace and
stability in countries in conflict, hail from diverse
countries and cultures, which necessarily affect their
perception of their obligations related to peacekeeping
in challenging environments.

In conclusion, my delegation commends the work
done by the members of United Nations peacekeeping
forces, whose merits are reflected above all in their
daily efforts to maintain the cohesion and unity of
action of peacekeeping missions so that, despite many
challenges, they can continue to be the most effective
United Nations instrument in the service of the
peace continuum.

