Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan, for his
briefing, as well as the personnel of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their dedication
under dangerous conditions. I would also like to thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement earlier.

Through their courageous participation in historic
elections, the Afghan people have expressed their
commitment to the political process, their rejection of
violence and their resolve to work steadily to advance
the process of democracy. In that regard, Jordan would
like to commend the people's broad participation in
the first round of voting despite terrorist threats. We
also applaud participants' political commitment to
the elections and the respect shown for the electoral
institutions, whose work must continue in transparency,

integrity and effectiveness in order to build voters' and
candidates' confidence in the electoral process. And we
salute the work of the Afghan authorities and security
forces in protecting voters, particularly women, as
they fulfilled their legitimate aspirations to elect their
representatives and President in justice, safety and
freedom. We call on the two presidential candidates to
put the interests of Afghanistan and its people first and
to do their best to end the stalemate so that the new
President will be able to take on his responsibilities as
soon as possible.
Although the process taking place in Afghanistan is
cause for optimism, we must also be realistic in assessing
the challenges facing the future Afghan President in the
electoral process and beyond. The security situation
remains difficult. The Afghan National Security Forces
and civilians still suffer terrorist attacks, which we
strongly condemn.

The international community must acknowledge
that without robust, sustained and significant support
for Afghanistan throughout the transition process and
beyond the authorities will face problems in overcoming
the many interlinked economic, political and security
challenges. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the Afghan people should not feel that they have been
abandoned. We also join his appeal for States to meet
their obligations to provide development assistance and
security despite the military drawdown in Afghanistan.
It is necessary to adapt the role of the United Nations
in line with the changes on the ground in the upcoming
period in order for the Organization to be able to
provide international assistance to the Afghan people.

The Afghan Government itself must continue to
ensure economic and political reform, the rule of law
and good governance, including combating corruption,
so that radical forces do not invoke popular justification
for their action. All political forces in Afghanistan must
work together in accordance with the constitutional
framework to achieve national unity.

Afghanistan's security affects and is influenced by
its regional neighbourhood. That makes it necessary
to foster bilateral relations between Afghanistan and
regional States and to achieve regional cooperation
and direct security and political outreach, as well as
a proper follow-up of the outcomes of the relevant
processes and conferences. Regional cooperation on the
ground is crucial to dealing with the illicit cultivation
and trafficking of narcotic drugs, which threaten the
socioeconomic future of Afghanistan and are a threat
to international peace and security.

In that regard, Jordan welcomes the regional
initiatives on drugs control, border management
and enhanced cooperation between judicial and law
enforcement bodies. We commend the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to combat drug trafficking
and call on it not to let up its resolve to address that
scourge. Jordan underscores the important role of the
United Nations and of UNODC and the need for the
Security Council to remain seized of the developments
in that regard.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our thanks
to the President of the Security Council for this month,
the Russian Federation, for the draft presidential
statement, which demonstrates the need for the unity of
the international community in combating the scourge
of narcotic drugs.

