The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members I have
been authorized to make the following statement on
their behalf.

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1989 (2011), 2129 (2013),
2133 (2014) and 2161 (2014), stresses the obligation
of the Member States to prevent and suppress the
financing of terrorist acts and expresses grave
concern over the reports of the access to and
seizure of oilfields and pipelines in Syria and Iraq
by terrorist groups listed by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), namely, the "Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant" and "Jabhat Al-Nusra",
and underscores in this regard that any trade of
oil with these entities would be inconsistent with
the Council's resolutions and that all States are
required to ensure that their nationals and any
persons within their territory do not trade in oil
with these entities.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria and Iraq, and in
this regard strongly condemns any engagement in
direct or indirect trade of oil from Syria and Iraq
involving terrorist groups. The Security Council
also emphasizes that such engagement constitutes
financial support for terrorists and may lead to
further sanctions listings if those groups are listed
by the Security Council 1267/1989 Sanctions
Committee as associated with Al-Qaida.

"The Security Council notes with concern that
any oilfields and related infrastructure controlled
by terrorist organizations could generate material
income for terrorists, which would support their
recruitment efforts, including of foreign terrorist
fighters, and strengthen their operational capability
to organize and carry out terrorist attacks.

"The Security Council reminds all States that
they are required to ensure that their nationals and
any persons within their territory not engage in any
commercial or financial transactions with or for the
benefit, directly or indirectly, of the "Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant" and "Jabhat Al-Nusra"
notably with respect to oil in Syria and Iraq.

"The Security Council also emphasizes the
importance of all Member States upholding their
obligation to ensure that their nationals and persons
within their territory do not make donations to
individuals and entities designated by the Security
Council 1267/1989 Committee.

"The Security Council calls upon all Member
States, should any information on such activities
be available to them, to bring it to the notice of
the 1267/1989 Sanctions Committee and cooperate
closely with the Security Council in this regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.
