Mr. Zarif: On 1 July, Liberia crossed a historic
milestone and assumed full responsibility for its security.
I applaud the Government and the people of Liberia for
the successful completion of the security transition, in
keeping with Security Council expectations. I commend
the Liberian institutions and international partners for
their leadership and commitment, which made reaching
that milestone possible.

It is now up to the Liberians to demonstrate full
ownership and responsibility for ensuring that the
significant investment made in building the security
institutions is not lost, that this achievement serves
as a foundation for more a focused and determined
continuation of efforts to strengthen their capacity
and professionalism, and that the execution of the
outstanding activities under the Government's plan
for the transition of United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) remains on track.

Following the security transition, the overall
situation in Liberia has remained calm. UNMIL
has been closely monitoring the performance of the
security institutions and adjusting its own engagement
accordingly. That has also necessitated a review of the
nature and form of the future support and cooperation
between the Government, on the one hand, and UNMIL
and other international partners, on the other, based
on the clear leading role of the Liberian actors and
continued, recalibrated support from international
actors. Accordingly, consultations are ongoing between
the Government and the United Nations and other
stakeholders on the revised institutional framework for
such cooperation.

In the meantime, UNMIL remains engaged with
a View to consolidating the gains of the past years
and advancing the development of the security and
justice structures, frameworks and accountability
mechanisms. That includes the training and mentoring
of senior management, assistance in the drafting of
legislation, policies and standard operating procedures,
and support for the decentralization of security
services. For example, with the technical training and
logistical assistance of UNMIL, the Liberian National
Police has opened five professional standards divisions
in the counties to deconcentrate security services from
Monrovia. UNMIL also provided support in developing
draft administrative regulations to implement the
Liberian National Police and immigration services
acts, once signed into law.

Following the takeover of the security functions,
the Government will need to redouble its focus and
energy in order to sustain the progress and implement
the remaining components of its transition plan. I
am afraid, however, that will not be possible without
continued international support. Challenges are still
complex, and too many for Liberia to successfully
tackle them by itself.

Over the recent period, Liberia has without doubt
continued to achieve progress in security and peace
consolidation. Some key legislation, such as the
firearms and ammunition control act, was adopted and
was enacted by the President. The Liberian National
Police and immigration services acts were also adopted,
but their signing into law has been delayed because of
some continuing disagreements on a number of clauses.
The Government has submitted to the legislature
a draft uniform code of military justice. The draft
code provides for a legal framework for jurisdictional
authority, dispensing justice and the right to due
process within the armed forces of Liberia. I cannot
overemphasize the importance of expeditious approval
and enactment of those critical laws to sustain progress
on the security transition.

Similarly, the domestic Violence act, which the
House of Representatives adopted in July, is yet to be
concurred by the Senate. The current version of the act,
regrettably, excludes the provisions that would have
criminalized female genital mutilation. The women's
legislative caucus continues to lackthe maj ority's support
in the legislature to outlaw that practice. In addition,
the land authority and land rights acts, which are key
elements of the reconciliation process, still remain to be
adopted into law. In a positive development, the long-
awaited draft of the local Government act, which is a
key component of implementing the decentralization
programme, reached the legislature in July.

Moreover, the overall political climate in Liberia
continues to be impacted by the fallout from the Global
Witness report issued in May, which implicated some
senior officials in bribery. The allegations triggered
strong public reactions and, among other consequences,
led to a tense stand-off in the House of Representatives,
where the majority of legislators continue to demand the
resignation of the Speaker, who was one of the officials
implicated in the report. The standoff has led to the
boycott of regular House sessions by the opponents of
the Speaker, who, in turn, has accused the President
of plotting to remove him The standoff has in effect
paralysed the normal functioning of the legislature
and resulted in a separate parallel session held by the
opposing camps in the presence of police on the capital
routes. Outside the legislature, supporters have each
camp have held demonstrations, which fortunately have
not led to any serious security incident.

One the potentially serious consequences of the
political infighting within the legislature is the delay
in adopting the national budget for the 2016-2017 fiscal
year, which includes the financing of the National
Elections Commission and preparatory activities,
including those related to the security for the October
2017 presidential and legislative elections. That should
also be viewed against the background of a hardening
socioeconomic environment due to the worsening
economic outlook, which has prompted the Government
to introduce austerity measures, revise downwards the
current year's budget and introduce an additional ll per
cent decrease in the proposed budget for the next year.

Also, last week the Government announced the
closure of several radio stations - Voice FM, Radio Lib
24 and Shata FM. - for failing to comply with tax and
licensing regulations. Opposition groups perceived that
as a Government attempt to muzzle the independence
of the media. One of the opposition parties, the All
Liberia Coalition Party, accused the President and
the Government of seeking an unfair advantage for
the Unity Party - the ruling party - with a view
to influencing the 2017 elections by silencing the
independent media and seeking the removal of political
opponents, in particular the Speaker of the House, for
their critical views. UNMIL has actively encouraged
the early resolution of those cases through equitable
application of the relevant regulations.

The current unsatisfactory situation calls for
ian urgent resolution in order to ensure the focus
and resources on critical national priorities. That is
becoming all the more pressing, as the legislature
is expected to move into recess at the end of the
month. The majority of House members, meeting in
separate session, wrote to the President to request the
postponement of the recess by one month.

In Liberia, as anywhere else in the world, the
prevention of conflict can be only effective in the
context of broader social, political and economic
transformations and respect for the rule of law. I
therefore remain concerned about the overall lack
of progress on addressing the underlying causes of
divisions and exclusion in Liberia. The failure to
robustly pursue reconciliation, and delays in structural
changes, such as land reform and decentralization,
raise a red flag about the future prospects for peace and
security in the country.

Tendencies towards division and exclusion were
manifested again in the constitutional review process,
in the form of Proposition No. 24, to render Liberia
a Christian nation, and Proposition No. 6 ,to grant
Liberian nationality based on race, which have caused
considerable tension despite the President's rejection
of those propositions, among others. I have been
engaged with legislators and religious and traditional
community representatives to defuse the tension and to
encourage the importance of preserving and building
on Liberia's diversity and adherence to international
standards and norms.

Over the past months, in my meetings with State
officials, I consistently urged constructive dialogue to
overcome disagreements and to refocus on substantive
national issues. I also engaged with all political parties,
media representatives, religious and traditional leaders
and women's groups to discuss political, governance
and security issues in the run-up to the 2017 elections.
I also stressed the importance of meaningful political
discourse, national unity and the need for all political
actors to adhere to electoral laws and regulations. I
urged the political parties to demonstrate leadership
and commitment to peaceful campaigning, robust
civic education and promoting equitable women's
representation in the political decision-making processes.

All parties I met with expressed a strong desire for
the peaceful conduct of the elections and recognized
their responsibility in that regard. Their main concerns
related to electoral transparency and potential for
fraud, the use of Government assets for political party
campaigning and the capacity of the Liberia National
Police to ensure security. The Government has also taken
steps to engage the political parties on the conduct of
the elections. Earlier this month, the Minister of Justice
invited the leaders of all political parties to discuss
their role and responsibility in ensuring peaceful
and credible elections. I will continue to encourage
stronger engagement between the Government and
other political actors to ensure a peaceful environment
in Liberia, particularly during the electoral period.

As the successes ofthe United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Liberia is leading to adjustments in
our presence, and as the country is preparing for its
forthcoming important political transition, many
Liberians are expressing concern about the prospects
of UNMIL's withdrawal and potential lack of United
Nations support during the elections. There is
consensus among national actors that the next elections
will be a critical test for Liberia's stability, democracy
and development. Therefore, both Liberia and the
international community must not lose sight of the
still arduous path towards sustainable peace in the
country and the region, which will require long-term
robust engagement by all concerned, particularly by the
Security Council.

