Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I shall begin
by thanking your country, Sir, for including the issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict on
the Council's programme of work for this month. We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Korea to guide our deliberations.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
on the topic under considersation, as well as Ms. Pillay,
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Spoerri
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements.

One of the international community's principal
concerns is ensuring the protection of civilians when a
crisis or armed conflict arises to threaten them. Despite
the existence of a body law on this subject, including
the case law of the international criminal tribunals on
the effective protection of civilians in armed conflict,
civilians continue to suffer the most serious violations
of their rights. Even the early warning systems set
up within peacekeeping operations sometimes reveal
their shortcomings in effectively protecting civilians.
Indeed, civilians suffer Violence of all types, including
sexual and gender-based violence; cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment; enforced disappearances and
obstacles to access to humanitarian assistance.

The conflicts raging in various regions of the
world today have caused extensive loss of human life,
injury and mass movements of refugees and internally
displaced persons. It has also been established that
the ratio of civilian to military Victims has risen, as
evidenced in the conflict in Syria, where over 60,000
people have died, as Ms. Pillay noted early. Moreover,
armed conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan, South Sudan and Mali, as well as the
recent crisis between Gaza and Israel, have also claimed
their share of civilian victims. Furthermore, armed
conflicts are also rife with trafficking in humans and
their organs. In all cases, unfortunately, it is children,
women, the disabled, the elderly and humanitarian,
health and media personnel who pay the heaviest toll
of such violence. It is all the more shocking that the
perpetrators of such acts may paradoxically be the
peacekeeping personnel who are supposed to protect
civilians.
There are a number of explanations not only
for such ongoing serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in armed conflict,
but also for the exponential rise in the number of
civilian victims. First among these is the flouting by
the parties to conflict of their obligations under relevant
international legal instruments in human rights and
international humanitarian law in armed conflict, in
particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977
Additional Protocols, together with the customs and
laws of war.

Moreover, certain non-State actors do not feel
bound by international legal instruments and customary
law, or are totally ignorant of their existence. We also
note the difficulties of media coverage, which - given
the fact that the media are kept far from the theatres of
conflict - prevent them from informing international
public opinion of realities on the ground. As a result, the
media is hard-put to raise awareness among civilians
of the precautions they should take and to ensure that
they do not engage in activities that might cause them
to lose their status as civilians and thereby forego the
protection to which they are entitled. Furthermore, the
institution of the Protecting Powers under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, one of whose roles is to ensure
respect for humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians, may prove ineffective.

We welcome the efforts of certain international
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to fill that gap so to protect civilians
despite their very limited resources. The Security
Council itself, given the differences among its members,
particularly the permanent members, may have trouble
reaching agreement when a crisis, such as that in Syria,
erupts.

The deterrence of impunity through international
criminal law is also being hindered from becoming
operational for several reasons. On the one hand,
international commissions of inquiry do not always have
the means to establish the facts objectively. Moreover,
cooperation between States and international tribunals
in the execution of arrest warrants and other decisions
tends to be ineffectual.

In the light of the gap between the measures taken
and their effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict, Togo should like to suggest certain changes.

First, the States concerned should be parties to the
relevant international legal instruments, incorporate
them into their national legislation, and ensure their
observance. It is also necessary to maximize the
role of transitional justice, which hinges on a broad
range of judicial and parajudicial measures, including
reparations for victims, in accordance with the principle
of full satisfaction, in order to ensure the restoration of
peace, security and reconciliation.

Secondly, we must design training modules that can
be made available to missions and training centres in
troop-contributing countries so as to ensure that troops
are better informed with respect to the protection of
civilians and to prevent potential Violence against them.
Resolution 2085 (2012) of20 December 2012, regarding
the deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, is a model in that it establishes the
precedent of verification of prior training before any
intervention and calls for the presence of observers
on the ground to ensure the effective respect of
international humanitarian and international human
rights law with respect to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Furthermore, we must urgently provide all
peacekeeping operations with early warning
mechanisms and the resources and means to monitor
and prevent incidents and intervene in real time when
incidents occur.

Similarly, it is urgent that we establish sound
vertical and horizontal cooperation among the various
national, international and regional stakeholders. In that
regard, we could consider including in the training for
peacekeeping operations some of the African Union's
guidelines on the protection of civilians.

Lastly, with regard to the Security Council in
particular, the stakes continue to be two-sided. On
the one hand, there is a need for this organ to adopt
clear and precise mandates that include the protection
of civilians. On the other hand, when it comes to
combating impunity, the Council should implement the
conclusions of the debate that took place on 17 October
2012 (see S/PV.6849), with regard to coherence as to
the referrals sent to the International Criminal Court,
the financing for those cases, and follow-up to the
decisions handed down.

I would like to conclude my statement by
underscoring the fact that Togo continues to believe
that the surest way to ensure the protection of civilians
is to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and crises. That
requires promoting preventive diplomacy as much as
possible, which has the advantage of sparing civilians
from the effects of armed conflict.

