Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and His Excellency
Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, for their attendance and
excellent briefings.

Africa is a continent of hope. Today we are
pleased to witness great strides in economic growth
and stability in many African countries, which are
grounded in national ownership. Those strides have
come from undertaking efforts to diversify economies
towards self-sustaining growth and enhance the
capacities of individuals and institutions. Africa's
bright future, however, is predicated on the development
of peaceful societies throughout continent that are
free from conflict, poverty and violent extremism.
The key to unlocking that future is a combination of
African ownership and international partnership. More
concretely, it entails responding not only to immediate
crises, such as conflict and famine, but also to the root
causes of conflict. Resilient national, regional and
local institutions are essential to empowering Africa's
greatest resource, which is its people.

One year ago, Japan, as the President ofthe Council,
organized an open debate on peacebuilding in Africa
(see S/PV.7750). Council members were united on the
importance of African ownership and addressing the
root causes of conflict, as well as the need to cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations, which were
included in a presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/12).
We commend China for providing an opportunity to
reaffirm the importance of those areas for Africa's
peace and stability.

The African Union (AU) is a prime example of
African ownership being used to achieve political and
economic integration, as well as prevent and resolve
conflicts, based on its solidarity and shared values.
The AU has acquired diverse capacities for regional
action on matters pertaining to international peace
and security, including mediation, such as regional
efforts for the peaceful transition in The Gambia, peace
support operations, such as the African Union Mission
in Somalia, institution-building, such as security sector
reform, as well as peacebuilding in order to address
the root causes of conflict. In South Sudan, the AU,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and regional countries are actively engaged, and the
United Nations is also working together to change the
situation for the better. The United Nations is capable
of expanding its dynamic partnership with the AU
far beyond peace support operations to include broad
efforts to address root causes.

In particular, the Security Council can consider
the various areas of cooperation included in the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed in April by Secretary-General Guterres
and AU Commission Chair Moussa Faki Mahamat.
The Framework includes a focus on preventing
and mediating conflict, addressing root causes and
responding to conflict, including financial cooperation
on AU peace support operations. Broad and holistic
cooperation will be needed to meet the challenges we
collectively face.

Peace and stability in Africa require self-sustaining
economic growth. In turn, that requires that the benefits
of economic growth reach all people, who must be able
to exercise their potential and participate actively in
national and social development. Cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU on the Sustainable
Development Goals and Agenda 2063 will play a vital
role in Africa's peace and stability and in addressing
root causes of conflict.

Since October 1993, together with the United
Nations, the United Nations Development Programme,
the African Union Commission and the World Bank,
Japan has co-hosted the Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD) in order to achieve
Africa's long-term development through African
ownership and international partnership. Through the
TICAD process, Japan's efforts have always centred
on the long-term development of individual and
institutional capacities. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we have partnered with the United Nations
since 2004 to conduct training for more than 20,000
police officers in the country, including women and
reintegrated former combatants. Similar efforts are
under way in Cote d'Ivoire and Mali.

Finally, during his trip to Somalia in March, the
Secretary-General noted that the country is at a moment
of both tragedy and hope. The same twin possibilities
exist for many countries in Africa and are the subject
of much international attention, as demonstrated by
today's open debate. With this in mind, it is essential
that Africa's partners, including States Members
of the United Nations, the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other international
organizations sustain the current high level of attention
towards Africa. Japan will remain actively engaged
with the continent going forward under the twin pillars
of African ownership and international partnership.

