Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council on the progress
of the Office of the Prosecutor towards the completion
of our mandate. In this reporting period, we moved
closer to finalizing our work in the Tribunal's last trials
and appeals. As the Council has already heard, at the
end of the reporting period, four trials are ongoing.
In the Mladie case, the defence continued to present
its evidence. But as previously indicated, my Office
will, later this month, briefly reopen the Prosecution
case to present our recently-discovered evidence on
the Tomasica mass grave. We will use nine courtroom
hours to present our evidence.

In the Hadzie case, the trial was adjourned in
October 2014 due to the accused's ill health and has
not yet resumed. In the Seselj and Karadzie cases,
we continue to await the trial judgements, which are
estimated to be delivered later this year. During the
reporting period, appeal judgements were delivered in
the Popovic et al. and Tolimir cases, largely confirming
the genocide and other convictions we secured at trial.
Therefore only three appeal proceedings now remain.
The oral hearings in Stanisie and Simatovic' and Stanisie
and Zupljam'n are anticipated to be held later this year.
In the Prlic' et al. appeal we successfully completed,
on schedule, our written arguments. It involved, among
other tasks, reviewing, researching and responding to
168 defence grounds of appeal spanning nearly 1,000

pages.

Our team completed that immense task in less than
four months by working around the clock. The Appeals
Division is now fully focused on preparing for the
presentation oforal arguments in the final three appeals.
The countries of the former Yugoslavia continue to
cooperate with my Office and respond, as required,
to our requests for assistance. State cooperation in
all aspects of our work remains mandatory and will
continue to be closely monitored.
My Office recognizes the significant results
achieved during the reporting period in regional
cooperation on several high-profile cases. That regional
cooperation includes joint arrest operations conducted
by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia. Those developments are positive signs that
national authorities are responding to the concerns
we have previously expressed. We call upon national
authorities to continue to tangibly demonstrate
their commitment to cooperation and increased
comprehensive accountability for war crimes.

Mrs. Adnin took the Chair.

At the same time, it is important to recognize that
only a very limited number of the outstanding cases at
the national level have been prosecuted to date. More
should also be done on the most complex and highest-
priority cases, particularly those involving senior- and
mid-level officials. It has become clear that further
progress in effective national justice requires a more
strategic approach in the investigation and prosecution
of war crimes.

In my previous reports I noted the need for
improved management and leadership in the Office of
the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Office
continues to discuss outstanding challenges with the
Prosecutor's Office, including the practice of breaking
up comprehensive cases into separate trials. But my
report also highlights the successful results by the
Prosecutor's Office regarding crimes related to the
Srebrenica genocide. We encourage the Prosecutor's
Office to ensure that the strategic approach and
effective practices of its Srebrenica team are applied in
other investigations and prosecutions.

This brings me to the category II cases transferred
by my Office in the period from 2008 to 2010. During
my recent mission to Sarajevo, the Chief Prosecutor
could report only limited progress in those cases.
However, he gave strong assurances that prosecutorial
decisions will be taken in all remaining cases by the
end of the year. While similar commitments were made
previously, we trust that they will be honoured this
time.

We continue to believe that those and other
challenges can be successfully addressed if there
is national ownership of post-conflict justice,
appropriately supported by international assistance. My
Office will continue to engage directly with national
authorities and encourage full responsibility for the
accountability process, while assisting them to improve
their methods and implement lessons learned from our
experiences. In our meetings, victims from every group
are unanimous in their desire that the search for missing
persons continues to be a key priority. While there have
been significant results already, there are still too many
families that do not know the fate of their loved ones.
More can and needs to be done in that regard.

Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina should give
serious consideration to the recommendations recently
issued by the International Commission on Missing
Persons. It is critical that the law on missing persons
be fully implemented and that national authorities
take full responsibility for that vital work. For our
part, my Office is participating in an intensive effort
with key partners to strengthen the search for missing
persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina by re-examining
available evidence and information. If that work proves
successful, we will consider how to expand it to other
States in the region.

In conclusion, the foremost objective ofmy Office is
to expeditiously complete our work in accordance with
the completion strategy. We will continue downsizing
staff in line with the completion of trials and appeals,
while also documenting and sharing our experiences.

Next month will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide. It will be an opportunity
to remember all victims of the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia and to recognize that survivors are making
extraordinary efforts to build a more peaceful future. It
is also an opportunity for the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to ensuring justice for past
crimes and preventing their repetition.

