Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me first thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting of the Council to
hear a briefing by Ms. Carla del Ponte, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
My delegation has studied and benefited a great deal from
the sixth annual report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the fourth annual
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which were addressed to both the Security Council and
the General Assembly. We welcome the presence of
Ms. Del Ponte in the Council for the first time since her
appointment as Prosecutor. We thank her for the succinct
but comprehensive briefing that she has just given the
Council on the two Tribunals, particularly in respect of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, which my delegation finds extremely useful.

 

We believe that the establishment of these two ad hoc
Tribunals was an important development in the application
of international law with respect to the prosecution of
individuals accused of committing war crimes, genocide
and crimes against humanity. It gave expression to the
universal desire for peace and respect for the rule of law,
thereby making international criminal justice a reality and
an indispensable element of international relations in our
time. It is our hope that with such a system in place the
international community will be in a better position to deal
with such crimes whenever they occur. Indeed, we dare to
hope that an efficacious system of international criminal
justice will act as a factor inhibiting the commission of
such crimes.

My delegation is pleased to note that the two
Tribunals have evolved into fully operational international
criminal courts providing for fair trials for the accused
while affording protection to victims and witnesses. We
commend the manner in which the Victims and Witnesses
Section of the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the
Victims and Witnesses Support Unit of the Tribunal for
Rwanda have handled the important issue of providing
protective measures, as well as counselling and support, for
witnesses appearing before the Tribunals. We also note that
with the close cooperation of a number of States, the
Victims and Witnesses Section and Unit have been able to
relocate witnesses unable to return to their respective
residences after completing their testimony. We believe that
this is an important aspect of the work of the Tribunals.

We are concerned by delays in the administration of
justice. Accused persons have been in custody awaiting trial
for lengthy periods. They must be tried as soon as possible
in cognizance of their fundamental right to trial without
undue delay. In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
amendment of the Tribunals' Rules of Procedure and
Evidence, which was aimed at streamlining and expediting
the proceedings before the Tribunals. While we recognize
that cases must be conducted in the most efficient and
expeditious manner consistent with respect for the rights of
the accused, we also recognize that the course of justice,
conducted in scrupulous compliance with fair trial
procedures, is often a slow one. While speed is an
important element of efficiency, the quality of the
proceedings is of paramount importance.

In this regard, my delegation would appreciate it if the
Prosecutor could elaborate on some of the impediments to
the conduct of expeditious trials.

The cooperation of States is vitally important for the
successful conduct of the work of the Tribunals. This is
particularly so with respect to the execution of arrest
warrants, provisional detentions and the transfer of
suspects and accused persons to the seats of the
Tribunals, given the fact that the Tribunals do not have a
police force or jurisdiction by which they can
independently effect the apprehension of suspects.
Clearly, the execution of arrest warrants has been and will
continue to be critical to the Tribunals' ability to function
effectively. We note that, in the case of the Tribunal for
Rwanda, States have been very supportive of the
Tribunal, but we regret that this has not been quite the
case in respect of the work of the Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia.

We reiterate our serious concern that publicly
indicted accused individuals still remain at large. The
recent report of the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(S/ 1999/846) indicated that, despite the best efforts of the
Tribunal, certain States and entities, principally the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska,
continue to obstruct the Tribunal in carrying out its
mandate. We agree with Ms. Del Ponte that there should
be no safe havens for indicted war criminals.

My delegation calls upon those in a position to do so
to make more serious and determined efforts to apprehend
and bring to justice those war criminals as soon as
possible. Failure to do so would be to send the wrong
message to those criminals. It would also, unfortunately,
convey a lack of resolve or political will on the part of
the international community to deal with these heinous
crimes. That is not the kind of message we should be
sending.

While arrests of all suspects, including relatively
minor characters, are important to the success of the
Tribunal, the failure to apprehend those most responsible
for the atrocities would cast a dark shadow on the
efficacy of the Tribunal. The continued presence of
indicted persons in those States and entities, enjoying
freedom with impunity, not only sends the wrong
message, as I said, but also contributes to sustaining a
climate of fear and insecurity that inhibits the return of
refugees, particularly in minority areas. The arrest and
prosecution of indicted war criminals is not only an issue
of justice, but something that would contribute
substantively to the process of healing and reconciliation,
and to the attainment and consolidation of peace.

 

We would like to express our appreciation to
Ms. Louise Arbour, the former Prosecutor, for the
outstanding way in which she conducted her work during
her tenure as Prosecutor. We look forward to working
closely with her worthy successor, Ms. Del Ponte, as she
carries out her onerous responsibilities.

Malaysia continues to believe that the work of the
Tribunals is a vitally important contribution to meting out
justice and to the healing process in both regions, which we
think will contribute tremendously to strengthening the
process of restoring peace, security and stability in these
two regions. The Tribunals deserve the unqualified support
of the Security Council in all aspects of their work. The
Prosecutor of the Tribunals has just made a clear, strong
and direct appeal to the Council for such support.

The issue of indicted war criminals still at large and
the lack of cooperation extended to the Tribunals must be
squarely addressed. The Council must respond appropriately
to Ms. Del Ponte's appeal. We cannot disappoint her.

