Mr. Osborne (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin, as others have done, by congratulating the
President for suggesting today's meeting, in which
the Finance Ministers of the members of the Security
Council have come together for the first time in the
history of the United Nations. I would also like to
congratulate the Secretary-General and the President
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for the
leadership that they have shown on the issue before us.

I, too, would like to start by offering my condolences
and the condolences of the British people for those
who lost their lives in Paris as a result of the dreadful
attacks there, but also those who lost their lives in
Ankara, Beirut and California, as well as the Russian
holiday-makers travelling home from Sharm el-Sheikh
who lost their lives. It is clear that these acts of violence
were designed to intimidate and divide us, but they
have failed to do that. Indeed, it is very striking to look
at the Security Council table here in the Chamber and
note that this has often been where the divisions of the
world have been most evident, yet today the unity of the
world is on display. Far from dividing us, the terrorists
in Daesh - the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) - are actually uniting us. We are determined to
take the fight to them, deprive them of their financing
and to defeat them.

All ofus around this table have been grappling with
the threat that terrorism poses. In the last year alone in
the United Kingdom, our security forces have prevented
seven different plots to attack citizens in our country.
At a time where people question whether we can defeat
these terrorists, we are already defeating these terrorists
and we are making progress. In the last year, the
coalition against Daesh/ISIL has liberated over 40 per
cent of the territory under their control in Iraq. We are
stemming the flow of foreign fighters to their ranks.
We are exploiting the vulnerabilities in their financial
network, and we are successfully targeting their oil
supply. As British Prime Minister David Cameron said
here at the United Nations in September, we are leading
the efforts to tackle Daesh/ISIL's propaganda so that
fewer people around the world are influenced by their
message of hate.

We know that those who seek to commit acts of
terrorism will not stop, so neither should our resolve
to defeat them. When our values of freedom and
democracy are threatened, when efforts are made to
undermine the international peace and security that the
Security Council protects, we must all unite to condemn
those actions and prevent further tragedy.

Since the Council first adopted resolution 1267
(1999), the threat from terrorism has evolved. In
Daesh, we face a new type of threat, oppressing those
in the territory that they physically control, inspiring
foreign terrorist fighters to join their cause in places
like Syria and Iraq, and now potentially in Libya as
well, and radicalizing individuals to inspire them
to commit atrocities at home. It is a new breed of
terrorism and a new challenge for us as Governments
and the international community, and it calls for a new
response. Today we are taking significant further steps
to strengthen that response. I very much welcome the
adoption of the very comprehensive resolution today
(resolution 2253 (2015)), and I thank the Secretary-
General and his team at the United Nations for their
work on this matter. I would like briefly set out the
areas that the United Kingdom considers to be key to
strengthening the global efforts to combat terrorist
financing and the financing of Daesh and to make full
use of resolution 2253 (2015).

First, we must ensure that we are using the existing
tools that we already have to combat the threat of terrorist
financing to their full effect. In September this year, the
United Kingdom put forward a list of names of British
nationals who had travelled to Syria and recommended
them for listing under United Nations sanctions. Today
I would urge other Member States to do the same, to
propose the designation ofthose individuals who pose a
real threat so that their assets can be frozen around the
world and we can cut off the resources they need before
they can commit their planned acts of terrorism.

We must ensure that we are using our counter-
terrorism financing regimes to full effect domestically
as well. I agree with what the Secretary-General was
saying earlier. We need to make sure that all Member
States have a regime in place that criminalizes the
financing of terrorists for any purpose and that they
implement the United Nations sanctions regimes fully
and promptly. I thought this was also an extremely
important point raised by the President of the FATF.
The gap between the sanction being announced and the
sanction being implemented is crucial in a world where
money can be moved from one place to another in a
matter of seconds.

In the United Kingdom, we have taken a long
look at our regime, and I can confirm today that we
will legislate domestically to ensure that we are able to
implement United Nations sanctions without any delay.
Like all members of the European Union (EU), we are
currently reliant on an EU process that takes too long.
We want to work with our partners in the European
Union to streamline that process and make our response
more rapid in order to make sure that we at a European
level are able to implement United Nations designations
immediately.

Secondly, I want to make sure that we are
responding to the evolving nature of terrorist threats
with additional new measures. We heard today about
the value of the Syrian oil fields to Daesh, namely, that
oil alone is providing the terrorist group with millions
of dollars every day: it is estimated that Daesh receives
$1.5 million in proceeds every day from its exploitation
of oil. We know that the military action that the United
Kingdom is proud to be taking with its allies through
the British air force is having some success in limiting
this resource - this oil money.

But we Finance Ministers can also take action.
We should make clear, as we do with resolution 2253
(2015), that the United Nations sanctions regime can
and will be used to target not just the terrorists but the
traders, the middlemen, the people who facilitate the
illegal trade in oil that provides Daesh with one of its
principal sources of revenue. We should similarly focus
on the illegal trade in cultural artefacts, about which the
Finance Minister of Jordan spoke very powerfully. We
are literally seeing the history of some these countries
being stolen outright from their peoples. Frankly, there
is much more we can do to shine a light on the opaque
trade in cultural artefacts.

But, naturally, as we limit one branch of Daesh's
financial network, we know that they will attempt
to strengthen another. We must therefore be ready
to respond to their evolving ways of satisfying their
financial needs, that is, kidnapping for ransom or the
involvement of organized crime. Accordingly, I am
delighted that resolution 2253 (2015) makes this point
clear as well.

I also want to look at new ways of gathering and
sharing information among law enforcement agencies,
internationally as well as domestically, between law
enforcement agencies and the private sector, including
our banking systems. This was a point that was raised by
a number of speakers, and I think it is a very important
one. We are taking steps in the United Kingdom, the
home of one of the world's largest - indeed the world's
largest - financial centres, to make sure that we have
a partnership with the financial sector by which we are
working together to tackle illicit financial flows.

The third and final point I want to make is this:
I want to make sure that the Council continues to
work together to consider how we implement the
recommendations on how we do more to tackle terrorist
financing. Because if the threat is constantly evolving,
so must our response to match it.

I welcome the special meeting of the Financial
Action Task Force last weekend, specifically focused
on our collective response to terrorist financing. In
particular I was pleased to see a commitment from the
group to update its report on Daesh financing while
working with the counter-ISIL finance group and
others.

I think it would be sensible for finance ministers
to perhaps meet again in the Security Council in the
months ahead, at some point, to review the evolving
situation and to consider proposals for further measures.
Let us be clear: adopting a resolution is one thing,
implementing the resolution is of course another. We
have all committed to report to the United Nations on
the progress we make on that. I think that is something
that we should therefore put into action.

ThatiswhereIseetheprioritiesforaction-ensuring
we are making the most of the existing tools that we
have; implementing new measures to respond to the
particular threat that Daesh poses to us and continuing
to work together to develop our response further and
reporting back here at the United Nations until we fully
destroy this evil.

