The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Haiti, Norway, Peru and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Merores
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti and head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 8 September 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Peter Schwaiger in which he requests
to be invited, in his capacity as deputy head of the
delegation of the European Union, to the United
Nations to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Peter Schwaiger.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Schwaiger to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/446, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Edmond Mulet, to whom I give the
floor.


