Mr. Yamazaki: I thank you, Madam, for this
opportunity to apprise the Council on the progress
made in strengthening financial and administrative
oversight of the current Development Fund for Iraq
(DFI), on the legal issues and options to be considered
to implement successor arrangements, and on the
assessment of the Government of Iraq's progress in
preparing for the successor arrangements for the DFI,
as presented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/359) pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution
1905 (2009).

With regard to the activities of the DFI and the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB),
the IAMB, at its meeting in Paris on 28 and 29 April,
concurred with the recommendation of the Government
of Iraq to appoint PricewaterhouseCoopers to conduct
the 2010 audit of the Development Fund. I am pleased
to note that the Government of Iraq will follow the
same selection procedure in 2011, and I understand that
the Government of Iraq will continue to select an
independent international auditor that will be
responsible for auditing the successor entity to the DFI
beyond next year as well.

In the absence of a fully operational
comprehensive oil-metering system, it is not possible
reliably to determine the volume of all export sales of
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from
Iraq for which proceeds are to be deposited in the oil
proceeds receipts account and the DFI accounts. In this
respect, I am concerned that there are delays in
implementing the comprehensive oil-metering system,
and I strongly urge the full and timely implementation
of the system, as initially envisaged by the Government
of Iraq.

I should like to recall that the Government of Iraq
initially planned for the oil-metering system to become
fully operational by the end of 2011, except for one
State company, which will be completed by 2012. I
10-44502
note the fact that the Board of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) has accepted the
application of Iraq to become a candidate country, and
I encourage the Government of Iraq to complete
compliance and validation by February 2012 to become
an EITI-compliant country.

I turn now to the legal issues and options relating
to the successor arrangements for the DFI. First, with
respect to the obligatory payments to the United
Nations Compensation Commission fund, I am pleased
that the Government of Iraq has received confirmation
from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of
continuation of the existing mechanism in place after
31 December 2010, and I note that the Government of
Iraq will open a separate sub-account with the same
bank, into which 5 per cent of revenues from oil
exports will be transferred automatically.

Secondly, as to privileges and immunities of the
DFI, in accordance with paragraph 22 of its resolution
1483 (2003), the Security Council accorded the DFI
privileges and immunities equivalent to those enjoyed
by the United Nations. From its inception in 2003, it
was clearly understood that the DFI would enjoy such
privileges and immunities for a limited and specified
period of time. Therefore, once the DFI becomes a
fully nationally owned and controlled fund, there is no
legal basis for extending such privileges and
immunities.

Thirdly, with respect to the Iraq escrow account
and other transfers to the DFI, once all outstanding
activities under the oil-for-food programme are
concluded, and taking into account issues mentioned in
the first report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 166)
of 1 April 2010, all other remaining funds should be
transferred from the Iraq escrow account to the DFI. In
this respect, I welcome the work of the Iraqi ministerial
committee that has reviewed all of the outstanding
letters of credit and the committee's decision to pay 26
letters of credit. I look forward to receiving from the
Government of Iraq the requisite confirmation of
arrival documents for those letters of credit so that the
Secretariat can proceed and process the payments to
the respective beneficiaries.

Absent the receipt by the Secretariat of the
aforementioned requisite confirmation of arrival
documents, the Security Council has the option of
cancelling the remaining letters of credit with
outstanding claims of delivery, subject to the provision
10-44502

by the Government of Iraq of a comprehensive
indemnity with regard to all activities of the
Organization and its representatives and agents in
connection with the oil-for-food programme since its
inception.

With regard to the assessment of the progress of
the Government of Iraq in preparing for successor
arrangements for the DFI, I note that the Government
of Iraq reports that measures have been implemented in
accordance with the plan presented in its first quarterly
report to the Security Council, included in document
S/2010/308. However, work remains to be done to fully
implement the action plan for the transition to
successor arrangements for the DFI, and I look forward
to keeping the Security Council informed on the
Government of Iraq's progress in preparing for such
arrangements.

This completes my briefing on the Secretary-
General's report pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution
1905 (2009). I will be happy to respond to any
questions posed by members of the Council relating to
the report.

