Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
information that he has shared with us today and
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, for his presence and statement. We also thank
Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.

We have followed closely the process of
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
full deployment on the ground of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). The cooperation
achieved between UNMIK and EULEX in the areas of
justice, the rule of law and customs shows that there is
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union in promoting regional peace and
stability.

For my delegation, it is particularly important
that the parties cooperate fully with UNMIK in
fulfilling its mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), respecting the criteria of neutrality. The
obligation to fulfil the provisions of that resolution
embodies the legal basis for attaining a lasting and
peaceful solution to the Kosovo situation and, in
general, for the stability of the Balkans.

We are concerned that, while the situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, continuing
incidents of tension between Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo
Albanians in the past months demonstrate the fragility
of the regional stability and the need to encourage
inter-community dialogue and confidence-building
measures between the parties.

We believe it necessary to strengthen cooperation
between UNMIK and EULEX in order to agree on
measures to peacefully prevent and contain the
possible outbreak of inter-ethnic violence, particularly
in north Kosovo. Similarly, UNMIK needs to cooperate
more closely with the parties and with EULEX, so as
to promote concrete steps to achieve the participation
of Kosovo Serbs in the Kosovo Police, since that is one
of the issues contributing to tension in the region.

For my delegation, strengthening the rule of law
is of the greatest importance in the current situation.
We encourage UNMIK and EULEX to continue to seek
ways to work together, particularly with regard to the
legal assistance to the local authorities. Likewise, we
call on the parties and UNMIK to support and fully
cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in order to ensure due process for
the cases under its jurisdiction.

One very important issue in conflict prevention is
the reintegration of minorities, in particular the Kosovo
Serbs. However, the reality does not always help that
reintegration, which is why it is essential to promote a
strategic association among the United Nations
development agencies and programmes, the donor
community, regional organizations and the Government
of Serbia in order to undertake specific measures to
promote lasting socio-economic development in the
region to provide conditions for people's well-being,
including opportunities for employment, access to
public services and security, while, at the same time,
encouraging the voluntary return of the refugees and
internally displaced persons.

In that regard, we welcome the fact that projects
for the return of Kosovo Serbian families and the
rebuilding of their homes are being implemented with
the help of the United Nations Development
Programme.
We believe that inter-ethnic relations are one of
the most pressing challenges that Kosovo is facing.
UNMIK presence is vital to guarantee the protection of
the human, property and housing rights of the
minorities.

In that respect, it is important that, in the
reconfiguration of UNMIK, particular attention be paid
to strengthening the Mission component on human
rights assistance in order to increase the efficient
consideration of alleged human rights violations in the
region, and that the parties work closely with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the parties so as to outline a
comprehensive strategy for strengthening the
protection of human rights in the region.

Finally, my delegation reiterates its position as a
steadfast and consistent promoter of the principles of
justice and international law, enshrined in the Charters
of the United Nations and the International Court of
Justice, which is the top jurisdictional body for
peacefully solving disputes arising from the
interpretation of international law. In that context, we
eagerly await the advisory opinion of the Court on the
case of Kosovo requested by the General Assembly.

