Mr. Kerim (Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): First of all, I would like to thank you very
much, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to address the
Security Council at this meeting. At the same time, I
would like to join previous speakers who have
expressed their appreciation for your personally
presiding over this meeting, which represents a
confirmation of Bulgaria's active approach and the
importance that it attaches to the region.

I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his very informative briefing on the
situation and current activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR in Kosovo. From what we have heard today,
UNMIK and KFOR are clearly achieving important
results in spite of the significant problems that they are
facing daily and will be facing in the future.

The Government of the Republic of Macedonia
gives its full support for the efforts and activities
undertaken by UNMIK and KF OR in Kosovo aimed at
the further improvement of the overall situation by
working together with Kosovo's provisional
institutions of self-government, ensuring the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and building
a democratic society with respect for all human rights
and freedoms. We would also like to express our
appreciation for the work done by Special
Representative Steiner and our support for the
implementation of his policy of benchmarks, which is
in full accordance with what the representative of the
United Kingdom today called a "standards before
status" approach.

The Republic of Macedonia is fully committed to
cooperation with UNMIK and KFOR in ensuring the
implementation of these objectives. The Government
of my country, in a session two days ago, assessed and
endorsed the agreement on cooperation between
UNMIK police and the Ministry of the Interior of the
Republic of Macedonia. The conclusion of this
agreement will have enormous significance for the
promotion and development of cooperation between
UNMIK police and the Macedonian Ministry of the
Interior in combating organized crime, terrorism,
illegal trafficking in arms, drugs and people, and
money laundering.

On the border issue, the Macedonian Government
has worked closely with UNMIK in order to undertake
concrete steps that will facilitate the movements of
farmers in the border area and the cultivation of their
lands. This is in full accordance with the agreement
reached between the President of the Republic of
Macedonia, Boris Trajkovski, and Special
Representative Steiner aimed at finding practical
solutions to these problems. As a result, we have
agreed to open new border crossings - as mentioned
in the statement of Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
today - and established a temporary procedure to be
applied pending the finalization of the ongoing process
of demarcation and delineation of the border between
the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

We welcome the prompt and decisive action of
Mr. Steiner with regard to the recent arrests of former
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army by United
Nations police in Kosovo. The political authorities of
the Republic of Macedonia give full support to
UNMIK and KFOR in their endeavours to put an end to
the activities of the people and organizations in Kosovo
that use violence in pursuit of their political goals,
regardless of their ethnic, national or political
affiliation, especially because their extremist agenda is
not limited to Kosovo alone. In this respect, we call
upon all the neighbouring countries to take a clear and
consistent position on this issue.

To our great disappointment, Kosovo's
provisional institutions of self-government issue
statements opposed to the intentions of UNMIK and
KFOR to uphold the rule of law in Kosovo. These
public statements only divert the local Kosovo
authorities from their true goals and do not contribute
to the overall stabilization of Kosovo, the achievement
of the benchmarks or the spirit of regional cooperation
that should bring us, all together, closer to European
integration.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
valuable contribution of the Security Council in
upholding the security of my country in the process of
overcoming the crisis that the Republic of Macedonia
has faced in the course of the past year. In this regard,
acknowledging the United Nations continuous policy
of decisive and consistent action to prevent instability
and conflicts in the region and to ensure peace and
security in South-Eastern Europe, I would like to make
use of this opportunity to refer once again to Security
Council resolutions 1345 (2001) and 1371 (2001), as
well as to its presidential statements of 12 and 16
March 2001 and 13 August 2001, which substantially
contributed to this end.

Before I conclude my statement, I would like, Sir,
to wish you success in the Bulgarian presidency of the
Security Council in the month of September.

