I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the States members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in my capacity as Chair of the OIC Group. At the outset, I thank the Dominican Republic for its stewardship of the Security Council in these difficult times. I would also like to express the OIC's sincere solidarity with all affected countries and convey our deepest condolences to all bereaved families on the tragic loss of thousands of lives caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In addition, we commend the positive responses around the world to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire during the pandemic and call on all parties to take action in line with the efforts of the Secretary-General's special envoys. The OIC member States stand ready to provide support to achieve that ceasefire and contribute to maintaining international peace and security. Just like the rest of the world, the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including occupied East Jerusalem, are working to contain the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, which poses unprecedented health, economic, social and security threats and challenges. Although the number of detected cases is relatively low to date, the United Nations has warned that the occupied Palestinian territories are exceptionally vulnerable to infection and mortality, with a severely impaired health system, high population density and widespread poverty, particularly in the Gaza Strip, where the impact of the illegal Israeli blockade and military aggression have devastated the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. The occupied Palestinian territories are at risk in the coming weeks and months of a rapidly deteriorating situation. In addition to this health crisis, the occupied Palestinian territories simultaneously face a debilitating fiscal crisis. They are also subject to severe restrictions imposed by Israel, the occupying Power, particularly in regard to access to areas in and around occupied East Jerusalem and in crossing to areas west of the illegal wall that limit the country's ability to respond effectively to the outbreak of the virus. As such, the OIC member States express deep concern about the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and urge the international community to demonstrate global solidarity with the Palestinian people to cope with the pandemic. In particular, the OIC member States urge the international community to consider taking the following measures. First, they must support the United Nations COVID-19 response plan for the occupied Palestinian territory. That plan appeals for $34 million to cover urgent and critical activities in the coming three months, with the aim of expanding the capacity of the health system, prevent the transmission of the virus and mitigate the worst effects of the pandemic. We thank the United Nations for its comprehensive plan, which covers important areas such as health, education and food security, and efficiently builds on its existing work and infrastructure in the occupied Palestinian territories. Secondly, it is important to ensure that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to have adequate resources to ensure that appropriate preparedness and response measures are in place at UNRWA installations, in particular health and education facilities. In addition to providing regular annual contributions to the Agency's core budget, Member States can also support UNRWA's COVID-19 flash appeal for Palestine refugees, which aims to mobilize $14 million to cover immediate priorities for health 95/99 96/99 and other services related to the pandemic in the occupied Palestinian territories, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. In that regard, OIC member States commend UNRWA's robust measures to cope with the spread of COVID-19, including by switching to online education and spreading awareness among the refugee communities about preventive measures and social distancing, in addition to the provision of essential health services. Thirdly, it is vital to provide bilateral humanitarian and financial assistance to the Palestinians, including essential medical equipment, testing kits and other types of support, to enhance the capacity of the health system in the occupied Palestinian territories and the refugee camps, as well as to facilitate the reopening of the economy and basic services. In that vein, the OIC member States note with appreciation the quick and effective response of the Palestinian Government and institutions to the COVID-19 outbreak despite limited resources and the fiscal crisis. While the international community is working to help the Palestinians to contain this pandemic, we cannot ignore that the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is exacerbated daily by the illegal policies of the Israeli occupation. These have continued and even escalated in the recent period, particularly in terms of settlement activities and annexation threats, as reflected in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2019/938) on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Israel's ongoing violations of international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, continue to cause immense hardship and suffering for the Palestinian people, further deepening their vulnerability in this time of worldwide crisis. As such, the OIC member States urge the Security Council to pressure Israel to take three immediate steps to help mitigate the situation. First, Israel must stop its inhumane treatment of more than 5,000 Palestinian political prisoners - among them 43 women, 180 children and 700 sick persons. Against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, Israel needs to release all children, elderly persons, sick prisoners and administrative detainees incarcerated in overcrowded Israeli jails where they are at high risk of infection. Secondly, Israel must end its illegal blockade ofthe Gaza Strip, which constitutes collective punishment, is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law, has severe humanitarian consequences for the Palestinian people and is compounding their hardship and suffering during this pandemic. Thirdly, Israel must ensure that Palestinians have access to the humanitarian assistance and medical equipment needed to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. Israel is obligated to take all of those steps in accordance with international humanitarian law, and specifically the Fourth Geneva Convention, which governs situations of foreign occupation. The OIC member States also remain deeply concerned about the construction and expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around occupied East Jerusalem and the Bethlehem area. In addition, the OIC deplores attacks by Israeli settlers, which have escalated in tandem with Israeli officials' continual threats of annexation. Settlers continue to abuse and intimidate Palestinians, raid Palestinian villages, appropriate Palestinian lands, destroy property, uproot olive trees, vandalize crops and contaminate groundwater by pumping industrial waste and sewage water into Palestinian lands. Settlement activities gravely violate the rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination, and undermine the possibility of achieving a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders. Settlement activity poses a challenge to the will of the international community and is a flagrant breach of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Such illegal and destructive activities become even more worrisome in the context of escalating threats by Israel to annex parts or all of the West Bank. Those threats are the culmination of Israel's decades-long settlement colonization scheme and require the immediate attention and action of the international community in order to deter such a breach of the prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force and to salvage the prospects for a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders. In conclusion, the OIC remains firm in its conviction that this organ must act with the utmost urgency to put an end to those Israeli violations. The United Nations must also continue its work to ensure that the Palestinian people achieve their right to self-determination - in the form of a sovereign and independent State in the territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital - and that a just solution is reached for Palestine refugees, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. Moreover, we call for Israel's full withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions. We further affirm the need to preserve the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and social harmony of Syria and reiterate our support for a political solution to the Syrian crisis, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).
