Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Security Council
for this month. I wish friendly Germany every success.

United Nations resolutions, especially Security
Council resolutions, are the basis for relations among
Member States in order to achieve the lofty goals of the
Organization, in particular maintaining international
peace and security, ending occupation and granting
peoples their right to self-determination. However,
Israel has clearly failed to fulfil its commitments under
the Charter of the United Nations. Israel has continued
to violate human rights in a blatant manner.

The latest of the Israeli illegitimate practices was
enacting a law that would allow the occupying Power
to withhold tax revenues belonging to the families
of Palestinian martyrs and detainees. Israel has also
continued its settlement expansion on Palestinian
territory and has continued to violate the sanctity of
religious sites.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reaffirms that the
Palestinian question is its first priority and that any
solution that does not grant Palestinians the right
to establish their own independent State along the
4 June 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, is
doomed to fail. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia remains
committed to international legitimacy, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

We stress once again the need to provide protection
for the Palestinian people, to protect occupied Jerusalem
and to maintain its Arab, Muslim and Christian identity
as well as its legal and historical status. We also stress
the need for Israel to end its occupation of all Arab
territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan, the Sheba'a
Farmlands and all other occupied Lebanese territories.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its
steadfast position on the Syrian Arab Golan as an
occupied territory, according to resolutions 242 (1967)
and 497 (1981). We reject any decision to recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the Golan. We underline that
any such recognition does not change the legal status of
the occupied Syrian Arab Golan.

Iran continues its provocative expansion approach
in the Middle East by supporting the participation
of the terrorist Lebanese organization Hizbullah in
the fighting in Syria and by supporting the Houthi
militias in Yemen, which refuse to implement the
Stockholm Agreement.

We welcome the decision by the United States to
consider the Islamic Revolutionary Guard of Iran and
Hizbullah as terrorist organizations, as well as the
decision by the United Kingdom to consider Hizbullah
as a terrorist organization. We call on the Security
Council to take all the necessary measures to list those
two organizations, including the Houthi militias, as
international terrorist organizations. We also call on
the Council to demonstrate the necessary courage
and to name the parties that continue to obstruct the
peace process in Yemen, first of which is Iran, which
continues to provide the Houthis with weapons, in
clear contravention of resolutions 2140 (2014) and
2216 (2015). My country's Government stresses the
importance of reaching a comprehensive political
solution in Yemen, in line with Council resolutions,
including resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and the outcome of the Yemeni
National Dialogue Conference. We also stress the need
to implement the Stockholm Agreement as the first step
towards a comprehensive political solution.

My country supports the efforts of the Special
Envoy for Syria to resolve the Syrian crisis. We
hope that Syrians will be able to take the appropriate
measures for establishing the suggested constitutional
committee, which will be tasked with drafting a new
Syrian constitution that guarantees equality for Syrians
and fulfils their aspirations to freedom and dignity.
We stress the need to put an end to the suffering of
detainees, abductees and the disappeared in Syria in
order to release them or shed light on their whereabouts
and their fate. That remains a humanitarian concern
that should not be subject to bargaining.

The countries of the region have long suffered
from conflicts and imposed wars, especially the Israeli
occupation of Palestine and the Iranian attempt to
impose its hegemony on the Arabian Gulf. It is time to
put an end to occupation and hegemony in the region
and ensure freedom and prosperity.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will always be the
first to support the people and their decisions so as to
put an end to their suffering, as is the case in Yemen,
the Sudan, Libya and Syria.

