Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): While
the events of 2 May 2011 marked a very important step
in the fight against terrorism, the most recent events in
Morocco, which my country firmly condemns, remind
us that terrorist groups are resolved to continue their
criminal activities. The Security Council must
therefore devote greater attention and vigilance to this
issue as long as the terrorist threat remains a clear and
present danger.

The Committees chaired by Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri, Ambassador Peter Wittig and Ambassador
Baso Sangqu show the resolve of the international
community in combating this threat. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank them for their
briefings on the activities of the Committees that they
have led since January. I would also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the role played by Turkey,
Austria and Mexico in leading the work of the
Committees in 2010 and 2011.

11-3390]
My delegation would like to reaffirm its firm
support for the actions undertaken and mechanisms set
up under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004).

The struggle against terrorism also requires more
sustained international cooperation and the
strengthening of the capacities of the States that are
least equipped to effectively combat this scourge.
Special attention must be paid to the credibility and
legitimacy of international counter-terrorism efforts by
ensuring full respect for obligations imposed under
international, human rights, refugee and international
humanitarian law. My delegation would like to make a
few comments on these three Committees.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning A1-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, we
welcome the first general update of the sanctions list of
all individuals and entities suspected of being
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We believe
that the various amendments made to the list in 2010
by the Monitoring Team and the substantial
information provided on these persons and entities
represent significant progress in terms of the fairness
and transparency of the sanctions.

My delegation urges the Committee to continue
its consideration of pending situations, pursuant to
paragraph 26 of resolution 1904 (2009), especially
those concerning deceased individuals and entities that
no longer exist.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute, as other
delegations have, to the assistance provided by the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost, in the
Committee's consideration of de-listing requests
submitted to it. We are also convinced that
strengthening cooperation and dialogue between the
Committee and Member States will enable us to better
grasp the difficulties faced in the implementation of
resolution 1267 (1999). Similarly, strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL in the field of exchange of information
remains essential.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
Committee has, first, improved its methods of work to
ensure greater transparency and effectiveness in its
work; and secondly, better utilized the tools at its
disposal, including preliminary assessments, to better
focus on the needs of Member States, country visits,
cooperation with regional organizations, and the
promotion of codes of conduct.

We welcome the organization of regional training
workshops as part of an approach that enables us to
highlight the specific challenges faced in certain areas
of the world. My country also had the honour of
hosting, last June, a workshop for countries of the
Central African subregion on the legal provisions
applicable to illegal acts committed against the security
of maritime navigation and offshore platforms. The
conclusions of the workshop have enabled us to raise
awareness among the countries of the subregion on the
dangers of illegal practices on the high seas and to
strengthen their cooperation with a view to putting an
end to such practices. As the Chair of subcommittee C,
Gabon will continue to support the efforts of the 1373
Committee.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation
welcomes the adoption on 20 April of resolution 1977
(2011), extending the mandate of the Committee for 10
more years. The resolution also recalls the obligation
of Member States to adopt national provisions
regarding the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. We therefore
welcome the establishment of a group of experts under
the Committee, charged with ensuring the
implementation of the resolution. We also welcome the
strengthening of the objectives of the Committee in the
fields of assistance and cooperation.

In conclusion, we recall the global nature of
counter-terrorism efforts, which require the active
participation and cooperation of all States,
international and regional organizations and civil
society. Gabon will continue to lend its support to
Ambassador Puri, Ambassador Wittig and Ambassador
Sangqu in the discharge of their respective mandates.

