Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): You will have the last
word, Mr. President, so I will go before you.

I am not going to repeat what I have already said on
two occasions, except to join others in stressing that our
clarion call is for follow-up and, in particular, for speed
in the deployment of United Nations military observers,
to be followed by the deployment of the United Nations
peacekeeping force itself under a Chapter VII mandate.

Secondly, there is a need for a clear and categorical
definition of the relationship between the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Joint Military Commission (JMC) as
regards the command and control structure. Thirdly, arms
supplies and sanctions-busting must be stopped by all
necessary means. Ambassador's Fowler's work is
pioneering in this regard, and we should all support him.

I am looking forward to reflecting on the letters that
are on their way to my office in respect of, among other
issues, the proposed special session of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS. I welcome the idea of setting up
a Security Council expert group to follow up on the

 

important issues discussed and decisions taken here.
However, I would like to remind the Council that in
furtherance with the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict in Africa (S/1998/318), the General
Assembly set up a working group to deal with the
implementation of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

I would only appeal for all efforts to be made for
greater coordination involving the Security Council, the
General Assembly - I should have listed the General
Assembly first - and the Economic and Social Council.
We are really dealing with interrelated, if not similar,
issues. While I welcome the need for greater coordination
and consultation between the Security Council and the
Organization of African Unity, we must begin at home.
That means strengthening cooperation and regular
consultations involving the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council.
We are all agreed on support for the JMC and the
facilitation.

