Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate on
the Middle East. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for his very insightful and timely
briefing. This is an important time for Palestine and
Israel, as well as the entire region. There is a slight
tinge of optimism in Mr. Feltman's briefing today.
A flicker of hope appeared after the visits of
President Barack Obama and Secretary of State John
Kerry to the region. That tentative beginning, after
a long hiatus, should be leveraged to generate the
momentum for engagement and a resumption of the
peace process.

The Security Council, the Quartet and the regional
leaders need to energize the stalled peace process.
While different bodies, including the Council, must
play their role, it is conventional wisdom that the most
decisive impetus for restarting the peace process will
come from Israel and Palestine. Working towards
sustainable peace is in the interest of both countries.
We all know that a leadership role by the United States
could persuade the two sides to come to the negotiating
table. The process needs benchmarks and deadlines.

In his report pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 67/19, the Secretary-General reiterates that
an end to the occupation and the achievement of a two-
State solution are overdue (see A/67/364). He gives us
a stark reminder that the year 2013 will be decisive for
the peace process. Similar views have been expressed
by other regional and world leaders.

However, a two-State solution is rapidly vanishing.
Palestine and Israel have not met for the past two and
a half years. There is an impasse in the peace process.
United States Secretary of State John Kerry warned
last week that the window for a two-State solution is
shutting after years of failure and that the chance to
create a Palestinian State alongside Israel will be lost
in one to two years. That is not a gloomy forecast. It
is the reality developing on the ground. That warning
underlines the sense of urgency for taking concrete
steps fast. The two sides need to engage. To do that,
they must overcome their persistent scepticism.

The ongoing settlement construction and Israel's
plans for new settlements in the E-l area will hinder the
two-State solution by cutting the West Bank into two
and destroying the contiguity of the Palestinian State.
A one-State reality will be unlawful and unsustainable.

The United Nations Independent International
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, established
by the Human Rights Council, pronounced that Israeli
settlements symbolized the acute lack of justice
experienced by the Palestinian people (see A/64/490, annex). The settlements deny the people of Palestine
the right to self-determination and systematically
discriminate against them. The report calls on Israel
to comply with article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and to cease all settlement activities
without preconditions. We concur. In the interest of
both Israel and Palestine, new Israeli settlement plans
must be frozen and earlier decisions rescinded.

It is in the interest of Israel itself to work towards
a long-term and sustainable resolution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Ending the Israeli occupation of the
Syrian Golan and Lebanese lands is imperative in that
regard. The establishment of a viable, independent
and contiguous State of Palestine on the basis of the
pre-l967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
is the only lasting solution to the Palestinian question.

This is also a time for national cohesion within
Palestine. The momentum towards building and
consolidating the national institutions 4 interior,
police, finance, health-care and education - must
be maintained. The flow of financial assistance to
Palestine should not slow down. We hope that the recent
elections in Israel and the consequent formation of
the Government will not be cited as justification for a
reduced interest in the resumption of the peace process.

While we continue to push for a long-term solution
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, urgent measures must be
taken to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people.

First, Gaza has become one big prison. As
demanded by resolution 1860 (2009), the blockade on
Gaza must be lifted. The heightened restrictions on the
movement of people and goods, as well as on fishing
limits, must be removed.

Secondly, checkpoints and barriers should be
removed from the West Bank because they interfere
with mobility and trade. The World Bank report to
the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians in Brussels last month provides details
of the damage to the Palestinian economy caused by
Israeli restrictions. Productivity has halved since the
late 1990s and the rate of unemployment has increased
many times.

Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority's tax revenues
should be transferred to Ramallah on time.

Fourthly, the inhuman treatment of the Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails should be
stopped.

Fifthly, an independent investigation into the death
of Arafat Jaradat in Israeli custody is overdue. It must
be initiated and be concluded in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

We welcome the agreement between Palestine and
Israel on UNESCO involvement in Jerusalem. It is a
small but important confidence-building measure.

Let me now turn to Syria. Syria is being decimated
before our own eyes. Last week's briefings to the
Council revealed that more than 70,000 people have
been killed (see S/PV.6949). Syrians are killing Syrians.
Foreign terrorist organizations have penetrated into
Syrian territory. Summary executions are on the rise.
More than 1.3 million Syrians have taken refuge in
neighbouring countries. Some 7 million people inside
Syria need humanitarian attention and assistance. The
crisis is assuming more sinister dimensions by the day.
Violence and refugees are threatening to embroil the
whole region in a wider conflict.

The dictates of realpolitik have immobilized the
international community and the Council from making
any meaningful intervention. Matters have reached a
tipping point. The competing doctrines ofmilitarization
and military triumph are choking conduits for dialogue
and diplomacy.

The supply of weapons to all sides should be halted.
Within the opposition, some entities and outfits are
allied to Al-Qaida. Judging by the Libyan experience,
such weapons will end up in the hands of terrorists,
who could plunge the entire region into a wider crisis.

Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi and
the other briefers last week made impassioned pleas
to the Council to work towards a political solution.
We continue to feel that the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) contains all the right ingredients for
political dialogue and dispensation. No other alternative
is in sight. Syrians, regional countries and major Powers
need to sit with Mr. Brahimi to implement the Geneva
communique. If there is any fresh thinking, it needs to
be developed rapidly and shared with Council members.
We earnestly hope that that will happen without delay
to stop further carnage in Syria.

We appeal to all sides to continue to trust
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as a mediator. It is also important
that he continue to represent both the Secretary-General
and the Arab League.

