Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): Thank you, Mr. President, for
your very kind words, which I greatly appreciate.

( spoke in Arabic)

It is my pleasure also to welcome the initiative taken
by your country, Canada, to convene this extremely
important meeting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to hold the open meeting of 12 February
under the presidency of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Canada.

I should like also to thank you, Sir, for giving States
that are not members of the Security Council the
opportunity to hear the statements made by Mr. Vieira de
Mello, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Cornelio
Sommaruga, Chairman of the International Committee of
the Red Cross; Ms. Bellamy, Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund; and Mr. Olara Otunnu,

 

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

There is no doubt that the issues that have been raised
concern us all. In this connection, I am pleased today to
comment on the views that drew Egypt's attention at the
two meetings at which we heard those statements.

Let me at the outset point out that it is important that
the Council, when seized with such an important and urgent
question, not get bogged down in pure theory to the
detriment of action. The Council should handle this
question with full respect for the delicate balance of the
roles assigned to various organs under the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular the role of the General
Assembly in considering the general principles of
cooperation to eliminate human suffering, including
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The delegation of Egypt believes that in the light of
the nature and scope of this issue, it would be desirable to
inscribe this item on the agenda of the General Assembly
as well as that of the Economic and Social Council, in
order that more comprehensive discussions be held to
supplement Canada's wise decision to convene this Council
meeting.

The Council's responsibility, as I understand it, is
based on its competence under the Charter, including the
complementarity between its work and that of humanitarian
agencies - work that now exceeds the capacities of the
United Nations, including the Security Council.

As this century draws to a close and we prepare to
enter a new millennium, and in a year when the world is
commemorating the hundredth anniversary of the First
International Peace Conference at The Hague and the
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions, it is
regrettable that we should witness an increase in the
number of civilians who are victims of armed conflict.
Indeed, civilians represent 75 to 80 per cent of such
victims, as seen in Sierra Leone, Rwanda, Liberia, Kosovo,
the Great Lakes region and in other areas.

This is reprehensible and shameful regardless of
whether civilians are deliberately targeted or become the
incidental victims of collateral damage. However, this
phenomenon has causes and roots, mainly the fact that the
Council has not been able to fulfil its functions because of
political considerations. The Security Council should
therefore assume its responsibility to find radical solutions
to the conflicts that jeopardize international peace and

 

security, and resolve them in an integrated and global
manner by analysing their causes. This will prevent the
escalation of violence among the combatants and avert
serious humanitarian consequences such as the
displacement or expulsion of populations or their exodus
to neighbouring countries, which would bring further
suffering to the civilian populations and lead to an
unending vicious circle.

We reiterate this to emphasize the importance of
proceeding with concrete action and not limiting ourselves
to rehashing legal issues.

There is clearly an unprecedented gap between the
norms of international humanitarian law and their actual
implementation.

The issue, however, is not to revise such rules,
which will evolve organically and must always be
scrupulously implemented. Instead, we should ensure the
implementation of obligations agreed by the international
community, as represented by the 188 States parties to the
1949 Conventions, which are committed under common
article 1 to ensuring respect for the norms of the
Conventions in all circumstances. We must all ensure that
there is no conflict between the application of
international humanitarian law and the need to observe
and implement the provisions of the Charter. It is
essential, not to allow the implementation of international
humanitarian law or the practical considerations of
humanitarian protection to lead to contraventions of the
Charter.

We welcome the Council's wise reaction to
situations in which civilians are targeted and humanitarian
assistance is deliberately hindered. Many current conflicts
are taking place within rather than between States. We
must therefore determine the extent to which the United
Nations can actually intervene to settle such conflicts. The
international community should preserve the fundamental
characteristic of States - their sovereignty - which is
the very foundation of contemporary international law and
a key principle of the Charter. This, of course, is also
addressed in paragraph 7 of Article 2, which defines the
relationship between matters which are essentially within
the domestic jurisdiction of any State and the enforcement
measures the Council may take when international peace
and security are threatened.

The international community should also ensure that
the Council respect the fundamental criteria laid down in
the Charter on the use of force solely under Chapter VII.

 

Article 39 provides for the use force only when the
Security Council determines the existence of any threat to
the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression and
makes recommendations or decides what measures shall be
taken in accordance with Articles 41 and 42. There is a
distinction to be drawn between the rules of international
law on the protection of civilians in international conflicts,
on the one hand, and in internal conflicts, on the other. This
distinction can be based on legal as well as practical
considerations.

I cannot fail here to express my full satisfaction at the
fact that certain members of the Security Council, including
permanent members, have mentioned the need for the
Council to act within the limits of its competence. We
support their appeal to ensure that different yardsticks not
be used in the area of human rights. The international
community must grant equal attention to all situations in
which there is loss of life or egregious violation of human
rights, wherever they may occur and without bias for the
political considerations of some members of the Council,
particularly the permanent members, over the general
concerns of the Council and the Members of the United
Nations as a whole. Thus, the Council must accord equal
attention to the peoples of the Balkans, Palestine and other
occupied Arab territories where there have been
displacements, isolation, demographic changes or any
situation requiring international protection.

It is also regrettable that the world must currently
confront the phenomenon of the systematic exploitation of
children, who are often compelled under different guises by
force to participate in conflicts. It has been estimated that
approximately 300,000 children are being used as soldiers
in current conflicts. The Egyptian delegation urges all
belligerents in the various conflicts throughout the world to
respect children's innocence and ensure that it be preserved,
for children are our hope for future peace. We also support
the practical recommendation made by certain speakers that
the minimum age for the recruitment of soldiers be raised
to 18. More than 2 million children have been killed, 1
million orphaned, more than 6 million severely wounded
and more than 10 million displaced. This gives us pause
and we must take it very seriously.

We believe that the protection of children requires
action at several levels. The key lies in full respect for
human rights, especially those of civilians, and in the
education of combatants on the rules for the protection of
children. Specific rules must be added to the code of
conduct on the protection of children. We must ensure that
humanitarian personnel is trained in the protection of

 

children in armed conflict. In this connection, we would
like State and non-State actors alike to commit themselves
to sparing children the scourge of war and to ensuring
that those who survive wars do not become vindictive in
their suffering.

Concerning the impact on civilians of sanctions
imposed by the Council, I also wish to point out that
these sanctions affect children first and foremost in the
areas of nutrition, health, education and psychology. The
sanctions that have been imposed in our times on certain
States, such as Iraq, have had truly tragic consequences
for the civilian population in general and children in
particular, as well as on third countries, engendering
bitterness and exacerbating aggressiveness. These
situations should be revisited and innovative responses
considered to ensure that the victims - civilians in
general and children in particular - receive help.

Another important issue is the guarantee of
protection for humanitarian personnel. Disquieting and
deplorable are the current conflicts in which humanitarian
agencies cannot intervene because human rights, safety
and security are being flouted. When the safety of
humanitarian personnel cannot be ensured, they cannot
carry out their jobs. Many have suffered in the line of
duty, being killed, injured or kidnapped. There must be
greater sensitization in humanitarian affairs to the
alleviation of human suffering.

Our delegation wishes here to pay a tribute to the
very important role played by the International Committee
of the Red Cross, particularly in disseminating these ideas
and in trying to ensure respect for humanitarian law.
Since last year, the world has witnessed two important
events capable of promoting the implementation of
international humanitarian law.

The first may apply in theory: the adoption of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. We hope that
it will be up to the task of punishing those who practice
their violent activities without scruple. The Statue of the
Court is intended principally to protect civilians and we
hope that the punishment of perpetrators in these
situations will serve to keep others from repeating such
activities.

The second development is the positive and
unprecedented decision to call upon the High Contracting
Parties to the 1949 Geneva Conventions to convene a
conference of the States parties on 15 July this year in the
United Nations Office in Geneva on measures to enforce

 

the Fourth Geneva Convention in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to ensure its respect in accordance with
common article 1. This would make it possible to hold
similar conferences for follow-up and support and to
monitor implementation of such conventions. Egypt
believes that the holding of this important conference is one
step forward to enhance international humanitarian law.
Egypt is profoundly convinced that the Swiss Government,
as the depositary State of the four Conventions, will spare
no effort to ensure the success of the Conference.

Having said this, I should like to revert to the role of
the Security Council, to reaffirm what I have said at the
outset and what was stated already by the Egyptian
delegation, on what considerations should be taken into
account in the determination of the mandate of any
operation which has a military component and which reacts
to humanitarian issues on conflict.

First, we must draw a distinction between the
responsibility and objective of the action and the
responsibility and objective of the humanitarian effort. The
Council should avoid the pitfall of leaving the humanitarian
actions and discussions as an alternative to political or
military actions.

Secondly, this mandate must always include
arrangements related to the voluntary return of refugees,
their repatriation and their compensation for loss of

property.

Thirdly, rules of engagement must also be clarified
and rendered more specific, as they are the very foundation
for United Nations forces in dealing with the parties to a
conflict. We must ensure that tragic events such as those
that occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina do not recur.
Those rules should include the principles established in the
traditional peacekeeping emergency operations which the
United Nations began in Egypt in 1956. Those principles
can be summarized in a few words: neutrality, self-defence
and the ability to protect headquarters.

Finally and in conclusion, the Security Council asked
the Secretary-General to submit a detailed report containing
practical recommendations on the means by which the
Council could enhance physical and legal protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We support the
idea that the Secretary-General should meet this request,
and in view of the complementarity between the Council
and the whole system of humanitarian protection I have
mentioned, my delegation also said the Secretary-General
should submit his report to the General Assembly as well,

 

so that the Council and the Assembly may both shoulder
their responsibilities without contradicting each other.

