Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members of
the European Economic Area - Iceland and Norway -
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union wishes to reaffirm once again
its strong support for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and its admiration for the
achievements of that Tribunal since it was established
under Security Council resolution 827 (1993). The
important mandate entrusted to the Tribunal by this
Council is to prosecute persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed in
the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1 January
1991. This mandate is vital not only to avoid the
possibility of the perpetrators of these crimes enjoying
impunity, but also to ensure the full implementation of the
Dayton Accords and thus support a peaceful resolution of
the situation in the former Yugoslavia as a whole.

The European Union notes with satisfaction that the
work of the International Tribunal has recently intensified.
One trial has been completed, subject to appeal, and in
another the accused has pleaded guilty and been
sentenced to five years' imprisonment. Four other cases
are ongoing. Sixty individuals are currently under
indictment by the Tribunal, 26 of whom are in its
custody. At the same time, we note with concern that
compliance by the States in the region with their
obligations under resolution 827 (1993) and article 29 of
the Statute of the Tribunal to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal remains uneven. The European
Union calls upon all States and entities in the region to
fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal.

Given the increase in the Tribunal's workload,it is no
surprise that the existing judicial resources of the Tribunal
are under heavy pressure. While the Statute of the
Tribunal does guarantee all those appearing before it a
fair and expeditious trial, it is nevertheless the case that
some of those persons who are in custody have been
awaiting trial for a long period of time. The addition of
a third Trial Chamber of the International Tribunal, which
has been requested by the President of the Tribunal, will
enable the backlog of cases before the Tribunal to be
dealt with more efficiently. The European Union is
therefore in favour of the establishment of the third Trial
Chamber in accordance with the draft resolution before
the Security Council today.

The European Union also supports the request made
to the Secretary-General in this draft resolution to
enhance further the effective functioning of the
International Tribunal, in particular by the timely
provision of personnel and facilities. In this context, the
European Union is pleased to recall that a second
courtroom has recently been opened for the holding of

 

trials and that a third courtroom is expected to be
completed in the near future. We reaffirm once again that
it is essential that the Tribunal be given adequate resources
to carry out its mandate effectively and that personnel of
the Tribunal be managed efficiently. The European Union
and its member States have made voluntary contributions to
assist the Tribunal in fulfilling its functions. We express the
hope that the Tribunal will continue to be provided with the
necessary financial support, not least through the payment
of annual contributions promptly and in full.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the decision to
increase the number of Trial Chambers of the International
Tribunal, together with the decision taken by the Council
last month in resolution 1165 (1998) to increase the number
of Trial Chambers for the Rwanda Tribunal, both point to
the broader concern of the international community that
persons who commit serious offences, such as war crimes,
be brought to justice. In this context, the European Union
wishes to emphasize its strong support for the establishment
of the international criminal court at the Diplomatic
Conference to be held in Rome in June and July this year.
The European Union firmly believes that the establishment
of such a court is necessary in order to provide a permanent
mechanism to bring to justice those who commit the most
serious crimes of international concern and to deter the
commission of such crimes in the future.

