Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): Let me begin by commending
the delegation of Egypt for convening this open debate
on a very important subject. My appreciation also
goes to the Deputy Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their insightful expositions on the topic of
our discussion.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf on the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

United Nations peacekeeping operations constitute
one of the veritable tools at the disposal of the
Organization for performing one of its three critical
founding objectives, namely, maintaining peace and
security and promoting human rights and development.
It has become imperative to note that those three
objectives are mutually dependent and reinforcing. In
that regard, resolution 2282 (2016) rightly states, inter
alia, that sustaining peace encompasses activities aimed
at preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, addressing root causes,
assisting parties to conflict to end hostilities, ensuring
national reconciliation and moving towards recovery,
reconstruction and development.

The doctrine of sustaining peace is becoming a
new paradigm in conflict management, so that even
peacekeeping operations are adapting to many of its
precepts. The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations identified four strategic shifts required for
the United Nations to successfully adapt to the changing
nature of conflict. Those consist of the following: a
political approach, a continuum of options ranging from
the deployment of Special Envoys to the deployment
of peacekeeping operations, partnerships with regional
organizations in order to fully exploit the comparative
advantages of each organization and a field-focused
and people-centred approach to peacekeeping.

The doctrine of prevention in peacekeeping
operations is not just about stopping conflicts
from happening or escalating, it is about continued
engagement from the early signs of conflict to the
post-recovery phase. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding
have therefore become so interwoven that they may be
considered simultaneously at each conflict phase. Even
where there is yet no need for the deployment of force,
the threat of force as a deterrent may dissuade parties
from abandoning an existing peace process.

There is need to recognize that no two conflicts
are the same, and therefore a one-size-fits-all approach
will always be misleading. In that regard, the analytical
framework for a peacekeeping mandate needs to be
exclusively unique to the conflict and to its environment.
Effective collaboration with regional arrangements in
the drafting of peacekeeping mandates is invaluable,
considering the obvious advantages that such regional
bodies have, including deeper insight on the conflict.
The environment, the people and their culture and
sensitivities; as well as the history of similar situations
also play their parts.

A phased mandate process would also be beneficial,
as it has the potential of making room for an assessment
of the phase of the conflict and what needs to be done
in the next phase. It is also useful to understand the
dynamics of the conflict in order to determine what new
mandate elements would bring improved results, and
so on. The complexity of contemporary conflicts also
informs the need for improved situational awareness;
and for the protection of civilians under imminent
threat of violence.

A critical element in sustaining peace is the
opportunity for reconciliation. Peace initiatives that
allow stakeholders to freely initiate and conclude
negotiations based on give-and-take concessions, are
most likely to attain enduring levels of compromise and
stability. A situation where parties are encouraged to
sign peace agreements drafted in foreign capitals, with
presumed knowledge of the issues, and of solutions that
are presumably suitable and acceptable to the parties,
may not achieve the desired results.

A very important component of the sustaining
peace agenda is the engagement of civil society. In
the past, the restriction of peace negotiations to armed
parties has proven to be fatally flawed, as those parties
may have limited, short-sighted political objectives that
do not lead to a sustained peace. The involvement of
young people, women, religious and community leaders
has intrinsic value that supports peace on a continued
basis. In that regard, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) would be very helpful to sustaining peace.

At this juncture, I need to stress the need to respect
the sovereignty of States, which is a fundamental
principle under the Charter of the United Nations. Host
States must buy into the peace process before they can
have a meaningful chance of success. Achieving that
buy-in requires great tact on the part of the international
community. On the part of host States, statesmanship
will be the key to embracing processes that would
yield peace, stability, development and justice on a
sustainable basis. A successful peacekeeping mandate
must therefore consider the following factors: effective
collaboration with host States, civil society, conflicting
parties and community leaders; the insight and
support of regional arrangements; the goal of genuine
reconciliation; the conflict dynamics; and respect for
State sovereignty reciprocated by State support for the
peace process.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that, in view of
the significant role of peacekeepers, it is imperative for
all concerned to make efforts to ensure the safety of
all peacekeepers.

