Mr. McCully (New Zealand): The situation in
Syria is bleak. Aleppo has fallen. The fate of tens of
thousands of civilians is unclear. Despite the strong
calls from members of the Security Council and others,
civilians continue to suffer.

New Zealand has used strong words in this Chamber
to describe the actions of Russia, and we stand by them.
Indeed, Russia, Iran and the Syrian Government bear
much of the responsibility to ensure the protection of
civilians. They must allow the United Nations to do its
job to get aid to those who need it and to ensure the
safety of those who stay and those who wish to leave.

The Security Council will meet behind closed doors
shortly to talk about how the United Nations might get
more involved in eastern Aleppo. To date the Security
Council has been unable to meet its responsibilities.
Unless that is going to change, it is our view that an
emergency special session of the General Assembly is
an appropriate next step.

In thanking His Excellency the Secretary-General
for his final briefing on the Middle East it is difficult
not to be struck by the depressing familiarity of much
of what he has imparted: a continuation of incitement
and violence against ordinary Israelis and Palestinians
and a continuation of the settlements programme,
which undermines the prospect of a viable Palestine
and challenges the credibility of any commitment to the
two-State solution.
In listening to today's briefing and to recent
briefings by the Secretary-General's Special
Coordinator it is difficult to understand how the
Council can be silent when the space for a two-State
solution is being so clearly undermined. Since 1947,
the Council and the international community have
embraced the notion of two States living peacefully
side by side as the only acceptable basis for resolution
of this issue - as reinforced in Oslo and Madrid and in
a number of Security Council resolutions. But we have
been told in words of one syllable that developments
taking place on the ground now threaten the viability of
the two-State solution and that the people on the ground
are losing hope in the two-State solution, with all of the
consequences that follow.

Since the previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7820) we have seen the situation compounded
by legislation before the Knesset that could lead to
the legalization of settlements and outposts, including
on privately owned Palestinian land. Since the last
briefing we have seen opportunities missed to advance
Palestinian reconciliation.

In the past we have participated in these debates
and expressed frustration with the challenges and
shortcomings from all sides, but also expressed
optimism that we would somehow see parties find
their way back to the negotiating table. That has been
difficult, but we are now moving beyond difficult. We
are now moving into a space in which the plain facts
are telling us that the forces currently in play will
irretrievably undermine the prospect of two States
living peacefully side by side.

It is difficult to see the legislation now before by
the Knesset as other than a direct challenge to the
notion of a two-State solution and a direct challenge to
the resolutions previously adopted by the Council.

Where does that leave the Council? It is eight
years since the Council last adopted a resolution
on this question. Over that time a good number of
reasons have been advanced as to why further Council
pronouncements might be counterproductive or
premature. But when the Secretary-General and his
representatives tell the Council that not only are people
on the ground losing hope in the two-State solution
but that the facts on the ground are being altered to
render a two-State solution unviable, it seems to me
that the Council must either reassert, on behalf of the
international community, a firm commitment to the
two-State solution or it should start to turn its attention
to its responsibilities in the event there is one State not
two. A one-State future clearly takes us into territory
that no friend of Israel wishes to contemplate.

My country has been engaging with fellow Council
members on the type of draft text that would reassert
the two-State solution and call clearly for a halt to
the Violence and the settlements, which threaten to
undermine this process. We very much welcome the
advice that Arab colleagues are working on text for
this purpose.

It is time for us, the collective membership of
the Council, to stop being bystanders and act as the
custodians of the two-State solution that we should be.

