Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having put this item on the agenda.

Let me start by expressing our condolences to the
Government and the people of Burkina Faso in the
wake of this terrible terrorist attack. You will recall,
Mr. President, that under the joint French-German
presidencies of the Security Council in March and
April, the Council visited Burkina Faso and witnessed
the situation on the ground and the efforts made by the
Government and by Cote d'Ivoire, which co-chaired
the mission. We are aware of the efforts made by the
Government, but it is clear that the Government alone
is not able to resolve this situation. This is a regional
problem that requires regional support, and we need to
support the African efforts made in this respect.

Our Chinese colleague, in his intervention, noted
the need for African solutions to African problems.
There are some African solutions here, and I would
again repeat our appeal for United Nations support
for the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. We
need this stabilization force; we need to stabilize the
region urgently.

I would like to thank Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
very comprehensive, very transparent and very frank
report and to reiterate what he said: that peacebuilding
has changed for the better. I would like to endorse this
and to commend him for all the efforts made and for
what he said concerning the new spirit and the new
mobility; better trained and better equipped personnel;
and the fact that the number of fatalities has decreased,
although, as he said, one peacekeeper killed is one too
many. We have to continue to work in that direction,
and, as he noted and as has been underlined around the
table, a lot remains to be done.

I would encourage the Secretary-General and the
Under-Secretary-General to continue with the policy
of, on the one hand, sharing positive examples and,
on the other, reporting on the obstacles and problems
that remain.

I would like to make one general and in three
specific points.

The general one is that peacekeeping is not a stand-
alone technical effort. It has to be embedded in a holistic
approach in order to effectively enhance stability, since
there is a need to strengthen the rule of law, the justice
and penal system and the police component. It is vital to
promote the women and peace and security agenda, and
to work on development and economic issues so that
fragile countries can get back on their feet.

We therefore need the One United Nations approach,
which is key and also includes the Peacebuilding
Commission. Germany is committed to flanking
all peacekeeping missions with its national civilian
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.

Concerning our concrete support for the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, we are committed to its success
and have taken on the role of its champion. For us three
fields are particularly important, and I would echo
what my Indonesian colleague has just said with regard
to, first, training. We support predeployment training
and mobile training teams financially and technically.
We deploy German experts and we host conferences,
on safety and security for example. Secondly, with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda, we
believe that it is very important to promote awareness
regarding the protection of women from sexual and
gender-based violence, in line with resolution 1325
(2000). We work hard regularly on integrating this topic
in the mandating of peacekeeping missions, which we
regard to be very important.

Mr. Lacroix has reported some progress with
regard to the number of female uniformed personnel,
but I think that we are all aware that we need to do
more in that regard. Member States may remember
that, during Germany's presidency of the Security
Council, our Defence Minister was present here to
promote the issue and to support initiatives, including
by highlighting our own initiatives on the global female
peacekeepers network and its financial support to the
valuable Canadian Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations and its trust fund (see S/PV.8508). We have
sent more women into peacekeeping missions. We
have a national barrier study and enhanced military
observer training. We know that in Germany we still
need to do more. Our numbers are still quite low. Our
Chief of Defence issued a guidance to our service to
enable more women to take part in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Lastly, we need to constantly improve through
review, and we support the targeted reviews conducted
by the Office for the Peacekeeping Strategic Partnership
through voluntary contributions because we believe that
we must identify the shortfalls that exist in a systematic
manner in order to tackle them.

