Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): I am pleased to present to the Council, in the early part of this year,the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic (S/2020/124). As the Council is aware, this year is an important turning point for the men and women of the Central African Republic, who, starting in December 2020, will be going to the polls to elect their leaders. However, before speaking about the electoral process, I would like to share with the Council a brief analysis of the main political, economic and security developments that have taken place in recent months in the Central African Republic. On 6 February, the country commemorated the first anniversary of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed by the Government and 14 armed groups. That commemoration was an opportunity to look back on the progress and address challenges in implementing the peace agreement. Among the notable strides made, I should like to first stress that the inclusive Government that emerged from the peace agreement remains valid and operational and that the signatory parties have reaffirmed their commitment to it, notwithstanding, of course, numerous difficulties. I also note the significant decrease in violence against the civilian population; the gradual and continuous extension of State authority, including the appointment of all prefects in all 16 prefectures of the country; and the ongoing deployment of the Central African Armed Forces and the internal security forces, including in areas where they were previously absent. The disarmament process has not been launched in the west of the country. Similarly, progress has also been made in the establishment of the special mixed security units, as provided for by the peace agreement. On 16 December, the first recruits of the special mixed security units completed their training in Bouar and are awaiting deployment. However, many logistical and political challenges remain to be addressed before they are operationalized. We can also commend the progress made in the fight against impunity and the promotion of transitional justice. Despite some structural challenges in the judicial and penitentiary administrations, jurisdictions are continuing their work, with the technical and logistical support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the United Nations Development Programme, by holding criminal sessions more or less regularly. I welcome the conviction on 7 February of 28 persons involved in the violence committed in Bangassou in 2017, including in the killing of Blue Helmets. For its part, the Special Criminal Court is pursuing its judicial investigations into cases of serious human rights violations and examining cases in relation to the 2019 civilian massacres in the Paoua region by members of the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation armed group. Furthermore, the key draft laws envisaged in the peace agreement are now in Parliament, including the bills on the status of former Presidents, the bill on political parties and opposition and the bill to establish the commission on truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation. Once adopted - hopefully in the coming weeks - those laws should contribute to creating a peaceful political environment and provide armed groups with political alternatives for their demands. The commission on truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation should provide the long-awaited reconciliation framework that will allow the victims of the crisis to have their voices heard and receive reparations for harm done. While the victims are waiting for reparations, the Central African people, scarred by years of conflict, hope to enjoy the dividends of peace as soon as possible. That is why I wish to commend the macroeconomic progress observed in the Central African Republic in 2019, the promising growth prospects for 2020 and the progress made in the implementation of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We hope that such economic impact and peace dividends will make it possible to increase the population's access to basic public services throughout the country and thereby promote a gradual improvement in the daily lives of the Central African population. (spoke in English) As we all know, a peace agreement is not yet peace. It is a step forward in a long process that is sometimes fraught with pitfalls. Despite significant advances in the implementation of the peace agreement, several challenges remain. Those include persistent violations of the peace agreement by some armed groups, which have continued over the past year to occupy administrative buildings, collect illegal taxes and expand their areas of influence. Despite improvement in the overall security situation of the country, there remain pockets of instability, related mainly to clashesbetween armed groups competing for territory and resources. Those clashes pose serious threats to the protection of civilians and have also led to rising intercommunal tensions in locations like Birao, Bria and Alindao. Those security developments in the north remain sources of major concerns. The inter-ethnic clashes in Birao between Runga members of the Front populaire pour larenaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and the Mouvement des liberateurs centrafricains pour la justice (MLCJ), mainly Kara, have further weakened the security and humanitarian situation in that part of the country. (spoke in French) In response to those worrying developments, MINUSCA has had to adopt a robust posture to curb the attempts to invade the town of Birao made by the FPRC and to take measures to protect the civilian population, in line with its mandate. Even as I speak, mediation efforts are under way for a cessation of hostilities between the warring parties. I strongly condemn the FPRC and the MLCJ for the resumption of fighting, in flagrant violation of the peace agreement. I would also like to condemn the public call for violence against MINUSCA, launched by the FPRC in Ndele, where the population was rallied to invade the MINUSCA camp. That is all the more unacceptable as it uses women and children as human shields to besiege the MINUSCA camp and obstruct its operations. I also denounce the illegal expansion of the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique into the extreme south-east of the country, Haut-Mbomou and some localities in the west. MINUSCA recently launched a military operation to halt that expansion and will spare no effort to stop the violence and protect civilians. I urge the Council, for its part, to consider strong measures against all those who continue to impede the implementation of the peace agreement. Such bleak news from the ground has not diminished MINUSCA's determination to implement the mandate that the Council conferred upon it. Together with the guarantors and facilitators of the peace agreement, as well as other international partners, we continue to take all necessary steps to, in particular, protect civilians, support the parties in the implementation of the peace agreement and support the preparation of the presidential and legislative elections of 2020- 2021 - an important step in the strengthening of the country's democratic institutions and the rule of law. As those elections approach, new _ political dynamics have emerged, notably with the return of former Presidents Bozize and Djotodia from exile. Both have stated and reaffirmed their desire to contribute to peace, stability and the holding of peaceful elections, which is to be welcomed. Allow me to commend President Faustin Archange Touadera for his spirit of openness and for engaging in consultations with the former Heads of State and Prime Ministers in order to ensure a peaceful political environment. It is also essential to ensure the inclusiveness of those elections by allowing refugees to vote and increasing the participation of women as candidates and voters. Moreover, the establishment of the framework for consultation with political parties of all stripes, civil society and public authorities, which held its first meeting on 17 February, is to be welcomed as it augurs well for the consensual management of the electoral process. However, the elections can be held only if the international community lends all its technical, logistical and financial support. Despite the mobilization of nearly half of the resources necessary for the holding of the elections within the constitutional time frame, it is urgent that all pledged funds be disbursed as soon as possible and that the resources that are lacking be mobilized. I urgently appeal to all Central African Republic's partners to honour their commitments and provide the unpaid contributions, and I request the support of the Council to that end. In that regard, I would like to thank the Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for the renewed support of his institution for the stabilization of the country, as he further demonstrated during his visit to Bangui last week. I have no doubt that his calls will bolster my calls for financing for the elections. In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the countries of the region that have rallied to revitalize their cooperation with the Central African Republic, thereby contributing to the stabilization and peace efforts in the Central African Republic. I also commend the determination and political will of the Government to mobilize all the active forces to ensure the full success of the implementation of the peace agreement and the holding of the forthcoming elections, which will open a new chapter in the history of the country. I know that the men and women of the Central AfricanRepublic will also always be able to count on the goodwill and support of the Security Council.
