Ms. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for your leadership at this meeting.

The idea of seeking justice for victims of genocide,
crimes against humanity and other atrocity crimes had
its beginning in the years following the Second World
War. Nothing could replace the lives lost or make families
whole again, but by holding perpetrators to account for
their crimes, a measure ofjustice was provided to the
victims and the loved ones they left behind. By acting
here today, we cannot restore the lives, the dignity or
the innocence of the victims of crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), but by
taking such an important step towards holding ISIL
accountable for its many unspeakable crimes we can
achieve justice. In time, that will hopefully begin a
process of healing.

It may have taken a long time to get here, but today's
resolution 2379 (2017) is a landmark. It is a major first
step towards addressing the death, suffering and injury
ofthe victims of crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq. The
crimes include genocide. The victims had been Yazidis,
Christians, Shia and Sunni Muslims and many, many
more. In the long history of human beings committing
atrocities against their fellow human beings, the crimes
of ISIL stand out, especially the brutality they have
inflicted on girls and women. Thousands of Yazidi
women and girls have been kidnapped by ISIL and then
bought and sold like animals. I have met with some of
those women. The victims of rape and sexual slavery

are understandably reluctant to speak out publicly, but
thanks to what we do here today, the world will still
hear about their suffering.

The investigative team created by today's resolution
is part of a comprehensive approach to holding ISIL
accountable for its atrocities against the Iraqi people.
Working with Iraq and other partners, it will expose the
depravity of ISIS and provide an indispensable record
of the scope and scale of its criminality. With victory
over ISIS in Iraq on the horizon, that record will play
an important role as Iraqis attempt to reconcile this
painful period in their national life. The team will help
to identify victims and perpetrators and ensure that
the perpetrators face the justice they so richly deserve,
while giving victims their day in court. Through that,
we hope and pray that the Iraqi people can begin the
process ofreturning to peaceful, normal, everyday lives.

The United States was honoured to work alongside
its Iraqi and British partners over the past year to make
resolution 2379 (2017) a reality. We thank them for their
dedication in seeing it through. While today's resolution
is specifically about the transnational threat that ISIS
represents, we support accountability for all violations
of international humanitarian law and for human rights
violations and abuses. Above all, we thank the Iraqi
Government and Prime Minister Al-Abadi for taking
an important first step towards demonstrating that
justice is never beyond reach, no victim is voiceless and
no perpetrator is above the law.

