Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June. We wish you every
success. I would also like to join you in expressing our
thanks to Her Excellency Ambassador Joanna Wronecka
of Poland for the outstanding professionalism she
demonstrated in presiding over the Security Council
last month, which was a very busy one.

In the past two weeks we have had two rounds of
negotiations at the expert level with the participation of
all the members ofthe Council, as well as meetings with
all Member States, all of which have been extremely
transparent, comprehensive and inclusive. We have
listened to every proposed amendment and suggestion
and have worked hard to take into account all the issues
raised. We would like to thank all the members of the
Council for their positive attitude and constructive
participation in the preparation of draft resolution
S/2018/516, which we are submitting for a vote today.

We urge all members to vote in favour of the
draft resolution, the text of which has been agreed
on and includes wording from previous resolutions
and presidential statements. It calls on all the relevant
parties to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including with
regard to the protection of civilians, and reaffirms
the importance of taking the necessary measures to
save and protect civilians and hold all perpetrators of
violations accountable. It highlights the need to respect
international humanitarian law in all circumstances in
line with common article 1 to the Geneva Conventions.
It also calls upon the Secretary-General to investigate
the recent events in the occupied territories and to
submit a written report as soon as possible within
60 days from the adoption of the draft resolution,
which should include, inter alia, proposals on the
ways and means to ensure the safety and protection
of the Palestinian civilian population under Israeli
occupation, including recommendations on international
protection mechanism.

In these critical circumstances, we again call upon
Member States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.

