Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Equatorial Guinea wishes to
thank Cote d'Ivoire for having convened this meeting,
which is being held exactly one day after we marked
the fourth anniversary of the creation of the Group
of Five for the Sahel. There can be no doubt that,
since the creation of that institutional framework for
coordination and follow-up of regional cooperation, the
Sahelo-Saharan countries have done important work in
pooling efforts in the areas of development and security
in order to expeditiously usher in an area of overall
progress and shared prosperity.

We also wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude for the presence of, and the detailed briefings
provided by, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw; the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Ion Jinga;
the World Bank Vice-President for Africa, Mr. Hafez
Ghanem; and Mr. Rioux of the Sahel Alliance.

In recent years, the countries of the Sahel region
have found themselves in the midst of a security crisis
following an influx of terrorists and criminal forces of
all stripes, and the peoples of the region are finding
their very existence under threat. To eradicate that
phenomenon, the States of the region, supported by
various partners, have waged a battle that has essentially
focused on the military aspect. However, we have
gradually realized that there is a need to ensure that
focus is not only on security but also on development,
so as to address the root causes of the instability in
the Sahel.

The Sahel region has a strategy that is based on
development and security, as is made clear in the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. The
political and security arenas cannot be dissociated from
the humanitarian dimensions of development if we wish
to build and sustain peace in the region.

In this connection, the Government of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the concerted efforts of the United
Nations system as a whole aimed at recalibrating the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
further promoting its implementation through a more
integrated and cross-cutting approach. Such endeavours
will undoubtedly contribute to mobilizing additional
resources for the Sahel and ensure that the assistance
provided by the international community is properly
coordinated and complementary to the efforts already
under way in the countries of the region.

For that reason, the countries of the region, in
particular those of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), have elaborated and adopted a programme
called the Priority Investment Program, which includes
some 40 projects directly related to living conditions
in the Sahel. We deem the Program very relevant, as,
for obvious reasons, much more has been done in the
area of security owing to the need to combat violent
extremism and negative forces that sow the seeds of
despair. However, we believe that the development
dimension must be bolstered so that the peoples of the
Sahel can feel truly protected. It is clear that on any
of the Sahel borders, specific achievements need to be
recorded in terms of bolstering social welfare. That is
what the Program must focus on.

In this connection, the region's partners must
respect their financing commitments. We underscore
the importance of the support provided by the European
Investment Bank, which, at the G-5 Sahel partners and
donors coordination conference held on 6 December in
Nouakchott, confirmed its support for the following two
areas of action in particular: infrastructure projects and
projects related to resilience and human development.
Such a large-scale strategic approach clearly reflects
the region's partners in the Program's ability to
significantly change the socioeconomic situation in
the region.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the development
dimension should not be forgotten in the Sahel because
it will serve to sustainably address terrorist threats.
We hope that tangible achievements will be made
in the coming years and that they will bring about a
positive transformation in the Sahel and offer a better
future to all of its peoples, without exclusion. It should
be underscored that achieving stability and peace
in the Sahel will have a positive impact on the entire
African continent.
