Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Mr. President, the delegation
of Nigeria welcomes you to the presidency of the Security
Council during this month of January, and takes
advantage of this opportunity to acknowledge with
appreciation the professional manner in which
Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian Federation conducted
the business of Council last month.

We welcome Chile, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Poland
and the Republic of Korea as new members of the
Council.

The current report of the Secretary-General, the
fifteenth in the series, represents a further step in the
continuing efforts by the international community to help
solve the seemingly intractable conflict in Liberia. It has
been submitted in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 1014 (1995) of 15 September 1995, which
extended the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) until 31 January 1996, and
of resolution 1020 (1995) of 10 November 1995, which
adjusted UNOMIL's mandate and approved a new
concept of operations for it.

We have just listened to the very important
statement by the Foreign Minister of Liberia on the
current situation in his country. We thank him for his
candour and objectivity in presenting a Liberian
perspective on the subject matter before the Council. We
cannot agree more with the View that the Liberian peace
process needs to be assisted if it is to result in the
consolidation of peace, thus clearing the way for national
reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction.

Six years ago, Nigeria's efforts to bring peace to
Liberia culminated in the establishment of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), an international military
intervention force of West African States under the
authority of the Heads of State of ECOWAS. ECOMOG,
which blazed the trail for subregional endeavours in crisis
management and conflict resolution, was conceived as a
complement to the political and diplomatic efforts which
were being deployed to find a just and lasting solution to
the Liberian crisis.

Over the years, the several accords which had been
painstakingly arrived at to resolve the Liberian crisis had

 

failed to bring an early end to the conflict. From the failure
of the Banjul accord to the collapse of the Bamako accord,
to the failures of the four successive Yamoussoukro
Accords and the Geneva accord, all efforts to resolve the
Liberian crisis were frustrated by the failure of the parties
to reach accommodation through compromise. Another
round of accords, in Cotonou, Akosombo, and Accra, in
spite of their promise, failed to bring the desired peace to
Liberia. It was therefore a matter of satisfaction for my
Government to have successfully hosted the Abuja meeting
in August last year, which resulted in a breakthrough in the
Liberian conflict.

Today we have a functioning Government in Liberia
and a cease-fire which is generally holding. We would like
to congratulate that Government for its continuing efforts to
establish its authority throughout the territory and conduct
the business of governance.

We are delighted to note that ECOMOG and
UNOMIL do not see themselves in competition but, rather,
in cooperation in Liberia. That is as it should be.
UNOMIL's role can find form, content and import only if
it collaborates with ECOMOG. In other words, it is only
when ECOMOG is able, or enabled, to fulfil its role and
carry out its responsibilities that UNOMIL can have any
impact in Liberia. We all desire that UNOMIL should have
such an impact. Liberia, as a faithful member of the
international community, deserves to have such a United
Nations presence in its territory, and it has so requested as
it tries to deal with its political crisis. In this connection, we
cannot but draw attention to the failure of the international
community to deliver on its commitment to provide a force
level of 160 military observers, as against the current level
of only 82 such observers in Liberia.

We are greatly concerned about the continuing
incidence of cease-fire violations and the slow pace of
disarmament and demobilization of forces in Liberia. We
are particularly distressed to note that the peace process in
that country suffered a major setback with the attack on
ECOMOG in Tubmanburg in December 1995 by General
Roosevelt Johnson's wing of the United Liberation
Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO-J), resulting
in a number of casualties, including Nigerians. The
Government of Nigeria hopes that those responsible for this
atrocity will be brought expeditiously to justice so that
those of its countrymen who have paid the supreme
sacrifice in the cause of peace in Liberia shall not have
died in vain.

A clear message must issue from the Security
Council to the Liberian parties that they cannot hold the
peace process in Liberia hostage to their personal whims
or political ambitions. The Liberian people are definitely
tired of war. They desire peace, and peace must be given
a chance. Besides, the countries of the subregion are
straining to keep ECOMOG afloat, and countries such as
mine, in spite of our domestic preoccupations and current
circumstances, are determined that ECOMOG must
succeed. ECOMOG has no partisan interest in Liberia; it
is there only to help restore peace and a climate of
confidence which can enable the political process to take
root and bear fruits.

It bears repeating, therefore, that the solution to the
Liberian crisis rests ultimately with the Liberians
themselves. It behoves the Liberian authorities to provide
a secure environment for ECOMOG, UNOMIL and the
humanitarian organizations to carry out their respective
mandates and minister to the needs of the civilian
population, particularly the refugees and the internally
displaced persons.

The task of disarmament and demobilization of the
Liberian combatants, which number at least 60,000, is
certainly arduous. It was in recognition of this that
Nigeria decided to increase its contingent in ECOMOG
by two battalions, aside from disbursing substantial funds
for the procurement of communications and other vital
equipment for the force. The capacity of ECOMOG is
being constrained by inadequate logistic support. We
therefore wish to remind those countries that had offered
to provide such support not to renege, in the interest of
peace and security in Liberia, on their commitment or
promise. We also hope that countries will redeem their
pledges of support to Liberia, in addition to their
contributions to the Liberian Trust Fund. It is our honest
View that the political programme in Liberia, including
the elections scheduled for August 1996 under the
provisions of the Abuja Agreement, can succeed only
when disarmament, demobilization reintegration of
disarmed combatants into civilian life and national
reconciliation have been successfully carried out.

In concluding, let me say that the Security Council,
for its own sake, and the international community at large
have a duty to stay the course in Liberia until peace is
won. In line with the proverbial wisdom, the Liberian
snake has been scotched but not killed. We therefore hope
that the Security Council will see its way clear to extend
UNOMIL's mandate for a further period of four months,
until 31 May 1996. It is the honourable thing to do.

 

