I thank you, Mr. President, and the Republic of Indonesia for organizing this important debate to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/754) on action taken by Member States and United Nations entities to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime, will provide a comprehensive basis for Member States to address this issue going forward. Canada is concerned about the growing linkages between organized crime and terrorism, and the ways in which these groups are exploiting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic environment to advance their nefarious objectives. New challenges have emerged in this complex security environment that require a comprehensive understanding of how, why and when the crime-terror nexus develops. The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately impacted vulnerable groups, such as migrants, refugees and stateless people, and increases the risk of exploitation by criminal actors. Women and girls are particularly vulnerable, including in areas such as kidnapping for ransom, where the nexus between human- trafficking and terrorist financing has been particularly profound. For this reason, Canada supports capacity-building projects that consider and address these specific risks and transnational threats. Our coordinated international response to linkages between terrorism and organized crime needs to be gender-informed in order to fully assess and address the drivers of insecurity that perpetuate criminal and terrorist activity and to develop effective and sustainable ways to combat these ongoing threats. Our efforts must also fully respect and comply with obligations and commitments under international law, particularly, international human rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law. Canada is active in many complementary multilateral and regional fora on this issue. As Co-Chair of the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) with Morocco, Canada would like to highlight that the GCTF is a critical partner in strengthening international good-practice norms through the development of tools and materials for policymakers and practitioners, and supports United Nations efforts to advance the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant resolutions. For example, the Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law Working Group of the GCTF has launched initiatives to develop good practices to address and prevent various issues relating to the crime-terrorism nexus. The Working Group is currently developing an addendum focusing on criminal justice to the GCTF Hague Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism of 2018. These good practices documents explore the linkages among terrorism, the financing of terrorism and various forms of illicit trafficking of goods from a criminal-justice perspective and build on the United Nations Transnational Organized Crime Convention and its additional protocols on trafficking in persons, smuggling of migrants and firearms, the United Nations Convention Against Corruption and the 19 international legal instruments on counter-terrorism. Canada also supports enhancing regional security in the Americas, as current Chair of the Organization of American States Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE). As part of our work within CICTE, we see the value of establishing standards, best practices and measures to improve border, port and documents security. Doing so provides the dual benefit of making the hemisphere more resistant to the spread of terrorism, while also impeding transnational organized crime. Another critical aspect of our efforts to address the linkages between organized crime and terrorism is the need to deprive criminals and terrorists of the proceeds and instrumentalities of crime. To this end, Canada advocates for implementation of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards to ensure that Member States cannot be used to raise, move and use funds from, or intended for, criminal activity. However, the efficacy of the FATF framework and its regional bodies in combatting money-laundering and terrorist financing, as with other counter-terrorism and anti-organized crime initiatives, lies in implementation by Member States. In recognition thereof, Canada provided $47.6 million in 2019-2020, through the Counter-Terrorism Capacity-Building Programme and Anti-Crime Capacity- Building Programme, for training, equipment, technical assistance and other capacity-building initiatives to support Governments in responding to threats posed by terrorist and criminal activities. In summary, Canada remains strongly committed to tackling transnational organized crime and terrorism and to working collaboratively with Member States in doing so. By working together, the United Nations and Member States can not only disrupt terrorist groups and criminal organizations, but also more effectively address linkages between them.
