Mr. Begec (Turkey): 1, too, express our thanks to
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, as well
as to the briefers for their contributions.

Water is crucial for basic human needs, economic
growth and sustainable development. The successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is essential for achieving universal access
to safe drinking water and sanitation for all, eradicating
poverty and hunger and improving water quality, while
also protecting ecosystems. In that regard, the United
Nations should focus on achieving the water-related
Sustainable Development Goals and targets in a timely
and effective manner.

Today, limited water resources in many regions are
under pressure of rapidly growing demands from many
sectors. They are not evenly distributed and often are
not properly managed. Furthermore, climate change is
affecting the availability of water in spatial and temporal
terms, as well as the frequency of extreme hydrological
events such as floods and droughts. In the coming
decade, more than half of the world's population could
be under water stress. The majority of those people will
rely on transboundary rivers. The competing interests
and demands on transboundary water resources may
turn into a divisive issue among riparian countries.

However, while water is perceived as a source of
tension, historically countries have tended to cooperate
rather than fight over it. Turkey considers water to be an
important means of cooperation and a bridge-builder.
We support the equitable, reasonable and effective
utilization of transboundary water resources, as well as
the sharing of its benefits, through cooperation among
riparian States. Water must be used in an efficient way
through integrated water resources management at the
basin level, and the benefits should be maximized.
Confidence-building measures should be put in place
in order to dispel mistrust and create an environment
that is conducive to meaningful cooperation. In fact,
each transboundary body of water has its own specific
characteristic and peculiarities, and reflects economic,
social and historical aspects of any particular region.
Therefore, bilateral and riparian-only approaches
are the most appropriate and result-oriented methods
for addressing the issues regarding transboundary
water resources.

Finally, guided also by our contractual obligations,
water resources and infrastructure must be protected
during armed conflicts, taking into account that water
is a source of life. However, engaging in a dialogue on
water as a confidence-building measure with the sole
purpose of addressing political or armed conflicts may
not always yield progress, and water issues that are
pursued with a misplaced political agenda might even
create further complications.

