Mr. McMahan (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to thank the
High Commissioner for his excellent briefing this
morning and for his work, and that of his able staff, to
protect and assist refugees throughout the world.

As he noted, the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has become increasingly complex and dangerous. The
number of refugees is rising, as is the number of people
who are internally displaced by armed conflict. These
developments have important implications for the
international community as a whole and for UNHCR in
particular. Today, I would like to make five points.

First, the United States remains deeply concerned
about the number, complexity and severity of conflicts
and violence that lead to forced displacement, as well
as attacks on refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) where they have sought refuge, and increasing
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.
Refugees and IDPs are too often the victims of such
conflict and frequently lack protection from physical
attack, gender-based violence, abduction, forcible
recruitment and other serious abuses. We must work to
ensure the safety of these vulnerable populations, as
well as of UNHCR staff and their implementing
partners. Deliberate attacks on humanitarian workers,
especially local staff and their families, remain a
significant impediment to life-saving aid in many
crises, and we must all work together to guarantee their
safety and security.

Secondly, protracted civil conflicts continue to
create some of the largest situations of forced
displacement and are a tragic reminder that civilians
are at times deliberately targeted. The number of
people fleeing conflict and violence and becoming
internally displaced far exceeds the number who are
crossing international borders to become refugees. The
United States calls on Member States to protect those
whose lives or freedom are threatened by civil conflict
and to support coordinated efforts by humanitarian
organizations with protection mandates and expertise.

The scope of UNHCR's work has been expanded
to include internally displaced persons affected by
conflict, and we have seen that much of its advocacy,
policies and funding are expanding to meet the
growing humanitarian demands around the world,
particularly in addressing the many cases of forced
displacement. While we welcome that expansion, it is
imperative that UNHCR's leadership and comparative
advantage on refugee protection issues are not
weakened as it finds the proper balance between its
various objectives. UNHCR's core mandate to protect
refugees must remain at the centre of its mission and
activities.

Thirdly, the United States remains gravely
concerned about the ongoing and widespread use of
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict situations
throughout the world. That is one of the most
significant protection challenges facing the
international community and is too often ignored.
Sexual and gender-based violence must be more
effectively addressed, including both in refugee and
IDP situations, and we call on all Member States to end
that gross injustice.

We believe that prevention of and response to
gender-based violence should begin at the onset of
every emergency. The United States strongly
encourages UNHCR and all humanitarian assistance
actors to integrate programming to counter gender-
based violence into their efforts. Those approaches
should be multisectoral and aim to combine protection
activities, community services, health care and referral
services into humanitarian assistance operations.

The United States strongly supports the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community,
such as Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), to secure a dramatic increase in women's
participation in all aspects of peacebuilding and
security. While progress has been made in that regard,
we look forward to working with UNHCR and other
United Nations agencies to ensure that the
empowerment of women in substantive and
institutionalized leadership roles continues to improve.

Fourthly, the United States agrees on the
importance of maintaining humanitarian space in the
context of integrated United Nations missions. Due
consideration must be given to allowing the
Organization's humanitarian agencies to carry out their
mandates to deliver humanitarian assistance in a
neutral and impartial manner. Some situations may call
for United Nations humanitarian agencies to integrate
strategically with United Nations missions, while
maintaining a degree of operational separation in order
to preserve their ability to assist populations in need in
environments where conflict exists.
Fifthly, the humanitarian and protection needs of
refugees and others of concern are met most effectively
when United Nations Member States demonstrate the
will, including politically and financially, to make the
international system work. As donors we must do a
better job, coordinating aid programmes and avoiding
duplication, while ensuring flexibility in our funding
through UNHCR so that it can carry out its mandate.

Finally, I would like to say a few words about the
current situation in Gaza. We must remain focused on
the urgency of the humanitarian situation. We are very
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Israel has taken steps to ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza, but, as
Secretary Rice said yesterday, the people of Gaza need
to be in a position to be able to get a lifeline to goods,
supplies, sanitation and medical help.

The United States remains a steadfast and
committed partner of UNHCR. We are fully invested in
its policies, programmes and performance. We know
UNHCR's work is never easy, and we salute its staff
for what they do in environments that are often
difficult. The United States will continue to work
cooperatively and generously with other Member
States, UNHCR and our own non-governmental
organization implementing partners to find durable
solutions for refugees around the world.

