Mr. Guterres: Syria has a long and generous
history of providing refuge to people in need of
sanctuary, including Palestinian and Iraqi refugees. It
is now particularly heartbreaking to see so many Syrian
citizens losing their lives, being uprooted from their
homes and becoming trapped in war zones.

As ofyesterday, 229,000 people had left the country
and sought registration as refugees in neighbouring
States. That number is growing rapidly. All sorts of
assets are quickly being used up and social support
networks are fragmenting. For many, becoming a
refugee is the only way to survive.

The number of Syrians arriving each day in Turkey
continues to increase dramatically. Thanks to the
Turkish Government, more than 80,000 Syrians are
now being hosted in camps and public buildings in the
south-east of the country. As the fighting intensifies,
pressure is increasing at border checkpoints, with
thousands of people waiting as new sites are made
ready - as is the case at the present moment.

In Jordan the number of refugees arriving each
day is also rising. Earlier this week, more than 5,000
people arrived in a span ofjust 30 hours. Some 72,000
Syrian refugees have now been registered. In total, the
Government estimates that there are now approximately
180,000 more Syrians in the country than at the outset
of the crisis. Most are hosted by local communities, but
in accordance with a decision of the authorities, over
21,000 recent arrivals are being accommodated at the
newly established Zaatari refugee camp.

The numberofSyrianrefugeesinLebanonregistered
or awaiting registration now exceeds 57,000. They have
largely been absorbed into local communities, along
with many thousands more who have not yet sought
assistance. Efforts are under way with the Government
to expand accommodation options, as hosting families
are stretched and schools where many hundreds have
been sheltered are due to reopen shortly.

In Iraq, a country striving to make its own transition
from conflict to stability, the number of Syrian refugees
is now more than 18,000.

In those four countries, there has been exemplary
cooperation between Governments, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other
United Nations agencies, the Red Cross/Red Crescent
Movement and non-governmental organizations.

Smaller numbers of Syrian citizens have also
sought protection beyond the region, in areas such as
North Africa and Europe. I am deeply saddened by the
drowning of a number of Syrians, including children,
earlier this week in the Mediterranean.

The most tragic consequences ofthe crisis are being
felt inside Syria itself. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent
Society, supported by the United Nations system and
other humanitarian actors, continues to undertake
exceptional work in the most difficult circumstances,
despite being considerably overstretched. Humanitarian
activities, as has been noted, are severely hampered by
constraints on access and funding.

UNHCR persists with efforts to provide protection
and assistance to Iraqi and other refugees and asylum-
seekers in Syria. The commitment of the Syrian people
and authorities to maintaining asylum space has been
commendable. Refugees are nonetheless exposed to
increasing insecurity, which also limits their access to
our offices and restricts the movement of staff. Some
31,000 Iraqis have now returned to their own country
since the surge in violence in mid-July, while migrant
workers and other third-country nationals are also
experiencing acute hardship.

Refugees from Palestine in Syria fall within the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Our
colleagues at UNRWA need funding to expand their
assistance programme, and are very appreciative of the
temporary protection afforded in neighboring countries
to the relatively few who have been forced to flee.

The refugee exodus is having a significant impact
on the society, economy and security of host countries.
Thousands of Iraqi, Jordanian, Lebanese and Turkish
families are sharing their homes and their increasingly
meager resources with relatives and friends, but mostly
strangers, who have been rendered homeless. The large-
scale arrival of refugees brings about a significant
economic cost, leads to complex social consequences
and has a serious impact on local infrastructure and the
environment. The acute pressure on water resources in
Jordan is just one example.

All of that is taking place in countries also affected
by the national security implications of the current
crisis. By keeping their borders open to refugees in
such a complex and challenging environment, the
countries that neighbour the Syrian Arab Republic
are providing a very positive example to the world.
However, their capacities are being severely tested.
International solidarity in support of their generosity
must be urgently reinforced.

The commitment of those countries to refugee
protection has upheld the internationally recognized
principle whereby all human beings have the right to
seek and enjoy asylum in another State. That is a right
that must not be jeopardized, for instance through
the establishment of so-called safe havens or other
similar arrangements. Bitter experience has shown
that it is rarely possible to provide effective protection
and security in such areas. However, evidently, more
effective humanitarian assistance inside the Syrian
Arab Republic might well reduce the numbers forced to
flee across borders.

As the conflict intensifies, the ability of the
international system to respond is being tested in
many ways. In that respect, I would like to conclude by
making the following appeals.

First, I appeal to all parties to the conflict to
grant unrestricted humanitarian access inside the
Syrian Arab Republic in order to enable humanitarian
actors to deliver protection and assistance without
discrimination, in accordance with humanitarian
principles.

Secondly, I would like to appeal to the parties to the
conflict to continue to respect and provide protection to
Iraqi, Palestinian and other refugees inside the Syrian
Arab Republic. We are all aware of the complexity of
the Palestinian refugee issue and its impact on countries
in the region. A situation in which large numbers of
Palestinians are forced to flee must be avoided at all
costs.

Thirdly, I would like to call for enhanced
international support to all victims of the conflict. I urge
all States to respond positively to the two appeals that
will shortly be made by the humanitarian community
for additional funding in countries of asylum and inside
the Syrian Arab Republic. However, direct support to
the victims is not enough. International solidarity must
translate into effective burden- and responsibility-
sharing, with meaningful support to Governments and
communities in refugee-hosting countries.

Fourthly, I ask all States in the region and beyond
to continue to extend protection to the Syrians fleeing
their country, and to ensure that the civilian and
humanitarian character of asylum is maintained, in
accordance with international law.

Finally, we must recognize that there is no
humanitarian solution to the Syrian crisis. Only
through a political solution leading to peace can the
humanitarian emergency be brought to a conclusion.
As history has so clearly demonstrated in the Middle
East and elsewhere, it is in nobody's interest for a
political conflict and the plight of its resultant refugee
population to be left unresolved.

