Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea): My
delegation appreciates the convening of this open
meeting on the question of small arms as one more step
to further enhance efficiency of the work of the
Security Council. We also thank Under-Secretary-
General Dhanapala for the excellent introduction to the
Secretary-General's report on the subject.

In substance, the subject we are dealing with is an
important issue with many challenges involving
security, humanitarian and development dimensions.

As noted in the presidential statement of the
Security Council of 31 August 2001, the accumulation
of small arms

"compromises the effectiveness of the Security
Council in discharging its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security". (S/PRS T/2001/2] )

Indeed, the destabilizing accumulation and illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons pose major
security concerns for the entire international
community, as reflected by the startling statistics on
this problem. Every year, the misuse of small arms and
light weapons has led to the loss of 500,000 lives, the
majority of them being civilians, including women and
children. Additionally, recent developments have
highlighted the further danger posed by the likelihood
of the use of small arms by terrorists and non-State
actors.
The momentum generated by the Programme of
Action adopted last year at the United Nations
Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons is now
having an impact at national, regional and global
levels. As underscored by the Security Council, the
Programme's success depends largely on the political
will of the international community. Hence, sustained
and concerted global action is vital in addressing the
problems posed by the illicit transfer of small arms and
light weapons. Accordingly, the Security Council
should continue to play a constructive role in
promoting the implementation of the Programme of
Action.

There are many complexities stemming from the
proliferation of small arms in post-conflict situations.
Of particular concern is the recurring pattern of
violence and instability. Therefore, there is a
compelling need for the Security Council, in carrying
out its peace-building activities, to include specific
considerations for small arms and light weapons.

My delegation regards the 12 recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/ 1053) as valuable input for future action by the
Security Council. We should like to identify areas
within the report as a basis for our deliberations.

Given that the proliferation of small arms gives
rise not only to the outbreak of violence but also to the
exacerbation, prolongation and perpetuation of
conflict, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes are crucial for consolidating peace
and for promoting an environment for sustainable
development. As reflected by the growing number of
casualties, the availability of weapons in conflict-
ridden areas is a great threat to the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers. The implementation
of more effective DDR programmes within the Security
Council's conflict prevention and post-conflict peace-
building efforts will help to ensure the safety of all
civilians in areas of conflict.

The Security Council has rightly stressed the
need to incorporate relevant provision for DDR
programmes into the mandates and budgets of all
peacekeeping operations. It is noteworthy that various
United Nations peacekeeping operations - particularly
those in Africa - now include a disarmament
component aimed at collecting and disarming these
types of weapons. As we said at a previous open
meeting, the Security Council is fully equipped to
integrate the recommendations concerning DDR into
its future peacekeeping activities as a core element.
With regard to the question of embargoes, the
lessons learned from the past have shown that weapons
embargoes alone are not sufficient. In the view of my
delegation, sanctions should be fine-tuned to
effectively target a region or specific countries to
achieve a greater degree of success. We agree on the
need for the Security Council to study further ways and
means to improve its efficiency on a case-by-case
basis. My delegation welcomes the recommendations
calling for the vigorous and expeditious use of arms
embargoes by the Council. In addition, we would like
to see the Council pursue the use of monitoring
mechanisms, in accordance with Article 41 of the
Charter, with a View to ensuring successful
enforcement.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Security Council
should call on Member States to establish and
implement legislation or measures to regulate the
movement of small arms and light weapons. In
particular, we welcome the Council's efforts to
encourage all Member States that have not already
done so to adopt and enforce stringent regulations with
regard to export control.

Once again, the Security Council should maintain
its attention and its active engagement with regard to
curbing the proliferation and illicit trade of small arms
and light weapons. The Republic of Korea would like
to assure members of its unswerving support for the
Council's initiatives in that field.

