Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Before beginning our statement, we would like to add our
own words to those of all our colleagues in condemning
the heinous attack that took place yesterday in London
and also repeat what President Evo Morales Ayma said
in conveying our condolences to the Government and
the people of the United Kingdom and to the families of
those who lost their lives. We wish a speedy recovery
to those who were injured. A few minutes ago, I found
out that citizens of 11 countries were among the victims
of yesterday's attack. That is a terrible reminder of the
fact that terrorism is a global threat and that it is crucial
for the international community to come together to put
an end to it.

I would now like to begin by thanking President
Farmajo of Somalia for participating in this meeting
of the Security Council. I would also like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, as well as Mr. Michael Keating and
Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose' Madeira, whom I thank for
their respective briefings.

Bolivia would like to emphasize the importance
of the conclusion of the Somali electoral process and
the election of President Farmajo on 8 February. We
were pleased to see that the elections were much more
peaceful and inclusive than has been the case in the past
and that they have inspired a sense of hope in Somalia.
We believe that they were the most representative and
legitimate elections in the country's history and that
they have made it possible, for the first time, for 26 per
cent of parliamentary seats to be held by women.

We welcome the Secretary-General's position
with respect to the importance of international
cooperation in consolidating the recent political
and security achievements. Moreover, we must also
continue to ensure ongoing and long-term support for
Somalia in order to promote the process of institution-
and capacity-building based on initiatives aimed at
good governance and efforts to improve the living
conditions of its people. We underscore the importance
of adhering to the political road map so that elections
based on the principle of one-person-one-vote can be
held no later than 2020.

Another issue of concern for us is the deterioration
in the humanitarian situation, exacerbated by the
drought that has extended beyond Puntland and
Somaliland to areas in the south, such as Gedo and Juba
Hoose. According to United Nations statistics, 5 million
Somalis are facing acute food shortages, of whom more
than 1.1 million are in emergency and crisis situations.
According to the report (S/2017/21) of the Secretary-
General, the continued lack of social safety nets and
basic services increases the country's vulnerability and
the potential for a broader crisis.

We call on the international community to respond
without delay so as to prevent the situation from
developing into a general famine in the country and the
Horn ofAfrica, such as we saw in 2011 when, according
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, 250,000 people died, of whom more than
half were children under the age of five.

I would like to underscore what the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden said earlier, namely, that it
seems unthinkable that in 2017 we are confronting the
worst humanitarian crisis since the Second World War.
But we also believe that it is crucial to recall that in
2017 we are encountering the greatest concentration of
wealth among a few in the history of humankind. Eight
individuals possess more than half of the world's wealth,
and we naturally believe that that is closely linked not
only to the planet's profound humanitarian crisis, but
also to climate change, which is one ofthe causes - not
the only one - of the tragic drought situation.

During the Secretary-General's visit to Somalia
in March, he stressed to donors the need to provide an
additional $825 million so as to be able to deliver critical
humanitarian assistance over the next six months, and
that, without that aid, the Somali people would face a
tragedy that neither they nor any other people deserve.
We therefore call on institutions like the World Bank,
as part of their international responsibility, to remove
all obstacles that might prevent such assistance from
reaching Somalia.
Moreover, we commend the President of Djibouti,
the Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, the President of the Republic of Kenya and
the President of Somalia for their joint declaration,
entitled the Mogadishu Declaration on regional
cooperation on the current drought, which commits
those States to combining efforts to establish security
and stability in Somalia and neighbouring countries,
thereby ensuring an effective response to the drought
and enabling further progress in peacebuilding and
State-building in Somalia.

Furthermore, Bolivia joins in the strong
condemnation of the coordinated suicide attacks that
killed dozens of Somali civilians and soldiers over the
last several days, for which responsibility lies with the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab. Similarly, we call attention
to the plight of the Somali refugees who are returning
to their country and facing situations ofinsecurity.

Finally, we acknowledge the important work of
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the
African Union Mission in Somalia. We believe that
their contribution is fundamental within a framework
of respect for human rights and for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Somalia.

