Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to convey my country's
profound condolences, sympathy and friendship to the
people of the United States on this very significant day,
and underline the importance of standing shoulder to
shoulder in the quest for peace.

First, Iwould like to thank the Russian representative
for his briefing, which is very timely.

Last week, during and after the meeting we
expressed our alarm over the signs of a possible military
offensive in north-western Syria, as it would risk
leading to catastrophic humanitarian consequences,
which are avoidable and must be avoided. We are deeply
concerned, however, by the recent escalation of violence
on the part of Syria and Russia in Idlib and surrounding
areas. We reiterate that all parties in Syria must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law

to protect civilians and civilian objects and to comply
with the principles of distinction, proportionality and
avoidance of unnecessary suffering.

We have said before and repeat now that Idlib is
different from other areas as there is nowhere to flee.
There are 3 million civilians living there, including
many children and internally displaced persons. Idlib
is a de-escalation area established by the Astana
guarantors, and that is why we all looked to their
meeting last Friday with some hope. It is key that they
step up efforts to immediately implement their own
de-escalation agreement in Idlib, ensure humanitarian
access and the protection of civilians, and avoid further
military escalation.

It is urgent for them to act now to avoid the
enormous humanitarian catastrophe that would unfold
before our eyes in a large-scale military offensive.
This is not hypothetical, as we have witnessed all
de-escalation areas turning into escalation areas over
the past year. The responsibility and ability to avoid a
catastrophe and allow time for dialogue lies with Syria
and Russia. The Council, however, should also explore
all meaningful options to prevent military escalation
and find a peaceful solution to Idlib, in accordance with
international law.

Last Friday, Special Envoy De Mistura presented
some ideas that merit consideration. We need to explore
any concrete, meaningful suggestions and proposals
over the coming days to ensure that the Council
collectively shoulders its responsibility. We remain
available to explore all options for preventive action by
the Council. We reiterate our full support for the Special
Envoy, including his efforts to swiftly establish a
constitutional committee. A United Nations-facilitated
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
is the only way to ensure a sustainable solution to the
crisis, to end the suffering and to address the legitimate
concerns of all Syrians.

