Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting and for distributing
the concept paper (S/2010/165) to facilitate the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2006/507 on the working methods of the Security
Council. While associating my delegation with the
statement of the Non-Aligned Movement, delivered by
the representative of Egypt, let me also share and
emphasize the following points.

As is correctly stated in the concept paper
annexed to the letter contained in document
S/2010/165, the lack of improvement in the three
interlinked and key issue areas of transparency,
interaction with non-members and efficiency in the
working methods of the Security Council is at the core
of today's discussion. I wish to build on those
shortcomings by further elaborating, as follows.

First, according to Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council should act on
behalf of all United Nations Member States. However,
in reality, the Council's decisions not only decreasingly
reflect the wish and the views of the general
membership, but also, in many cases, do not even
represent the genuine opinion of its own general
membership.

Secondly, despite the requirement of the
Council's own decisions on its working methods,
including those contained in document S/2006/507,
which, for instance, call for consultation by the
Council with:

"the broader United Nations membership, in
particular interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or specifically
affected, when drafting, inter alia, resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements,"
(S/2006/507, section VII, para. 42)

in many cases the general membership and even the
countries concerned are kept totally uninformed of the
negotiations on resolutions or statements directly
affecting them, let alone their views on the Council's
outcome documents being sought. That is also the case
for non-permanent members when they are frequently
faced with the situation of secretive negotiations being
held among a few permanent members on important
issues.

Thirdly, the refusal to allow non-members of the
Council to participate in discussions on matters
affecting them and their interests, and the denial to the
countries concerned of the right to brief the Council on
their positions on issues having a direct effect on their
national interests, and, more crucially, of their right of
reply to countries against which allegations are raised
during certain formats of the Council's meetings are in
total disregard of Article 31 of the Charter.

A fourth shortcoming is the ongoing trend of
selective notification of Council meetings and the
failure to convene regular and necessary briefings.

Fifthly, the quick and unnecessary resort to
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and the
threat or use of sanctions in cases where no action has
been necessary are other disturbing facts that have
undermined the credibility and legitimacy of the
Council's decisions.

Sixthly, as has been mentioned by various
delegations on different occasions, the veto power has
always raised concerns and criticism on various
grounds among a significant majority of Member
States. There is a strong sense of injustice and
discrimination between the haves and the have-nots. In
fact, the veto is a non-constructive instrument that
undermines the possibility of action by the Council in
many cases where it is needed.

To increase the transparency of its work, to strike
a balanced approach in interaction with non-members,
and to improve the efficiency of its working methods,
the Council should seriously address the said
shortcomings and take into consideration the relevant
provisions of the Charter and of the resolutions that
clarify its relationship with the General Assembly and
other organs of the United Nations.

Finally and undoubtedly, impartiality,
transparency and fairness are key premises on which
the Security Council should base its approach to
discharging its responsibilities mandated by the
Charter. Every effort should be made to render the
Council more democratic, representative and
accountable. My delegation stands ready to contribute
to the achievement of those goals.

