Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Lithuanian presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and for
producing the concept note (S/2014/74, annex). We also
thank Ms. Navi Pillay, Ms. Valerie Amos, Mr. Herve'
Ladsous and Mr. Yves Daccord for their participation
in the meeting.

Unfortunately, the latest report of the Secretary-
General on today's subject (S/2013/689) reaffirms that
civilians continue to constitute the majority of victims
in conflict. However, it is important that the Security
Council continue to be committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by promoting full respect for
international law, in particular respect for humanitarian
law, human rights law and the rights of refugees, as
well as the fight against impunity.

Likewise, as referred to in the President's concept
note, it is imperative that we continue to include
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
missions on the ground. The Secretary-General's report
includes a description of the activities undertaken by
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians.
In all cases, peacekeeping forces have sought to create
protected areas. The challenges they face on the ground
include avoiding an escalation of violence between
groups, supporting political dialogue to facilitate the
protection of civilians and encouraging reconciliation
between ethnic groups.

In addition, peacekeeping forces have implemented
training programmes for police to investigate crimes of
sexual violence and other crimes and have contributed
to building domestic institutional capacity. The United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a special paradigm
in that regard, where the Security Council decided to
reconfigure the mandate to authorize a peacekeeping
mission to carry out offensive operations against armed
groups via an intervention brigade.

The clear position of Argentina is that the
imposition of robust mandates by the Council and the
implementation of those mandates by peacekeeping
operations must not divert us from our fundamental
mandate to protect civilians, in line with the
fundamental principles that govern, and must continue
to govern, peacekeeping operations. We believe that,
in order for peacekeeping forces to be able to fulfil
their missions effectively, where priority is given to the
protection of civilians the mandates must be designed
carefully. Operations must also have the necessary
resources available to act effectively and in a timely
manner.

With regard to the composition of missions, there
needs to be an appropriate structure and the staffing
that is required to protect women and children from
violence, in particular sexual and gender-based
violence. We recognize the United Nations policy of
due diligence in the area of human rights, which should
continue to be part of mandates for peacekeeping
operations.

One aspect that we want to highlight with regard
to peacekeeping operations relates to international
humanitarian law. On the one hand, the training of
troops is necessary. As for Argentina, with the help
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
we carry out human rights courses for armed forces,
with a particular focus on those troops that will
be participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Our commission on the implementation of
international humanitarian law has produced a manual
on international law in armed conflict that sets out the
norms of international humanitarian law to be used by
armed forces in peacekeeping operations.

In addition, I would emphasize that peacekeeping
operations must respect international humanitarian law.
In that respect, I highlight the bulletin of the Secretary-
General on "Observance by United Nations forces of
international humanitarian law" (ST/SGB/ 1999/ 13).

Peacekeeping operations play an essential role in
the protection of civilians in many situations. However,
ensuring a secure environment for civilians goes
beyond the role of peacekeeping forces; it involves the
entire Organization and its States Members.

To achieve strengthened and sustainable security,
national peacekeeping and institution-building efforts
must be supported, including rebuilding national
institutions. Coordination in the area of support for
the rule of law as part of the Organization's efforts is
crucial. But it is also important that the United Nations
and Member States make progress on the challenges
identified by the Secretary-General, with which my
delegation agrees. Those include the following.

First, we must promote respect for international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law by State
and other parties to conflict.

Secondly, parties to a conflict must make every
effort to ensure effective and timely access to
humanitarian aid, including cargo and materials. Such
assistance - including access to medical personnel,
transport and hospital facilities - enjoys special
protection under humanitarian law in all its aspects.

Thirdly, impartial mechanisms are essential in
terms of investigating violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In addition to ad
hoc commissions of inquiry, including those set up by
the Human Rights Council, I should like to highlight the
international commission of inquiry provided for under
Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949.

Fourthly, I should like to underscore accountability.
In that context, I commend the contributions of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as
well as to acknowledge the role of the International
Criminal Court.

Argentina supports presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/3 and stresses the useful aide-me'moire on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict published
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
I should like to conclude by reiterating that, in line
with international humanitarian law and the Council's
resolutions, any attacks against civilians or other
protected groups, as well as the recruitment of child
soldiers and preventing humanitarian access, constitute
violations of international humanitarian law. In that
context, I again urge strict respect for the obligations
under The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the
four 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols,
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law and Security Council resolutions.

