Mr. Menkerios: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council in this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the area of peace and security. I
thank Egypt as President of the Security Council for
bringing us together today for this timely debate, and
for the discussions between the two Councils yesterday
as well.

While much progress has been made to address
conflicts in Africa, threats to international peace and
security in the continent remain real and numerous.
The findings and recommendations of the recent high-
level reviews of United Nations peace operations and
of peacebuilding architecture emphasize the imperative
for strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly with
the African Union. This is based on the recognition
that no single organization can succeed on its own
in addressing the challenges that confront us. The
United Nations values cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. In the past decade, regional
and subregional organizations have gained greater
influence over conflict dynamics and regional politics.

My office, the United Nations Office to the
African Union, is a critical bridge in supporting and
strengthening the rapidly evolving cooperation and
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in peace and security. We are already reaping the
dividends of our partnership. Working closely with the
African Union and with regional economic communities
and mechanisms, we have made significant progress in
enhancing consultations, harmonizing positions and
jointly engaging in international efforts to avert open
conflict and to manage ongoing ones in many parts
of the continent. Increasingly, the United Nations has
been working hand-in-hand with the African Union
and regional mechanisms to stabilize volatile situations
throughout the continent, from the Lake Chad Basin to
Somalia, Burundi and the Sahel. The 2016-2020 road
map of the African Peace and Security Architecture
(APSA) emphasizes coherence and coordination across
all pillars of the APSA, and between the AU and its
regional mechanisms, and provides a coherent approach
for strengthening joint peace and security actions with
the United Nations.

In recent weeks, the United Nations and the African
Union have acted together to de-escalate political
tensions in the Comoros. Concerted United Nations
and African Union engagements with the parties in the
Comoros show the value of having the international
community speak with one voice on an issue to
encourage restraint and promote peaceful outcomes
to disputes. Those efforts should continue, and I am
convinced that they will.

In Burundi, we are working with the African
Union, the East African Community and other partners
to support the parties to engage in an inclusive
dialogue, the only way to resolve their differences in
a sustainable manner. The Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union need
to continue to work together to encourage Burundians
to find a durable solution to their crisis.

Yesterday the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the AU held their tenth annual
consultations. The two Councils met informally in
Addis Ababa in February, with a focus on the situation in
Burundi alone. We commend the growing relationship
between the two Councils, as it helps build synergies,
coordinate positions and promote the adoption of
resolutions that are mutually supportive. To enhance
the value of the growing strategic partnership between
our two organizations, the Secretariat is working
with the African Union Commission to systematize
working-level consultations, share information,
support joint training and carry out joint exercises on
early warning and conflict prevention. As part of our
efforts, we are working on a holistic approach that will
elevate the partnership from an ad-hoc arrangement
to a more institutionalized approach to conflict
prevention, management and resolution. In that regard,
we are finalizing a joint United Nations-African Union
framework for an enhanced partnership in peace and
security. I am hopeful that the two Heads of the two
organizations will sign the framework before the end
of the year.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the subsequent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/682) call
for a stronger overall partnership to ensure that the
Councils can draw on a more resilient and capable
network of actors, while continuing to stress the need
for the African Union to have access to predictable and
sustainable funding. The reports also call on the United
Nations and the AU to strengthen conflict prevention
and mediation capacities.

The African Union has built, and continues to put
in place, the African Peace and Security Architecture,
underpinned by the realization that conflicts are resolved
through political solutions. Our collective challenge is
to support and strengthen the Architecture, particularly
the African Standby Force and the African Union's
preventive diplomacy and mediation capabilities. I am
more hopeful than ever that efforts to strengthen the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations will remain critical to the ongoing quest for
security and stability in Africa. I wish the Council
fruitful deliberations and look forward to the outcomes
of this open debate and suggestions on how we can take
them forward.

