Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): Let me first
congratulate the United States for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for December and
pledge my delegation's support during its presidency. In
addition, we would like to thank the United Kingdom
for successfully presiding the Security Council
in November.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations, Mr. Robert Mardini, and the Archbishop of
Erbil, Monsignor Bashar Warda, for their briefings.

I would like to address the following two points in
my intervention this morning, namely, the political and
security situations.

First, on the political situation, South Africa
supports the mandate of UNAMI as the Mission
promotes the strengthening of the Government of Iraq
and subsequent electoral processes. We welcome the
appointment of Iraq's first female minister, Ms. Suha
Ali Bek, as a positive step towards the inclusion ofmore
women in Government and higher decision-making
structures. Furthermore, we applaud the positive
progress in reaching an agreement between the Iraqi
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
on dividing oil revenues.

We note with concern the large-scale public protests
of past months, which have spread and escalated across
Baghdad. We hope that the Government of Iraq can take
concrete action to address the concerns of its citizens,
launch investigations into the violence and loss of life
resulting from the protests and ensure accountability
for any human rights violations. South Africa
welcomes the reforms proposed by the Government to
improve governance structures and the implementation
of service delivery. We also support the drive for an
inclusive Government that will bring together all diverse
elements of Iraqi society in governance structures.

We believe national reconciliation and unity in Iraq
are vital to avoiding future challenges resulting from
the fracturing of Government policies and actions.
South Africa encourages further cooperation between
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan autonomous
region in order to strengthen and maintain the prevailing
peace throughout Iraq. We also encourage Iraq to
continue engaging with its neighbours with a view
to maintaining peace and stability in the region and
diversifying its regional economic partnerships. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts by the Iraqi leadership
to promote a balanced regional policy, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report (A/2019/903).

Secondly, on the security situation, we believe that
peace and security are fundamental for Iraq to develop
its infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic
services to all of its citizens. In that regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of Iraqi army
control over Iraqi territories and the efforts of the
Government to eradicate the threat posed by Da'esh.
The issue of the return of internally displaced persons
to their areas of origin should also be given priority to
ensure that their return is safe, dignified and voluntary.
South Africa would further like to propose involving
the Peacebuilding Commission to support the efforts
of the Government to promote inclusivity, specifically
in institution-building and post-reconstruction
development in Iraq.

In conclusion, we are encouraged by the sustained
joint efforts of the Governments of Kuwait and Iraq
to locate the missing Kuwaiti and other nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property. We are also encouraged by
other positive developments, including Iraq's handing
over of books belonging to the Kuwaiti National
Library and Kuwait University to the Government of
Kuwait. We hope that both countries can work together
with the relevant United Nations institutions to resolve
any outstanding issues.

