The Secretary-General: Before proceeding, I
would like to offer my deepest condolences to the
Russian delegation following the assassination of their
colleague, Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara,
earlier today. I condemn that senseless act of terror, for
which there can be no justification.

We are here to address one of the world's most
urgent crises - the deteriorating situation South Sudan.
Not long ago, the people of South Sudan were riding a
wave of optimism. Africa's longest civil war had ended.
The world's youngest nation was born. Yet today, all of
that hope and promise has disappeared. South Sudan is
engulfed in yet another civil war. Tens of thousands of
civilians have been killed. The country's economy is in
ruins. The social fabric is in tatters. Millions of people
are homeless and displaced. Hunger and poverty have
only deepened.

The responsibility for that tragic state of affairs
lies squarely on the shoulders of South Sudan's leaders.
They have betrayed the public trust and continue to
show a perverse sense of entitlement, seeking to retain
power and wealth at all costs. Reports suggest that
President Salva Kiir and his loyalists are contemplating
a new military offensive in the coming days against
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition. Moreover, there are clear indications that
Riek Machar and other opposition groups are pursuing
a military escalation.

It is time to put the people of South Sudan, and
not its leaders, at the forefront of any strategy. The
international community must come together to provide
the necessary help and incentives. At the same time, we
should be united and determined in following through
with severe consequences for those who impede the
path to peace and stability.

In that spirit, I reiterate my call for an arms embargo
on South Sudan. Such an embargo would diminish the
capacity of all sides to wage war. South Sudan faces no
external threat. More weapons will only pose a greater
threat to its own people. We have repeatedly seen the
deliberate targeting of civilian communities perceived
to support an opposing side. As efforts to revive the
political process continue, the least we can do is to stop
the flow of more weapons, which pose a direct threat
to the safety and security of civilians and humanitarian
workers. Instability in South Sudan is also a threat to
the region. I call on all the neighbouring countries to
support and cooperate on an arms embargo.

The most urgent need is to prevent the parties from
launching any military operation at the beginning of
the dry season. I urge the Security Council, regional
leaders and the international community to make it clear
to President Kiir and Rick Machar that the initiation of
a military offensive will carry serious consequences.

The parties must reinvigorate an inclusive political
process that is deemed credible by the people of South
Sudan and the international community. Any attempt
to rubber-stamp the legitimacy of those in power will
not bring peace or stability. An inclusive and credible
process requires all parties to the conflict to have a
seat at the negotiating table with the ability to share
and exercise power without fear of reprisals. A national
dialogue could be a positive step if all stakeholders are
able to participate in freedom and safety. Unfortunately,
that environment does not currently exist in South
Sudan.

I call on regional leaders to invest all possible
efforts into resuscitating the political process in South
Sudan. I commend the work of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union, and
call upon the Security Council to complement those
efforts. I strongly believe that an arms embargo is the
most appropriate way to do so. Such a step, I should
emphasize, would strengthen and not undermine the
political process.
The conflict in South Sudan has already assumed
an ethnic dimension. We have witnessed hate speech
from many internationaln leadership positions. As
my Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, said to the Council after his recent
visit to South Sudan (see S/PV.7814), genocide is not
one event; it is a process. I am afraid that process is
about to begin unless immediate action is taken. The
Security Council must take steps to stem the flow of
arms to South Sudan, as well as to send a clear warning
that hate speech, incitement and violence must end and
that there will be accountability for mass atrocities and
other crimes.

As the Council is aware, after two independent
investigations, Ihave had to take some difficult decisions
regarding the performance of our troops in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Moreover,
UNMISS continues to face serious restrictions on
its freedom of movement throughout the country, in
clear violation of the status-of-forces agreement. The
Secretariat has been providing the Security Council
with a list of those violations on a monthly basis.
Unfortunately, those reports have not resulted in any
action on the part of the Council to restore the freedom
of movement without which the Mission will be unable
to fully implement its mandate.

But an improvement of the Mission's performance
is only one part of the picture. The Government of South
Sudan should also fulfil its pledges of unconditional
acceptance of the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. Words alone are insufficient. They
must be matched by practical actions that demonstrate
a strategic shift to full cooperation with the United
Nations and all partners for peace.

I spoke with President Kenyatta of Kenya on
Saturday to exchange views on the South Sudan peace
process. I emphasized that the Regional Protection
Force represented the collective commitment of the
region to peace, security and stability. I would like to
commend Kenya for its unwavering commitment to
peace in South Sudan and for working closely with the
United Nations to meet that goal.

The people of South Sudan have suffered for far
too long and far too much. We must put all pressure on
leaders who think or act otherwise. Ifwe fail to act, South
Sudan will be on a trajectory towards mass atrocities.

Its people will be the targets of those atrocities while
they pin their hopes on the international community in
general and the Security Council. I appeal to the Security
Council to act now in fulfilment of its responsibility
and in support of ongoing regional efforts.

