The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Bangladesh.

First of all, Bangladesh considers it important that
the Security Council is holding an open briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, enabling the general
membership of the United Nations to join the Council's
deliberations on this important issue.

We thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
statement on the subject matter of today's meeting and
also for presenting the comprehensive report contained in
document S/2000/208, consolidating a number of
elements, as requested in Council resolutions.

 

Our thanks are due to Mr. Benon Sevan and his
colleagues in the Office of the Iraq Programme, who have
been fulfilling the task given to them with professionalism
and commitment.

The Secretary-General's report dwells at length on the
present deplorable state of the oil industry of Iraq. The
group of experts commissioned by the United Nations
stated in its report that the previously noted generally
lamentable state of the Iraqi oil industry has not improved
and that the decline in some cases is accelerating, posing
the threat of serious environmental degradation. The experts
noted that unless key items of spare parts and equipment
are made available and commissioned within a short time,
Iraq's oil production will severely drop, which would
seriously affect the oil-for-food programme itself. My
delegation therefore strongly endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendation to the Council to approve the
request to increase the allocation for oil spare parts and
equipment from $300 million to $600 million for phase VI,
and is therefore happy to support the draft resolution that
has been circulated in that regard. However, my delegation
feels that raising the allocation to the proposed level would
be self-defeating if the requests for spare parts for Iraq's oil
industry were stuck because of the holds placed on them.
According to the Secretary-General's report, the total value
of contract applications on hold for oil spare parts and
equipment as of 31 January 2000 was $291 million. We
would also urge the Council to reach consensus on the
selection of additional oil overseers to help the Office of
the Iraq Programme to expedite processing contracts on oil
supply from Iraq.

The Secretary-General's report is a poignant reminder
of the fact that there has been a serious deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and that the situation needs
urgent attention. As the Secretary-General said this
morning, the United Nations is - and we believe always
should be - on the side of the weak and the vulnerable. A
great deal needs to be done to improve the situation in
order to alleviate the suffering of the common people of
Iraq, who are deprived of their basic humanitarian needs. It
is evident from the current food security, education and
health situation in Iraq that the sanctions have hit the Iraqi
people in an indiscriminate way. So it is no wonder that
many have described such measures as immoral.

The Bangladesh delegation is fully prepared to extend
wholehearted support to measures which aim at easing the
suffering of the Iraqi people and improving the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. We also feel strongly that
there is a need for carrying out a sanctions impact
assessment to determine the consequences of such
measures on the already deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Iraq.

The food security and health situation in Iraq
presents an especially dismal picture. The caloric level
among the Iraqi people, particularly children, is critically
low, and the caloric target set by the United Nations
distribution plan is nowhere near being attained. The
report of the Secretary-General says that the overall
situation in the water sanitation sector has seen very little
improvement over the past two years due both to an
insufficient level of funds and to the high value of holds.
Hospitals are seriously handicapped by lack of facilities,
due again to a large number of equipment orders being
placed on hold. The recent figures from the United
Nations Children's Fund have shown a marked upward
trend in child mortality in a country where such mortality
used to be one of the lowest in the world. The Council
owes it to itself to address the problem of the devastating
impact of the sanctions regime on the people of Iraq and
to do everything possible through effective measures on
its part to alleviate the suffering and improve the
humanitarian situation in that country. We in the Council
have to get our act together and take some constructive
steps in this regard. The important decision which the
Council took on the question of Iraqi pilgrims to the Hajj
last month was an eminent example of how the Council
can act quickly and innovatively, keeping the interests of
the common people of Iraq uppermost in its mind.

Before concluding, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to another, often forgotten, dimension
of the humanitarian situation which we are discussing
today, and that is the important question of prisoners of
war and persons unaccounted for in Iraq. Over the last
decade, the matter has reached a serious point and needs
urgent resolution to ameliorate the untold suffering of the
large number of affected families, not only in Kuwait but
in a number of other countries, including mine. We would
like to see the high-level coordinator on this matter,
Ambassador Yuli M. Vorontsov, recently appointed by
the Secretary-General, make progress in bringing this
tragic situation to a close.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Taking into account the various statements made in
the course of today's meeting, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees
to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional

 

rules of procedure to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, to respond
to some of the issues raised in statements made this
morning and this afternoon.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Bellamy to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.

