Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I would first like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his informative briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan. I also express my
sincere appreciation to Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar for his
briefing. I now follow him on Twitter, and so I know
that today was both exciting and nerve-wracking for
him, but I must tell him that I hope we live up to his
expectations and, by extension, to the aspirations of all
Afghan youth.

I will cover three points today: the situation of
youth, the Geneva Ministerial Conference and the
upcoming parliamentary elections.

With regard to youth, Canada commends the
Security Council for having focused this quarterly
debate on this topic. As many other have noted, in a
country where over 60 per cent of the population
is under the age of 25, involving young people and
including their views in identifying solutions is more
important than ever. If Canada is elected to serve on
the Security Council for the period 2021-2022, we can
be counted upon to support a continued and expanded
effort to regularly include youth voices in such debates.
In Afghanistan, it is clear that equitable access to social
services, including education, remains an essential
component of supporting youth. That is especially
important for girls and young people from ethnic and
religious minorities.

The progress made since 2001 in terms of child
enrolment in schools is nothing short of remarkable.
Nevertheless, approximately 4 million children, most
of them girls, remain outside of school today. Their
enormous untapped potential prompted the Afghan
Ministry of Education to work with Canada and other
donors to develop a community-based policy that
increases access to education in rural and remote
locations. Leading that policy, Canada is proud to have
helped establish more than 9,200 community-based
schools serving 273,000 students, over 80 per cent of
whom are girls.

(spoke in French)

Canada looks forward to participating in the
forthcoming Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in November, and will be
paying keen attention to the Afghan Government's own
assessment of progress made to date and its planned
approach to address remaining obstacles. We hope to
hear more about how they intend to continue increasing
the participation of women in public affairs and
reducing gender-based violence. We hope to learn more
about the implementation of its policies to strengthen
budget transparency and increase Government
accountability, especially in the security sector. And
we eagerly await an update on its efforts to enhance
Government capacity to deliver services and ensure
good governance. All of those areas will be critical for
the success of the transformation decade.

The forthcoming parliamentary elections are
another important milestone. It was my personal
privilege to be in Afghanistan ahead of the historic
presidential elections in 2004 and to help organize
training for staff of the new Afghan Parliament in
2006. I met many incredible volunteers, officials and
politicians from across Afghanistan and was struck
then, as now, by the depth of their commitment to
their country and the remarkable diversity of their
perspective and experience.

(spoke in English)

Canada remains fully committed to supporting
Afghanistan as it seeks to leverage that diversity,
including by advancing the full participation of women
and marginalized communities in the upconubg
elections. As is the case everywhere, women's full
and equal participation in decision-making processes
strengthens both the processes and the decisions
themselves, leading to better, more sustainable results.
In that regard, I commend the Independent Election
Commission for its gender policy and for its concrete
efforts to enhance women's political participation. I
also want to cite the tremendous efforts of civil society
actors like the Transparent Election Foundation of
Afghanistan and the Afghan Women's Education
Center for promoting the rights of women and girls and
of ethnic and religious minorities.

We likewise welcome the work of the United
Nations and other partners to distribute ballots in
rural areas ahead of the elections. We encourage the
Afghan national authorities to continue to actively
address irregularities and to promote and protect the
rights of those in rural communities, especially women
candidates and voters, to participate in civic affairs and
political life. Their inclusion is essential to the integrity
of the elections.

As Afghanistan approaches the half-way mark of
its transformation decade, the Secretary-General is
right to point to the urgent need for political leaders to
demonstrate unity of purpose in guiding Afghanistan
towards greater stability and self-reliance. We look
to the Afghan Government to lead, as no doubt do
Afghanistan's young people. Canada will continue to
work with the Afghan Government, our United Nations
and international partners and with civil society in this
effort - because we know that, by working together,
we can help young people like Mr. Bakhtiar build a
peaceful, inclusive and resilient Afghanistan, which he
embodies so vividly for us all.

