Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): Two weeks
ago, the President of Poland convened a very important
debate in the Security Council (see S/PV.8262) on
upholding international law. Many of us talked about
the purposes and goals of the United Nations. It was
an opportunity to ask ourselves why we are here and
what we hope to accomplish. Today's debate effectively
answers those questions.

The conflict in Ukraine is a textbook example of
the direct violation of the sovereignty of one Member
State by another Member State. It is precisely the kind of
flagrant misconduct this organ was created to address.
When Russian forces entered the Crimean capital in
2014, it was a direct violation ofthe Charter ofthe United
Nations. Russian forces seized the Parliament building
and imposed an illegitimate referendum on the people.
Since then, Russia has pushed into eastern Ukraine,
creating a humanitarian crisis that threatens millions.

In response to the resulting outcry, Russia signed the
Minsk agreements, committed to a ceasefire, committed
to countless truces, committed to a withdrawal of heavy
weapons and committed to monitors to guarantee all of
its commitments. Unsurprisingly, Russia has serially
disregarded all of those promises and it has permitted,
if not instructed, its forces to detain, threaten and
even shoot at monitors, their vehicles, cameras and
observation drones. In short, Russia has created a
catastrophe of suffering in Ukraine.

This is not a frozen conflict. The month of May
has seen security conditions worsen, with the increased
ceasefire violations, higher civilian casualties and
growing military casualties. Adding to its complicity,
the Kremlin has neglected every one of the dozens
of previous ceasefire agreements. Russia insults our
intelligence by telling us that this is a home-grown
internal conflict, but everyone in this Chamber knows
better. The militants in eastern Ukraine report directly
to the Russian military, which arms them, trains
them, leads them and fights alongside them. Russia's
combined forces in eastern Ukraine include thousands
of tanks, armoured vehicles and heavy artillery.
Despite its transparent denials, there is no doubt that
Russia is driving the Ukrainian conflict. How do we
know? Because the Russian forces work hard to conceal
who is directing their actions and paying their wages.
They strip patches and insignia off of their uniforms
and equipment. They hide their identities behind face
masks. But we know why they are there and we know
who sent them. Russian soldiers have been captured
by Ukrainian armed forces. Journalists have identified
numerous examples of Russian military equipment
being used by Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine.

Tragically, that includes the Russia-supplied
missile system that shot down Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7 in July 2014 - a civilian aircraft flying from
Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur - killing all 298 people
on board. The victims include nationals of our Security
Council colleagues: 193 citizens of the Netherlands, 10
British citizens and a dual-national American, among
others. The families of the victims deserve answers. We
welcome last week's update from the international Joint
Investigation Team, which has handled this case with
professionalism and independence.

We strongly support the call of Australia and
the Netherlands for Russia to acknowledge its role in
the tragedy, to cooperate and bring to account those
responsible for shooting down Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17.

Like its role in the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
tragedy, we ask Russia to acknowledge another reality
that everyone here knows to be true: Russian soldiers
are in Ukraine, not to "protect Russian-speaking
Ukrainian nationals", but to impose Russian control on
the country. Let me emphasize that there is an urgent
reason for making this request: the Russian Government
holds the key to solving the crisis in Ukraine. The
resolution of this conflict is not only possible; it is
profoundly straightforward. Russia needs to withdraw
its military forces and equipment, call on its proxies to
honour the ceasefire and fulfil its commitments under
the Minsk agreements.

In Crimea, Russia needs to withdraw from the
peninsula and restore it to Ukrainian control in line
with Moscow's multilateral and bilateral commitments.
Russia can unilaterally fix this wrong, and the first step
is acknowledging it. Until Russia ends its outrageous
actions in Ukraine, the position ofthe United States will
not waver. We condemn in the strongest terms Russia's
involvement in eastern Ukraine and its purported
annexation of Crimea.

Until Russia returns the Crimean peninsula to
Ukrainian control, United States sanctions related to
the invasion of Crimea will continue. Until Russia pulls
its forces out of eastern Ukraine and honours its Minsk
commitments, our sanctions in response to its flagrant
misconduct in the eastern part of the country will stay
in place.

The United States, in close partnership with
France, Germany and Ukraine, is weighing options to
bring peace to eastern Ukraine. However, Russia has
refused to engage meaningfully, and our efforts have
been stalled since January.

On 23 April 2017, Joseph Stone - an
American - was working as a paramedic in eastern
Ukraine. He was serving with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine in an area under Russian control.
His vehicle was hit by an anti-tank mine. Joseph was
killed. The tragedy of Joseph is joined by many others
in Ukraine - we will not forget his sacrifice, just as
Ukrainians will not forget the death and suffering of so
many of their people.

All those who respect and are committed to defend
the United Nations and its Charter must join us in
demanding justice for Joseph and for all of the victims
in Ukraine.

