Mr. Zannier: Since my predecessor addressed
you on 21 April, the situation in Kosovo has changed
fundamentally. The Secretary-General's special report
on Kosovo (S/2008/354), discussed by the Security
Council on 20 June (see S/PV.5917), demonstrates that
events on the ground have contributed to creating a
profoundly new operating reality for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). The report before the Council today
(S/2008/458) describes in further detail UNMIK's
activities during the period 1 March to 25 June 2008.

Considering that the latter report covers only very
marginally my period in office - as I took up my
duties in Pristina as new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for UNMIK on 20 June - I would
like to supplement it with my own assessment of the
developments on the ground since my arrival in
Kosovo.

During the reporting period, the ability of
UNMIK to perform the vast majority of its tasks as an
interim administration has been fundamentally
challenged, owing to actions taken by the authorities in
Pristina and by the Kosovo Serbs.

As my predecessor reported previously, the
Kosovo Assembly adopted on 9 April What it described
as the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo. This act
came into force on 15 June. Since then, the Kosovo
authorities continue to seek to assume the powers and
08-43933
responsibilities of a sovereign State. For example, the
Kosovo Assembly recently approved an allocation of
funds for the establishment of a Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and a minister has been appointed and is
present here today. The Prime Minister has also
announced his intention to establish embassies in a
number of European States and in Washington, DC.
The Assembly of Kosovo continues to pass legislation,
which is now promulgated by the President of Kosovo
without reference to my powers under Security Council
1244 (1999) or the constitutional framework.

Kosovo Serbs have, on the other hand, continued
to oppose cooperation with the Prishtine/Pristina
authorities, stressing that they will cooperate only with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). At the same time, the Serbian
Government has consolidated its control of structures
in Serb-majority areas, particularly in northern
Kosovo. On 11 May, local municipal elections were
held in 23 out of the 30 municipalities in Kosovo in
which Kosovo Serbs live. UNMIK neither hindered nor
supported the elections and declared the results invalid.
As a result of the Serbian local elections, new parallel
municipal authorities are now operating in all Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo, and the Serbian
Minister for Kosovo has noted publicly his expectation
that UNMIK will eventually recognize them. Recently,
the Serbian Government also sanctioned the formation
of an Assembly of the Union of Serbian Municipalities
and Settlements in Kosovo and Metohija, on the basis
of the results of these elections.

As a consequence of this stark divergence of
paths taken by Kosovo's Serbian and Albanian
communities, the space in which UNMIK can operate
has changed. Since the entry into force of the Kosovo
Constitution, exercising my legal powers under
resolution 1244 (1999) has become increasingly
difficult in practice. As the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, I am not in a position any
longer to promulgate legislation that has an undisputed
binding effect. Attempts to impose my legal authority
are simply not heeded by the Kosovo Albanian
majority, which now sees the Constitution of Kosovo
as the fundamental document from which legal
authority derives.

Moreover, the relationship between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Prime
Minister has altered significantly. Regular working
meetings to decide on key governance matters - a
08-43933
standing fixture since the inception of UNMIK - no
longer take place.

While I and my staff continue to monitor the
work of the Kosovo authorities and to mediate and
facilitate in disputes between communities, my power
to impose solutions has in practice disappeared
throughout much of the territory. While I am still
formally vested with executive authority under
resolution 1244, I have no tools to enforce such
authority. Therefore, these powers can only be
exercised if and when they are accepted by all parties,
as is the case, for instance, in the rule oflaw area.

Consent to direct administration by UNMIK has
disappeared in the majority areas and is greatly
diminished in practice; it has also disappeared in areas
inhabited by minority communities, regardless of
claims that resolution 1244 (1999) is being upheld.
Recent local-level disputes demonstrate the more
complicated situation which now prevails for the
international community as it attempts to resolve them.
These disputes have included disagreement over the
siting of a new mosque in the Kamenica municipality, a
water distribution dispute in a multi-ethnic
neighbourhood of Mitrovice/Mitrovica and a complaint
by the Serbian Orthodox Church about actions taken by
the Gjakove/Djakovica municipality in covering over
the foundations of a destroyed church to make a public
park.

While UNMIK has monitored these situations and
sought to facilitate dialogue between the communities,
the Kosovo Serbs deal only with UNMIK and Kosovo
Albanians prefer either to attempt to deal with such
issues themselves or involve the European Union or
other representatives of the international community
and it is becoming increasingly difficult for UNMIK to
broker solutions. Nevertheless, in areas where ethnic
minority issues are more strongly felt, UNMIK
effectively remains the only actor that can attempt to
mediate between both sides in practical disputes.

In addition, the decision of the European Union
to end funding for the operations of UNMIK's
economic reconstruction pillar has left UNMIK as from
30 June without the technical capacity or budget to
operate in most economic areas, which is a further
factor that is forcing UNMIK to reassess its ability to
carry on as before.

With respect to the rule of law, like my
predecessors, I am concerned that key institutions are
3
not functioning as they should. As the Secretary-
General's report indicates, a number of judicial
institutions in northern Kosovo remain closed. Large
numbers of Kosovo-Serb police officers, who refuse to
work within and take instruction from the leadership of
the Kosovo Police Service, continue to be suspended
with pay. UNMIK Customs has no presence at the two
northern gates on the Administrative Boundary Line
with Serbia, with the resulting loss of revenues and
increases in smuggling.

As a result of this situation, UNMIK has been
engaged in planning for a reconfiguration of its
presence that takes into account these circumstances
and refocuses its operations, so as to maximize the
value it can add in the areas where its role remains key.
The planning has been based on the instructions of the
Secretary-General and maintains a strictly status-
neutral posture, in full compliance with the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).

An initial reconfiguration plan has been
developed and forwarded to Headquarters outlining a
number of measures that will reduce UNMIK's
capacity in areas where it can no longer effectively
function, for example, in civil administration, and
enhancing it in others, with particular attention to
minorities. For example, I am particularly conscious of
the ongoing need to ensure that the rights of all
communities in Kosovo are fully protected.

In the area of external relations, UNMIK is
willing and able to continue assisting with Kosovo's
participation in international forums, in line with the
requests from the inviting organizations, thus ensuring
that the people of Kosovo can fully benefit from
interaction with the international community and with
regional cooperation processes.

In principle, UNMIK continues to retain
executive authority for rule of law functions, such as
the police, judiciary and customs, throughout Kosovo
for the time being. Discussions on future cooperation
have taken place with representatives of the European
Union's Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) at the
technical level. We are close to concluding an
agreement encompassing, inter alia, areas such as
transfer of assets, privileges and immunities of staff,
and exchanges of information. We expect the European
Union Rule of Law Mission to be deployed and operate
under United Nations authority and in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
In addition, I expect the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Kosovo
to continue its work as part of the reconfigured
UNMIK. This will be crucial for the promotion of
democratic values and the protection of all community
interests. In fact, as a part of UNMIK's
reconfiguration, the role of OSCE as an UNMIK pillar
will be enhanced, particularly at the field level. For this
reason, I expect a closer interaction with OSCE in
future.

NATO has also expressed its continuing
commitment to support both the people of Kosovo and
the international civil presence in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). I am most encouraged by the
level of constructive cooperation between UNMIK and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) on the ground. This is
essential for safeguarding peace and stability in the
region.

A key continuing role for UNMIK will be to lead
the process of dialogue with Belgrade and to consult
with all affected parties in a number of practical areas.
It is my firm belief that every effort must be made to
keep open all available channels for constructive
dialogue and cooperation. Since my arrival in Kosovo,
I have held discussions with a number of local
interlocutors, undertaking several field trips and
meetings, at which I have been able to talk to
representatives of most political groups and
communities. In the last two weeks, I have met with
political leaders in the north, judicial officials in both
Prishtine/Pristina and Mitrovice/Mitrovica and leaders
of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Decan/Decani.

Just two days ago, on my way to New York, I had
an initial meeting with the new Government of Serbia
in Belgrade on organizing dialogue in the six practical
areas of mutual concern outlined by the Secretary-
General in his 12 June letter to President Tadie:
customs, police, courts, transportation and
infrastructure, boundaries and Serbian patrimony. I am
very encouraged by the expressed willingness of
Foreign Minister Jeremie to engage in fruitful,
constructive dialogue. I consider that to be a promising
beginning to the dialogue with Belgrade, which will
continue next week with a meeting with Serbia's
Minister for Kosovo, Mr. Goran Bogdanovic, in
Pristina.

That process will require the consultation and
support of all interested parties. I consider my role in
08-43933
that regard as that of a facilitator for eventual direct
dialogue between the parties. I intend to engage in the
process in good faith, in a spirit of transparency and
openness, with the aim of promoting the resolution of
outstanding issues within a realistic timeframe and
without prejudice to the status of Kosovo.

In conclusion, let me express my hope and trust
that the path we have taken to ensure the continued
relevance and effectiveness of UNMIK will allow the
United Nations to protect its legacy in Kosovo, while
adapting itself to the circumstances and maintaining
the monitoring and mediating capacity that is still
essential, in full cooperation with the other
international actors.

I am also optimistic that UNMIK can continue to
have an important role in facilitating dialogue among
the different parties on matters affecting the lives of all
communities in Kosovo.

