Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation between Israel and Lebanon
continues to intensify dangerously. The conflict began
on 12 July with a border incident caused by the
kidnapping of two Israeli soldiers and by the firing of
rockets into Israeli territory by militarized units of the
Lebanese Hizbollah movement, and it is escalating into
a major military conflagration that could have grave
consequences for Lebanon, for the Middle East region
as a whole and for international peace. The spiral of
violence in the region is growing ever tighter.

Retaliatory action by Israel - troop incursions
into Lebanese territory, the destruction of civilian
infrastructure and the air and sea blockade of Lebanese
territory - has resulted in major casualties and
suffering among the peaceable population. Hizbollah
has begun to fire rockets on Israeli cities, including
Haifa; these too are inflicting harm on perfectly
innocent people. All of this takes place in parallel with
ongoing Israeli army operations in the Palestinian
territories, where innocent people die daily.

Russia strongly condemns the kidnapping of the
soldiers and the firing on Israeli territory. But we View
Israel's military action as a disproportionate and
inappropriate use of force that threatens the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and
peace and security throughout the region.

In the light of this situation, it is essential that
urgent steps be taken to halt the military escalation. We
urge Israel to end its incursions into Lebanon and its
destruction of civilian infrastructure on Lebanese
territory, and to lift the blockade against that country.
Experience in the Middle East and, indeed, past
practice in the resolution of other conflicts show that
security problems cannot be solved by armed force.

For its part, Hizbollah must refrain from actions
against Israel, which pose a threat to the interests of its
own country as well. It must release the Israeli
soldiers, halt its rocket attacks on Israeli territory and
respect the Blue Line. We expect the Lebanese
Government and other parties to provide all possible
assistance in resolving these issues.

Russia, for its part, is taking active steps to
achieve a ceasefire and to steer the conflict towards a
political settlement. On 13 July, Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
met with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Prime
Minister Siniora of Lebanon, Foreign Minister Aboul
Gheit of Egypt and Foreign Minister Motaki of Iran.
Russia expressed its support for the Secretary-
General's decision to dispatch a special mission to the
region with the task of entering into contact with the
regional parties and finding a way to deescalate the
conflict. In the light of the acute deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East, Russia has decided to
send Mr. Sergei Yakovlev, special representative of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, to the region for talks
with the interested parties, our Quartet partners,
international mediators and the United Nations special
mission.

