Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
At the outset, I should like to thank the United States
for taking the initiative to hold an open debate on the
protection of journalists in armed conflict. I should
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
briefing and the distinguished journalists for sharing
their valuable insights and experiences with us today.

The Nordic countries greatly value the crucial
role of journalists in enhancing the international
community's understanding of conflict areas, and we
are deeply committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, including the protection ofjournalists.
The work ofjournalists in armed conflict - witnessing
and reporting on violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of humanitarian law - is in the
international public interest. The presence of j ournalists
often helps to prevent atrocities being committed. Yet,
many journalists and media workers are persecuted
during armed conflicts precisely because of their work.
It is often said that truth is the first casualty of war;
this sometimes translates into a deliberate targeting of
journalists.

In light of the worsening situation over the past
decade, the Nordic countries very much welcome the
creation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, led by
UNESCO and aiming at securing greater cooperation
among United Nations organizations, Member States
and other stakeholders in supporting the creation of a
free and safe environment for journalists and media
workers in conflict and non-conflict situations. We
particularly appreciate the United Nations Plan's
concrete implementation strategy for the global and
national levels.

The increasing violence across the world against
journalists undermines the very foundation of open and
democratic societies in which freedom of expression is
a cornerstone. The Nordic countries welcome the first
resolution on the safety of journalists adopted by the
Human Rights Council in September 2012 (resolution 21/ 12).

Many different forms of media play a key role in
the exercise, promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression. Journalists, like
everyone else, are entitled to the same rights online
as they have offline, as affirmed by the Human
Rights Council in its landmark resolution 20/8, "The
promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights
on the Internet", adopted in July 2012.

We, the international community, must demand
and ensure that the protection under international
humanitarian law given to journalists, as recognized
war correspondents and as civilians, is fully respected
and upheld. The Security Council must be clear and
strong in its messages and resolutions that violations
against civilians and journalists cannot be tolerated.
We, the international community, must also put pressure
on those who fail to respect the basic yet vital rules that
apply. Journalists also play a crucial role in witnessing,
gathering information, and reporting on violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. This is an essential element in
ensuring that such crimes do not go unpunished.

Neither should crimes against journalists
themselves go unpunished. Promoting the safety of
journalists and fighting impunity requires preventive
actions to address the causes of violence against
journalists and impunity. This encompasses the need
to deal with issues such as corruption, organized crime
and an effective framework for the rule of law.

At the thirty-first International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011, the States
parties agreed in a resolution on a four-year action
plan to enhance the protection of journalists and the
role of media workers. We must report on progress at
the next Conference in 2015. Education is also needed
in preventative actions and to underline causes of
violence against journalists. For this purpose, we have
a common responsibility to educate our armed forces
on the protection of civilians and journalists under
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and we must make sure that crimes against them are
brought to justice.

The Nordic countries support a range of initiatives
that are relevant to the topic of today's debate. Let
me mention just a few. Norway, in partnership with
Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and Uganda, has
led a series of regional conferences on the theme
"Reclaiming the protection of civilians under
international humanitarian law". At the final global
conference held in May this year, the protection of
journalists was specifically underlined in the co-Chairs'
recommendations.

The Swedish Folke Bernadotte Academy and the
Swedish National Defence College have produced
a handbook on assisting international criminal
investigations with very hands-on information to all
those - including journalists - who are present in
conflict environments on how to correctly identify,
gather and forward information on possible international
crimes to international criminal courts and tribunals.

UNESCO and Reporters Without Borders have
developed a practical guide for journalists in conflict
zones. Sweden, together with the Swedish Reporters
Without Borders, is in the process of translating this
handbook to ensure its wider distribution.

In closing, this debate today has underscored
the difficult circumstances under which journalists
operate, while providing the international community
with vital information from conflict areas. It is our
common responsibility to make sure that they can play
this indispensable role without risking their own lives.

