Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Before
I deliver my statement, let me offer my condolences to
the peoples and the Governments of Japan and Ecuador
for the loss of lives as a result of the recent earthquakes.

Ihave the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM), and to convey the
Movement's appreciation to the Chinese presidency for
convening this open debate at this critical juncture for
the Palestine people and the Middle East. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Given the time constraints, I will deliver an
abridged version of my statement. The full text will
be circulated.

Each and every time the Council holds an open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
question of Palestine, NAM. appeals for international
attention and urgent action to address the illegal and
brutal Israeli occupation that is causing so much
anguish to the Palestinian people, provoking deep
anger and frustration and inflaming tensions. The
breaches of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, that are being committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, are inflicting widespread
human suffering and are deliberately destabilizing the
situation, with far-reaching and serious consequences
for the prospects for a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and for peace and security
in the Middle East and beyond.

Each time, we repeat our call to the international
community, first and foremost the Security Council,
to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and the obligations to respect those
instruments and ensure such respect, including through
the necessary measures to compel Israel to end its
war crimes and human rights violations against the
Palestinian people and end the illegal foreign occupation
of another people's land.

Regrettably, the Security Council has failed to
uphold its obligations, despite the clear global consensus
on both the illegality of Israel's policies and practices
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and the urgency of ending this decades-
long conflict so that the Palestinian people can finally
realize the freedom, rights and justice they have for too
long been unjustly denied.

Israel, the occupying Power, has been emboldened

by that inaction on the part of the international
community, which has enabled it to act with impunity.
Consequently, it has intensified its illegal, oppressive
measures against the defenceless Palestinian civilian
population, including, inter alia, by using excessive
force against Palestinian civilians, including children
and women, causing death and injury. As the occupying
Power builds and expands more illegal settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, which constitutes not only a grave breach
of the Fourth Geneva Convention but also a war crime
as defined by the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Israel also continues with its illegal,
repressive and punitive measures, including home
demolitions, leaving countless Palestinian families
homeless and without hope. The destructive impact
of such Israeli violations is immense, as reflected in
the increasing tensions, deteriorating socioeconomic
conditions and deepening frustration and despair
among the Palestinian civilian population, which has
been living under the Israeli occupation for nearly half
a century.

Moreover, the humanitarian disaster deliberately
inflicted on the Gaza Strip by the occupying Power
remains without redress, as the illegal Israeli blockade
continues to obstruct the reconstruction of thousands of
damaged and destroyed homes and infrastructure, and
socioeconomic conditions continue to deteriorate as
the blockade continues to have a suffocating effect on
Gaza. The Palestinian civilian population there remains
isolated from the rest of Palestine and the entire world.
The situation of youth in Gaza is especially critical, as
hope and opportunity are absent. We would draw the
Council's attention to that critical aspect.

The Security Council must act in accordance
with international humanitarian law to ensure the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population under
Israeli occupation. The Council must also act, in line
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Council's own resolutions, to
bring a halt to Israel's ongoing illegal colonization of
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. That is a minimal and fundamental request
to the Security Council and is not beyond the realm of
reason, or its obligation for that matter.

How can the Council remain silent as Israel
continues its systematic settlement policy, its
construction of the wall, its confiscation and de
facto annexation of Palestinian land under various
pretexts, such as "State land" or "military exercises" or
"building without permits"? Those and other systematic
violations, including the demolition of homes, the
forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the arrest
and detention of Palestinians, including children, and
the incessant violence, terror and provocations by
Israeli settlers and extremists, including at sensitive
religious sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in
occupied East Jerusalem, have persisted in an unabated
fashion, worsening the extremely fragile situation
on the ground. Such violations must be addressed
immediately, because it is unacceptable to allow Israel
to enjoy impunity without suffering the consequences
of its actions. Any justification for such criminality
must be rejected, and the time is past due to act, in
line with United Nations resolutions, international law
and our moral responsibilities towards the question
of Palestine.

Finally, at a time when the Palestinian people are
facing increasing Israeli aggression and have rapidly
declining hope for the possibilities for peace andjustice,
the Non-Aligned Movement seizes this opportunity to
reaffirm its long- standing solidarity with the Palestinian
people, recognizing their decades of resilience despite
so much suffering and injustice. NAM. reiterates its
support for the realization of their legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including their right
to self-determination and freedom in an independent
and viable State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, as well as for a just solution to ease the plight
of the Palestine refugees, in accordance with resolution
194 (III), of 1948.

Lebanon continues to suffer from continuous Israeli
violations of its borders and incursions into its territory,
which have been followed by years of occupation and
aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that ensures the strengthening of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, and
especially in view of the recent blatant defiance
exhibited against the will of the international
community, the Movement condemns all the measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status of the occupied Syrian
Golan, which have intensified after the outbreak of the
Syrian crisis. NAM. demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

