Mr. Gentiloni Silveri (Italy): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacekeeping reform. I also want to thank Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta for their
briefings, and to commend Ethiopia for resolution 2378
(2017), which we adopted a few minutes ago.

I think that the issue not only involves the role
of the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security, but also the role and the reputation
of the United Nations. The sustaining peace agenda
stresses the need for a holistic approach that covers
the United Nations pillars of security, human rights
and development. Secretary-General Guterres went
even further with his vision of the peace continuum,
with a firm conviction that long-lasting peace can be
pursued only by adopting a multidimensional approach
across the whole cycle of peace, from prevention to,
when necessary, peacekeeping, and from post-conflict
recovery to inclusive national reconciliation and
sustainable development processes. We are now called
upon to put concrete actions in place so as to effectively
implement that approach. As a global security provider,
let me highlight Italy's commitments in that regard.

We are very proud to be the primary contributor
of Blue Helmets among the Group of Western
European and other States, as well as one of the most
generous financial supporters. We are committed to
current United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Lebanon, where we have deployed approximately 1,100
peacekeepers, as well as in Kosovo, Cyprus and Mali.
In addition, Italy has provided capabilities to the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System
in terms of maneuver units that are complemented by
the provision of quality training for United Nations
peacekeepers, based on highly professional and ethical
standards. We deem it essential that a zero-tolerance
policy be applied against Blue Helmets who have
committed sexual violence. It is not only a matter of
fully respecting fundamental human rights, but also
one of United Nations credibility.

The implementation of the sustaining peace and
peace continuum approaches cannot rely solely on the
efforts and commitments of Member States. The Charter
of the United Nations also already recognizes the key
role of regional organizations, which the Council fully
acknowledged as an important resource to provide local
solutions to local problems. In that context, let me once
again welcome the recent initiative by the Group of Five
States for the Sahel and its newly established Force.

The reports and the agreement signed between
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission constitute a significant
step forward and mark the beginning of a strategic
partnership between the two organizations, thereby
paving the way for a broader approach. Today, African
problems are our problems. To concretely ensure
effective operational cooperation, we are in favour of
exploring the use of assessed contributions for African
Union peacekeeping missions. I would also like to stress
that it is important to ensure that the appropriate set of
requirements for troop quality, training, equipment and
high accountability standards is met.

In that regard, Italy is ready to provide its full
support through our Carabinieri and defence forces in
countries ranging from Somalia to Afghanistan, Iraq to
Libya and in the Sahel, the Arab Gulf, the Balkans and
Eastern Europe. Wherever our assistance is required,
we spare no effort in capacity-building across the board,
from border security to election security and from
justice and correction practices to fighting organized
crime and trafficking.

We also pay attention to the capacity-building
of peacekeepers, so that they can face emerging
challenges, such as frequent attacks on cultural heritage.
In that regard, let me just quickly remind the Council
of our Unite for Heritage Task Force, established in
cooperation with UNESCO - an endeavour rooted in
our common cultural identity that also resonates with
the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2347
(2017), on protecting cultural heritage in conflict-
affected areas.

We must ensure that the commitments that we have
undertaken in support of peacekeeping are effectively
implemented. Budgetary and financial considerations
are very important aspects. However, we must avoid
prioritizing cost considerations over the effectiveness
ofpeacekeeping missions. That should be our main goal
if we are to be committed to a long-term solution, as it
is a matter that could jeopardize the credibility of the
Council. We need to demonstrate to the international
community the Council's capacity to rapidly and
effectively respond to current and new international
challenges and threats to international peace and
security. It is not an easy task, but it is our primary duty,
as established in the Charter of the United Nations.

