Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
for the briefing that we heard from Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, to whom we reiterate our support in the
discharge of his duties.

Once again we cannot but express our sorrow at the
fact that this conflict has gone on for six years now and
we are still witnessing the ongoing siege and Violence
suffered by the Syrian people, mainly children, who, in
addition to living with the psychological aftermath of
the situation, are also in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. We deplore any act of violence that puts
human lives at risk and therefore call for an end to
the violence and urge the parties to refrain from any
hostile, provocative or unilateral actions, in order to
prevent any further suffering of the Syrian people and
any further destabilization of the region.

We welcome the holding of the summit of the three
ceasefire guarantors in Ankara, Turkey, in March. We
will be focusing closely on the next summit, which
will be sponsored by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Likewise, we welcome the recent Astana meeting. We
deem its outcome positive, as were the agreements
reached one year ago exactly, when the important
de-escalation zones were established. We believe that
that international initiative has served to reduce the
level of violence and has facilitated, and will continue
to facilitate, the path to peace and stability in Syria.

We therefore call for greater coordination among
the local authorities within the de-escalation zones,
humanitarian agencies and the Syrian Government,
which will make it possible to improve the living
conditions of the local population, with a view to
contributing to international efforts to end the conflict
in Syria.

We call once again for efforts to continue with
respect to the full implementation of resolution 2401
(2018), so as to ensure safe, sustained and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those who require it. The
protection of the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure must also be a priority within the
framework of respect for international law and
international humanitarian law.

We deem imperative the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons in a safe and dignified
manner, as soon as the situation permits. For that to
happen, demining will be vital in those areas where it
is necessary. We would urge that the political dialogue
agenda continue to focus on the release of detainees and
abductees, as well as on the identification of missing or
deceased persons.

We stress the efforts made towards the voluntary
return of thousands of people to eastern Ghouta and
other cities north and south of Damascus and their
subsequent full return. My delegation would draw the
attention of the Security Council to the need to protect
thousands of innocent civilians, including children and
the elderly, and move them to Idlib. It is urgent and
pressing that peace be maintained and any escalation
of violence avoided in that area, as the aftermath could
be tragic.

We believe that measures must continue to be taken
to reduce the level of violence on the ground, promote
confidence among the parties involved, alleviate the
humanitarian situation and promote ongoing initiatives
aimed at finding a peaceful political solution. The
process must take place on the basis of the various
initiatives taken and meetings held at different levels.
We therefore underscore once again the commitments
made at the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held in
Sochi on 30 January, with a focus on strengthening the
United Nations-led political process in the framework
of the road map set out in resolution 2254 (2015), in
particular through the drafting of a new constitution
and the establishment of a constitutional committee,
which we believe must be representative and impartial.
We hope that the work of that committee, in Geneva,
should start as soon as possible and should be active
and dynamic and include the participation of all parties
to the conflict.

We welcome the good offices and mediation of
the Secretary-General and his close collaboration with
the members of the Security Council in the quest for a
peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria.

To conclude, we reject any attempt to divide
or fragment Syria along ethnic lines or to foster
sectarianism there. It is the Syrian people themselves
who must freely decide their future and their political
leadership, in the framework of their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, without any
external pressure or interference.
We reiterate that the only way to resolve the
conflict in Syria is through a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process that is inclusive and based
on consultation and dialogue and that will allow for a
peaceful solution to be reached among all the parties
involved.

