Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset, Mr. President, to say how pleased
and honoured we are that you have agreed to come and
preside over the work of the Council today, which
focuses on post-conflict peacebuilding, a subject to
which, as we know, Denmark is firmly committed. We
appreciate that commitment.

Later in the debate, the representative of
Luxembourg will speak on behalf of the European
Union; I support that statement. I wish only to add a
few brief comments.

For many years, Members of the United Nations
have been concerned about the fate of war-torn
countries once peace has been restored with the support
of a peacekeeping operation. In the 19905, in
Cambodia and in the Balkans, United Nations missions
were already working - in addition to the work
carried out by the various agencies - to build the
peace that had been restored. Since that time,
peacebuilding has become increasingly prominent in
our debates. Many ideas have been put forward over
the years with a view to refining the concept. Major
reports have been written seeking to improve
programmes of action in the field. And, indeed, there
has been real progress.

To foster further progress, the Secretary-General
has proposed the establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission. France fully supports that proposal and
hopes that it will become a reality during the
September summit.

The theme of peacebuilding brings together many
subjects of direct interest to the United Nations. Today,
I wish to highlight two specific points.

The first relates to financing. Money not only
drives war; it also drives peace. Peacebuilding has a
high cost, which is generally spread out over several
years. Many approaches have been envisaged to raise
the necessary funds. The question of financing from
assessed or voluntary contributions is at the centre of
our discussion.

France believes that a clear distinction must be
drawn between activities that can legitimately claim
funding from assessed contributions and those that
should be supported by voluntary contributions from
Member States. A certain flexibility is necessary in this
regard, and radical positions should be avoided. In all
cases, funds that have been pledged or assessed must
be disbursed expeditiously, because time is of the
essence in post-conflict peacebuilding.

The second point I wanted to mention concerns
the process of disarmament and reintegration of
demobilized soldiers, the traditional DDR programmes
that we find regularly in Security Council resolutions.
In several cases we see that those programmes have not
yet produced the hoped-for results. Beyond the
question of financial resources, we can all do better.
Coordination between the various agencies responsible
for financing and carrying out those programmes could
be improved; there must be better coordination among
all the actors concerned. Among its many tasks the
future Commission will, we hope, be able to facilitate
that coordination.

Before I conclude my statement, I would have a
couple of comments. We have already heard them here
in the Council, and we think perhaps they make good
sense.

The international community, on occasions such
as today, must reaffirm its duty to help. However, it is
also useful to recall that the primary responsibility for
peacebuilding lies with the people emerging from the
conflict. Sustainable peace, economic development,
observance of human rights and social cohesion
definitely need international assistance, but the sine
qua non for success is that the people and their leaders
mobilize and act together to obtain that goal. France
will continue to concern itself with, and act for,
recovering countries, as it has always done.

