Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea): We thank
the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, for his updated
briefing on the work he has done since his most recent
report to the Council (see S/PV.8475).

We are aware that much remains to be done in
Syria. As we seek a way to put an end to the terrorist
groups operating in Idlib based on the Russian-Turkish
agreements and defeat the main terrorist forces, it is
necessary to focus on fully stabilizing the situation
on the ground and on promoting a political solution
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). We must therefore
be fully determined to step up efforts to form the
constitutional committee so as to give genuine impetus
to the political process aimed at putting an end to the
eight years of war in Syria.

We welcome the meetings held recently by the
Special Envoy in Damascus and Geneva and in the
framework of the Astana process to discuss the
formation and launch of the work of the constitutional
committee. We would recall that the bilateral and
trilateral rounds of talks held on 25 and 26 April in
Nur-Sultan were focused primarily on ensuring that
progress is made in the efforts ofthe parties to reactivate
the political process, the need for constitutional
reform and the holding of free and fair elections, and
on the reaffirmation of Geneva as the venue for the
achievement of a permanent political solution to the
conflict in Syria, as agreed in January 2018 in Sochi.

In the current context, we must be objective and
recognize that there is no longer room for eventualities
or expectations, and that the constitutional committee
should be formed as soon as possible.

The political process in Syria would begin only
after the formation of the constitutional committee,
and, as we have stated recently, we are fully aware of
the fact that it remains difficult to set specific dates for
the formation of the committee and the launching of its
work. For that reason, we once again urge the parties,
especially the Syrian authorities, to take the necessary
measures, give priority to their cooperation with the
Special Envoy and actively expedite the culmination of
the process.

In that same vein, it would be advisable to take
measures to further strengthen the Astana process, with
the incorporation of additional States as observers. We
share the View that the participation of additional States
in this negotiating process will make the solutions
reached in the rounds of consultations even more robust
at the international level.

I would conclude my statement by encouraging
the Special Envoy once again to continue investigating
all possible opportunities to overcome the obstacles
standing in the way of the formation of the committee
and by reiterating the firm commitment of my
Government to a political solution to the conflict in the
framework of resolution 2254 (2015).

