Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is an honour for me to
address the Council during the Swedish presidency.

On behalf of Norway, I would like express
appreciation for the Secretary-General's report on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations.

We would like to support the European Union
statement, with which we fully agree. In addition, I would
like to emphasize some points that we believe are of
particular importance.

First, the necessity of ensuring consistency and
coordination between humanitarian action and broader
United Nations peace and development activities should
be stressed. The contribution of targeted and efficient
assistance to people in distress is an important objective
of Norway's humanitarian policy. Providing protection
and assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons

 

often means operating in areas of conflict. Humanitarian
assistance should therefore always be part of a broader
international effort aimed at seeking political solutions and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts. In order to ensure a
cohesive response, the possible role of humanitarian
assistance in contributing to such broader goals should
therefore be analysed.

Secondly, to improve the current situation, it is
important that those responsible for violations of
international law, including international humanitarian law,
be brought to justice. The International Criminal Court
should fulfil its potential by ensuring better accountability
of States, non-State actors and individuals. All Member
States are encouraged to sign and ratify the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and other relevant international
instruments.

Thirdly, problems that have a negative impact on the
security situation of humanitarian workers could be
addressed in the context of a humanitarian strategy that
includes preventive measures. Such measures might be
based on international humanitarian law and could include
training for democracy and human rights.

Finally, firm measures must be taken against parties
that deliberately attack civilian staff members of the United
Nations and the personnel of humanitarian organizations. In
this context, I would like to mention that my Government,
in order to support training and enhanced security
management, has contributed $100,000 to the recently
established United Nations Trust Fund for the security of
United Nations personnel, referred to in paragraph 50 of the
Secretary-General's report. We encourage other Member
States to also provide resources to this fund.

