Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, as other delegations before me, I would
like to convey to you how pleased Cameroon is to see
you personally here this morning to chair this meeting.
Your presence vividly demonstrates the importance that
your country attaches to the development of the
situation in Kosovo in particular and in the Balkans
region in general.

I would also like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his
very useful briefing, which highlights the efforts being
conducted by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) on Kosovo, as well as the
results garnered to date.

We would also like to thank all those men and
women who, through their dedication and commitment,
are providing ongoing and steadfast support to the
work of Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The meeting of the Council held on 30 October to
consider the situation in Kosovo revealed the new
prospects before the province with regard to the
ongoing stabilization process. During the period from
July to October 2003, thanks to mediation by UNMIK
officials, we witnessed the establishment of direct and
concrete cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina in
a number of areas. In addition, on 14 October in
Vienna, a direct political dialogue at the highest level
between the authorities of the two capitals regarding
practical issues of common concern took place for the
first time. Four expert working groups were established
to familiarize themselves with matters related to
energy, missing persons, returns, and transport and
communications.

In addition, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) that was presented to the Council
illustrated the great progress that had been made in the
functioning of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. The information provided today seems to
confirm the great hopes that arose at the meeting held
on 30 October. On 5 November 2003, on the initiative
of the Contact Group under the auspices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, a mechanism
was launched in Pristina and Belgrade to monitor the
implementation of the policy of standards before status.
And, on 10 December 2003, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General issued a declaration on the
standards applicable to Kosovo. The Security Council
was pleased to note that in the presidential statement
issued in document S/PRST/2003/26, of 12 December
2003.

At this juncture, it is the view of my delegation
that one of the most urgent challenges before the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is to
develop an implementation plan for those standards,
given the crucial impact they will have on the process
that the Council must carry out towards a final and
appropriate resolution of the issue of Kosovo. Given
the importance of that plan, my delegation believes that
its drafting, and its finalization in particular, must take
place on the basis of consensus among all the parties,
in order that all obstacles to the implementation of the
standards may be overcome.

With regard to dealing with the issue of Kosovo,
the Security Council is often reproached for its
approach that seems to defer consideration of the
province's final status and avoid the establishment of a
timetable for doing so. My delegation believes that the
great progress recently made provides eloquent
testimony with regard to the policy of standards before
status, to which Cameroon has always demonstrated its
commitment. The satisfactory implementation of the
eight standards - namely, the functioning of
democratic institutions, the establishment of a State
based on the rule of law, the right to free movement,
the return and reintegration of displaced persons, the
establishment of a market economy based on a stable
foundation, the recognition and re-establishment of the
right to property, a candid and direct dialogue between
the authorities of Belgrade and Pristina and, lastly, the
training and professionalization of the Kosovo
Protection Corps - continues to be essential to an
orderly debate on the final status of Kosovo. How
could one imagine reversing the process in Kosovo,
where today we continue to see a rise in targeted acts
of violence against the Serb minority community and
UNMIK staff, including the recent attack on the World
Bank delegation at Mitrovica? How could we imagine
a Kosovo in which extremists on all sides utilize mafia-
like methods to foment intolerance, hatred and fear,
and where freedom of movement remains a luxury for
some people, and the right to property even more so?

The direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade is gradually taking place. The
operationalization of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government continues apace, and those continue
to function better every day. Combating corruption and
organized crime has had undeniable success in Kosovo.
The economy, which for a long time was under ground,
is resurfacing on the solid and reliable foundations of a
market economy. The core of a judicial system for a
State based on the rule of law is being established with
the assistance of the United Nations. And the training
of the Kosovo Police Service is almost completed.
With all that progress, which we owe to the concerted
efforts of all the members of the international
community and to Kosovars themselves, my delegation
is inclined to be optimistic about the future of
Kosovo - a Kosovo that is multi-ethnic, multicultural,
reconciled unto itself and prosperous, in which peace,
justice and social harmony reign through the force of
law rather than the law of force. Such a Kosovo is no
longer just a hope, it is within our grasp.

We therefore launch an appeal to the parties
concerned to reaffirm their commitment to the process
under way and resolutely engage themselves, without
ulterior motives. We express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
UNMIK, KFOR, the European Union and all other
international organizations acting in Kosovo for the
work they are doing pursuant to the ideals and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in order
to return peace and security to Kosovo and the region.
As a Member of the United Nations, Cameroon will,
through its contingent, continue to take part in those
joint efforts. We will continue to make our contribution
to the search for a solution to the situation in Kosovo
on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all the men
and women who are daily risking their lives to return
peace and social harmony to Kosovo.

