Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Madam, on your country's assumption ofthe presidency
of the Council for the month of April, and thank you for
organizing this very important debate, which affords
the wider United Nations membership an opportunity

to contribute to these very important deliberations on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the Middle East remains of great
concern to Namibia, as the occupation ofthe Palestinian
territories continues unabated and the people of
Palestine continue to live under subjugation. This debate
is taking place following the Israeli legislative elections
held on 17 March on the premise of not establishing a
Palestinian State. This debate is the second to be held on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine, following the failure of the Security
Council to adopt a draft resolution calling for Israel to
withdraw from Palestinian territories occupied since
1967 within three years, and for the parties to reach a
negotiated solution to the conflict within one year.

It goes without saying that the Security Council
holds the key to peace in the Middle East. The situation
remains fragile, with up to 80,000 families living in
houses that have sustained varying degrees of damage.
Tens of thousands of children continue to live with
injuries and psychological trauma, and tens ofthousands
of people continue to live in overcrowded temporary
shelters with inadequate sanitation facilities. At the
same time, Israel, the occupying Power, increases its
demolition of Palestinian buildings, continues its
settlement expansion and hinders reconstruction
efforts in Gaza. The establishment and expansion of
settlements are at the centre of many of the ongoing
human rights violations, and such persistent settlement
activities could kill the prospects for peace. Namibia
calls on Israel, the occupying Power, to end its punitive
demolition of Palestinian homes in response to alleged
acts of violence by Palestinians in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory.

The Palestinian people and their leadership continue
to face an unrelenting barrage of repressive, illegal and
destructive measures from Israel, the occupying Power.
In addition to its ongoing colonization of the State of
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, gross human-
rights violations, seizure and destruction of homes
and properties, arrest and detention of thousands of
civilians and the inhumane blockade imposed on more
than 1.8 million people in the Gaza Strip, Israel, the
occupying Power, has also resumed stealing Palestinian
tax revenues - which currently is at least under review

and may enable legitimate, peaceful steps to be taken
by the Palestinian leadership in their ongoing pursuit of
justice and for the purpose ofprotecting the Palestinian
people and advancing the realization of their rights,
including the right to self-determination and freedom.

Namibia is further concerned about the fact that
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to maintain
that the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights does not apply to the occupied territories, as
well as about the need for accountability for alleged
human-rights violations committed during Israel's
military operations in Gaza, the excessive use of force
by Israel's security forces and the violence perpetrated
by Israeli settlers against Palestinians in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We are also concerned
that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to deny
entry to the West Bank and Gaza to the Independent
Commission of Inquiry appointed by the Human
Rights Council in July and charged with investigating
violations of international humanitarian and human-
rights law arising from Israeli military operations
carried out in the occupied Palestinian territories
beginning in June 2014. Namibia would like to remind
the Security Council of its responsibility to stop
Israel's continued settlement expansion in the West
Bank, which undermines the prospects for attaining a
peace agreement, and to ensure that investigations into
war crimes committed during the Gaza onslaught are
impartial and those found accountable are prosecuted.

Namibia wishes to reaffirm its call for Israel's
complete and unconditional withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and calls on the international community
to facilitate the creation of a Palestinian State on
the basis of the 1967 borders. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence and are concerned about the
increased tensions, which have affected both Israelis
and Palestinians. Namibia urges both sides to take
immediate steps to restore calm and encourages both
Israeli and Palestinian leaders and their citizens to
work together to lower tensions, reject violence, avoid
all provocation and seek a path to peace. In that regard,
Namibia calls negotiations to be resumed as soon as
possible and for donor funding, so as to accelerate the
reconstruction of Gaza, address the basic needs of the
Palestinian population and ensure stability.

Namibia will continue to support the people
of Palestine, who, despite suffering for so long
and continuing to bear this burden, have remained
steadfast and fully committed to achieving their
inalienable rights, justice and their legitimate national
aspirations, including self-determination, freedom and
independence, and to the pursuit of political, diplomatic,
peaceful and non-violent means for attaining those
objectives, for which there is overwhelming and long-
standing international support. Namibia remains
convinced that our deliberations here can be fruitful
and contribute to the search for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution that will end the 1967 Israeli
occupation and enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their inalienable rights in an independent State
of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Namibia's
unwavering support for and solidarity with the people of
Palestine in their just cause of freedom, independence
and social justice, and our steadfast backing for
Palestine's full membership in the United Nations and
its specialized agencies.

