Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): For
years now, the Government of Iraq has had a heavy
outstanding debt vis-a-vis the international community.
That debt must be paid without delay and without
concessions. The Council has sent clear signals to
Saddam Hussain's regime that the time for patience and
tolerance has ended. We are now in another phase. If
Iraq wishes to avoid being the object of grave measures
of force, it must convincingly prove that it does not
possess weapons of mass destruction. Or, if it does, it
must destroy them immediately under the direction and
supervision of the United Nations.

Uruguay believes that at this juncture and in the
current circumstances, before resorting to extreme
measures of force, we must travel along all the paths
that still remain in order to achieve the objective of
disarming Iraq without the bloody cost of war. Above
all, it is essential to exhaust all the means and measures
that the Security Council has provided for in its
numerous resolutions, in particular resolution 1441
(2002), means and measures that, as has been
repeatedly stated here, have not yet been sufficiently
employed.

Last week, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei informed
us that the inspections, which resumed barely 11 weeks
ago, have already yielded positive though not totally
satisfactory results. We should continue on this course
and give the inspectors more time to complete a task
that we knew from the outset would be extremely
complex and would require new actions.

We must exhaust all available resources before
exposing the world to the most devastating of human
experiences: war. It has often been noted in the Council
Chamber that Iraq has engaged in deceit and
concealment, mocking the rest of the world over a long
period of 12 years. That is true. There have been 12
years of tolerance, which can no longer be protracted
without justification. But neither can we abandon the
excess of tolerance of the past without first awaiting
the results of international action now under way. To
do so might lead us even against our will to adopt
decisions with grave and irreversible consequences.
War would undoubtedly cause death and destruction,
which is precisely what the international community
must prevent in disarming Iraq.

Uruguay, like other States, believes that the
inspections should continue and should be decisively
strengthened and broadened in order to extricate Iraq
from the situation in which it has put itself: a State in
breach of United Nations resolutions. However, the
prolongation of those procedures should not in any way
be interpreted as a definitive renunciation of the use of
force or as an increased flexibility in the Council's
position. Much less should it be taken as a sign of
solidarity with the dictatorial Government of Saddam
Hussain. The Government of Iraq should hear this clear
and unequivocal message.

When we stress that force should be used as a last
resort in an extreme case and in accordance with
international law and the principles and rules of the
Charter of the United Nations, we are reaffirming our
commitment to a peaceful and effective solution to this
difficult situation.

