Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate on Afghanistan following
the first ceasefire in the last 17 years. We welcomed this
development and expressed our hope that this would
lead to lasting peace. I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his informative briefing and tireless efforts at the
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, and I also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov and
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov for their briefings.

Japan welcomes the steady implementation of the
Secretary- General's strategic review, which was issued
in August last year and endorsed by the Council in its
resolution 2405 (2018). The strategic review's insightful
findings provide a path forward for UNAMA to help

create a future for Afghanistan where sufficient stability
exists to allow for a focus on institution-building and
development activities. Japan looks forward to actively
taking part in the forthcoming Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan to be co-hosted by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations,
where we will discuss the strategy towards sustainable
peace and self-reliance in the country.

The Government of Japan welcomed the recent
announcement by President Ashraf Ghani regarding
the ceasefire with the Taliban. Even if temporary, a
cessation ofhostilities is a positive step for peace. Long-
standing instability and conflict have left Afghanistan
unable to realize its full potential.

Japan, together with key stakeholders, took part
in the second Kabul process meeting and the Tashkent
conference, and expressed support for the Government
of Afghanistan offering to the Taliban its plans for talks
without preconditions.

Despite the recent ceasefire announcements,
regrettably, we have not observed any concrete step
toward such talks. The international community must
keep urging both sides to extend their ceasefires for
the sake of the Afghan people and to engage with each
other on starting a more formal process.

Parliamentary and district council elections, to
be held on 20 October, will be a critical test for the
Government of Afghanistan. While we are aware of
the ongoing preparation process by the Independent
Election Commission and of strong support by
UNAMA, there remain administrative and security
challenges. The international community awaits the
outcome of credible and inclusive elections, and we
are ready to extend assistance. However, the most
important thing is that elections must be Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned. I appreciate the update provided today
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Yamamoto, and ask him to keep us informed and
to provide the international community with concrete
suggestions as to how we can support the ultimate goal
of inclusive elections.

Japan reiterates its commitment to assisting
Afghanistan on its path toward a peaceful, stable and
self-reliant future. The ceasefire offered a brief vision
ofwhat the future would look like. Achieving that vision
is our goal, and we should not miss any opportunity to
get there.

