Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Special Envoy began his briefing today
by pointing out that the Syrian people have suffered
for a period longer than the duration of the Second
World War. What he said is correct. As members of
the Security Council know, however, every story has
a beginning and an end. That is why it is impossible to
summarize what the Council has termed "the Syrian
crisis" and reduce it to a few formal remarks, even
if they seem important. Council members who have
a long memory should not forget the circumstances
surrounding the beginning of the crisis and the hidden
roles played by certain Governments, some of whom
are members of the Council, to make up the crisis and
create the conditions necessary for it to worsen for the
sake of their agendas of internal interference in order to
change the geopolitical landscape in our region.

I would remind Council members of the following
minor, but important, detail. During an appearance
by the former Prime Minister of Qatar on national
television, he admitted that Qatar and Saudi Arabia
had spent $137 billion to destroy Syria by orders of
their American masters. That statement was made by
the former Prime Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad Al
Thani. Everyone will recall that he came to the Security
Council in 2011 to pit Council members against the
Syrian State. That man acknowledged on Qatari
television that Qatar and Saudi Arabia spent $137 billion
to destroy Syria. I am speaking only about Qatar and
Saudi Arabia having spent $137 billion. Would it then
not seem legitimate to make the link between the
statement of that Qatari official and the emergence of
Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other takfiri terrorist
organizations in Iraq and Syria? Is that not a legitimate
question? Would any reasonable, intelligent person
believe that those terrorist organizations fell on Syria
and Iraq like meteorites from outer space? That is the
question that I am asking the members of the Council.

I said this before and I will say it again in this
Chamber. More than ever, it is high time to objectively
and correctly read the situation in Syria in order to
help the Syrian Government rid itself of the waning
terrorist war with the help of our allies. Such a reading
is also necessary to eliminate the remnants of Da'esh,
the Al-Nusra Front and their affiliated misled and
thuggish groups. That is what should have been done
instead of adopting radical positions to blackmail
the Government and the people of Syria, prolong the
terrorist war and extend its destructive effects on Syria,
the region and the world. That should have been done
instead of repeating failed recipes that have resulted
in the destruction of more than one country. It is high
time for some to stop disassociating themselves from
reality. They must give up the last of their illusions and
realize that they will not be able to get through politics
that they were unable to get through terrorism and
sponsoring terrorism.

The Government of Syria has demonstrated its
openness to all initiatives and sincere efforts aimed at
bringing us out of the current crisis. That is why - and
the Council is aware of this - based on our sense of
national responsibility and what is in the interests of
our people, we have demonstrated our commitment to,
and cooperation with, United Nations efforts, whether
during the mission of Mr. Kofi Annan, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi or Mr. Staffan de Mistura. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of Mr. Geir Pedersen as the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and we are prepared to work in close cooperation
with him.

Today I reiterate the willingness of the Syrian
Government to participate effectively in any serious
efforts aimed at reaching a political solution, one
in which Syrians exclusively decide on their future
through inter-Syrian dialogue and under Syrian
leadership. That solution should be based on the fact that
the people of Syria are the sole and exclusive holders
of the right to determine the future of their country
without external interference, while guaranteeing the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria. Those are matters that have all been confirmed
by international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the 30 Council resolutions concerning Syria.

The success of any political solution in Syria
depends upon close cooperation and coordination with
the Syrian Government on various relevant issues.
Success also calls for international commitment and
genuine political will to fully eliminate the remaining
terrorist organizations and the removal of the
illegitimate foreign forces present on Syrian territory.
Success requires that the sincere efforts of the Syrian
Government and its allies to reach the political solution
to which we all aspire no longer be hindered.

Almost eight years after this dirty and unprecedented
war was imposed on my country, it is important to note
a strange paradox among certain States. That paradox
is the clear contradiction between their deeds and their
words, which reminds us of this Italian proverb: "There
is a sea between saying and doing". Those States say
that the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria are to be respected, and that the
solution must be an inter-Syrian solution led by Syria
without external interference. How can those words be
reconciled with the actions ofthose States, in particular
their direct military aggression against Syria, their
invasion of some parts of Syria, their support to armed
terrorist groups, as well as their creation of political
groups whose only objective is to undermine the
inter-Syrian solution?

Those States continue to rely on the failed recipes
of the past. They are desperately trying to create the
image of a landscape characterized by confrontation
and the new division of roles in order to destabilize the
region, causing conflict among its various States for the
sake of the plans ofIsrael and its allies to "assassinate"
the Palestinian question. They also try to characterize
the foreign terrorists whom they have brought in from
the four corners of the world as the Syrian opposition.

On the subject of the moderate opposition, allow
me to present some of the key figures of that "moderate
armed Syrian opposition". Those eminent persons
were genetically modified in the intelligence labs of
their parent countries in order to become the Syrian
opposition. The list is long, but I shall name a few:
Abu Omar the Chechen, Abu Mekdad the Turk, Abu
Musab the Saudi, Abu Suhaib the Libyan, Abu John
the Briton, Abu Muhammad the Tunisian, Abu Huraira
the American, Abu Moaz the Turkistani, Abu Hafsa
the Egyptian, Abu Abdul Rahman the Canadian, Abu
Abdullah the Jordanian, Abu Talha the Kuwaiti, Abu
Murrah the Frenchman, Abu Oud the Belgian, Abu Walid
the Australian, Abdulhaq Jundallah the Uyghur, and the
mufti of the Al-Nusra Front, Abdullah Al-Muhaisini
from Saudi Arabia. Those are the prominent figures of
the "moderate armed Syrian opposition".

The political hypocrisy continues under the roof
of the Security Council, revealing the true political
intentions of those States that for eight years have
been putting their full military, media and political
weight behind investing in terrorism, in a grave moral
contradiction of all the resolutions of the Council. That
has led to innumerable tragedies and the suffering of
the innocent Syrian people.

The constitutional committee emerging from the
inter-Syrian national dialogue conference in Sochi
should be established as soon as possible. It must be
recalled that the Syrian State was the first to provide
the list of invited members, and the Special Envoy
attests to that. The Government of Syria has worked
very seriously with its allies to overcome the obstacles
imposed by some parties to prevent the formation of
the committee and to divert it from its set objectives.
Nobody therefore has the right to doubt the Syrian
Government's support of that process or its commitment
to the outcome of the Sochi conference.

We have always welcomed the role of the Special
Envoy as facilitator of the constitutional committee,
and we will continue to do so. Nevertheless, we stress
once again that no one can proclaim to be a third-
party participant in the process, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
neutrality, integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of Member States. That is what the founding
fathers of the Organization said. We ourselves took part
in the establishment of the United Nations in 1945.

We reaffirm that the constitution and all relevant
issues are purely sovereign issues to be decided by
Syrians themselves, without external interference. It is
unacceptable to set in advance conclusions or conditions
on the work of the committee and its recommendations.
The committee is autonomous. It is the committee
that decides what recommendations to make, and not
any other State or party. It is unacceptable to impose
deadlines or artificial timelines on the work of the
committee. That would be counterproductive because
the constitution will define the future of Syria for
generations to come.

In conclusion, my country, Syria, has always been
serious about working towards a political solution
through the inter-Syrian dialogue led by Syrians
and without external interference. The fight against
terrorism is the priority at all stages of the political
process. All honest Syrians are called upon to take
part in that political process based on national interests
in order to move forward with the reconstruction of
what terrorism has destroyed. That reconstruction has
already begun thanks to the efforts of Syrians who
are loyal to their country. The same must be done to
guarantee the return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes.

We are confident that all Syrians will take into
account the following. It must be a Syrian-owned
political solution, reached through a credible political
process in our homeland, not in Istanbul, Doha, Riyadh
or Washington, DC. The political solution must be
achieved in Syria on the basis that the Constitution and
all issues concerning it are sovereignty-related matters
that should be decided solely by the Syrian people.
