Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, on behalf of the Government of Canada,
I would like to thank you, first of all, for having taken
the initiative of organizing this debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report and
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his briefing,
and also to emphasize the contribution of the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross.

Armed conflicts can have devastating
consequences for individuals and communities. Forced
displacement, deliberate and targeted attacks against
civilians, abductions, denial of property and land rights
and family separation occur all too frequently. This
situation reinforces the importance of having an
appropriate regime for questions of the protection of
civilians.

Canada thinks that effective protection strategies
are inextricably linked to broader peace and security
considerations. In Afghanistan, for example, Canada
recognizes that the protection of civilians cannot be
guaranteed without a sustained and long-term
investment in security and stability in all regions of the
country. Our commitment towards those objectives
remains steadfast.

We need to look no further than Somalia to
understand that concerted international attention and
action remain critical to protecting people at risk.
Moreover, disturbing trends in Burma further reinforce
our belief that the protection cannot be taken for
granted when the principles underlying democracy and
the respect for human rights are ignored.

In the face of such grim realities, the Council has
demonstrated a resolute commitment to advancing the
protection of civilians. Regular Council debates on a
wide range of protection issues, combined with strong
protection language in thematic and country-specific
resolutions, serve as a testament to the Council's
resolve. The Democratic Republic of the Congo offers
an example of how a strong mandate for the protection
of civilians and a willingness to implement that
mandate on the ground can make a difference.

But important work remains to be done. The
Council must be timely in its engagement and vigilant
in its monitoring. It must demonstrate more
consistently the political will to draw upon the full
range of measures at its disposal. That includes
periodic Council visits so that civilian protection
concerns can be addressed first hand, the strategic use
of targeted sanctions where applicable, the effective
implementation of early warning mechanisms and the
use of force to protect civilians under imminent threat.
Looking ahead, further Council attention on how to
operationalize the concept of the responsibility to
protect will also be important.

We welcome the emphasis that the Secretary-
General has devoted to the issue of humanitarian
access in his most recent report on the protection of
civilians. Rapid, safe and unhindered access remains a
critical challenge. In the Darfur region of Sudan, for
example, access to the displaced and dispossessed is
not guaranteed, and humanitarian workers are at risk.

The imposition of obstacles to humanitarian
access, whether physical or administrative, is
completely unacceptable from all points of View. To
prove its commitment to the protection of civilians,
Sudan must first show its willingness to bring to justice
those responsible for crimes against civilians. Canada
urges the Government of Sudan to take all steps
necessary to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court. We call on the Government to surrender the two
indictees, namely, Minister of State for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Ahmad Harun, and militia leader, Mr. Ali
Kushayb, to the International Criminal Court for trial.

(spoke in English)

Canada strongly supports the Emergency Relief
Coordinator's commitment to developing a monitoring
and reporting mechanism to facilitate more in-depth
analysis of the causes and consequences of access
constraints. However, this mechanism will be effective
only if the Council demonstrates that it will act on the
information received. We urge Council members to
consistently and effectively address obstacles to
humanitarian access. Where access is denied, those
cases must be more systematically brought to the
Council's attention. The Council must be willing to
draw upon the full range of tools at its disposal to back
up the decisions it takes.

Since 1999, the vast majority of Council-
authorized peacekeeping mandates have included
strong guidance on the protection of civilians. What is
now required is a more systematic assessment of the
lessons we have learned during that time, including on
how protection mandates are mainstreamed in peace
support operations. Only by learning from our past
experiences can we address existing gaps in the
implementation of protection strategies.

It is important that we be able to translate the will
of the Council on protection issues into clear and
robust operational guidance for military and civilian
actors, including in situations where civilians are under
imminent threat of attack. It is equally important that
those who are being asked to enforce protection
mandates receive the training required to fulfil that
objective. Clearly, the Council will also need to work
closely with regional organizations - such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union - which have a critical role to play in
implementing protection mandates.

Finally, I wish to reiterate the importance of
consistent engagement and follow-up by the Council.
Despite successes in recent years, the Council remains
selective on which countries it will engage. And when
it does engage, and where troops have been deployed,
the Council and the United Nations membership as a
whole have not always undertaken appropriate and
systematic follow-up to ensure that missions are
adequately equipped and resourced to fulfil the
protection tasks being assigned.

Canada strongly supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to establish a Security Council working group
on the protection of civilians. We would urge the
Council to implement this recommendation without
delay and ensure that the working group takes a
proactive and results-oriented approach to its work.

When it comes to protecting civilians, there are
no quick fixes. Efforts to ensure that clear guidance
and adequate resources are provided to the United
Nations and other missions on the ground remain
critical. So too is a willingness by the Council to
remain fully engaged and draw on a full range of tools
at its disposal. Canada remains committed to working
with international partners to translate our words into
concrete and sustainable actions. Millions of crisis-
affected people worldwide are counting on our
collective will towards this end.

