Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank the Security Council for the attention given
to Cote d'Ivoire for more than a decade following
the political and military crisis that took place in the
country. My thanks also go to the Secretary-General
and, through him, to his Special Representative,
Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou Souleymane, to the staff of
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and to the French forces in C6te d'Ivoire.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the Council's
deliberations today that renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, maintaining
the current uniformed personnel component. The
Council decision to extend the mandate to 30 June 2016
fully accords with the desire of the Ivorian authorities,
who expect to benefit from the invaluable support of
UNOCI with regard to the major challenges that remain.

Despite the progress that has been achieved, as
duly recognized by resolution 2226 (2015), which
was just adopted, the Government of C6te d'Ivoire
is aware that it is important to tirelessly continue its
efforts. My country is particularly attentive to the issue
of human rights and intends to make every effort in
the ongoing search for specific and comprehensive
solutions to the problem. The political dialogue with
the opposition continues within the permanent dialogue
framework in order to arrive at national reconciliation
and social cohesion, as well as the organization of
peaceful, open, inclusive and transparent elections.
The reforms undertaken in the security sector, which
have enjoyed unprecedented success, will be continued.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
work - whose reinsertion section will be continued so
as to absorb former combatants who have not yet been
taken into account - will be completed by 30 June
2015.

The year 2015 will be marked in C6te d'Ivoire by
the organization of a presidential election. That will
be a crucial step for the re-establishment of peace and
the consolidation of our institutions. It is understood
that the successful organization of that election is
the primary responsibility of the Government, as the
resolution just adopted asserts so well. Nevertheless,
the support of the United Nations and the international
community will be useful with the approach of this
crucial deadline in the political life of Cote d'Ivoire.
From that perspective, my delegation welcomes the
Security Council's decision to allow UNOCI to provide
logistical support to Cote d'Ivoire for the election
planned for October 2015. Among other things, that
support will enable access to the areas most difficult
to reach.

Ensuring security around the upcoming elections
again presents the problem of providing the national
police and the Force Republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire
with adequate and sufficient material to maintain order
and secure the borders. In that regard, my delegation
would like to reiterate the Ivorian Government's
request regarding the total lifting of the embargo on
arms coming into Cote d'Ivoire to allow our defence
and security forces to appropriately fulfil the State
mission and to protect and secure future elections.

My delegation also takes note of the Security
Council's wish to see UNOCI, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the country teams in the region
closely cooperate for greater oversight of the embargo
and of the fight against the proliferation of and illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to renew
its expression of gratitude to the Security Council and
to reiterate the Ivorian Government's commitment to
make its cooperation with UNOCI a perfect example of
success that can be cited throughout the world.

