Mr. Motoc (Romania): Germany's initiative of
organizing this public meeting of the Council is highly
commendable and timely. We are indeed witnessing a
growing awareness that economic security is key to
stability and security in countries marked by conflicts
and key to ensuring sustainable peace and economic
development.

Concrete evidence shows that the business
sector's role is closely connected to the responsibility
entrusted to the Security Council by the Charter.
Resolution 1366 (2001) highlights the mutually
supportive relation between conflict prevention and
sustainable development. It acknowledges the priority
attention that should be devoted to poverty and the lack
of development, which are important root causes of
conflict. And we all concur that economic development
depends to a great extent on the viability of a country's
private sector and the involvement of international
private sector actors.

This meeting is extremely important in helping
members of the Security Council to deepen their
understanding of the particular role business and the
private sector actually play, or could be expected to
perform, in the different stages of conflicts: prevention,
resolution, post-conflict stabilization and
reconstruction.

In that regard, my delegation would like to
welcome the participation and opening statement of the
Secretary-General in this debate. We also welcome the
presence among us of the President of the World Bank,
the President of the Economic and Social Council, the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group for African
Countries emerging from conflict and the President and
Chief Executive Officer of Siemens. Their input was
assuredly enriching.

Until recently, the role of economic factors in
intra-State conflict was largely overlooked.
Explanations of conflict emphasizing enmity, religious
fundamentalism or manipulative politicians amply
prevailed. Many of the situations tackled by the
Security Council have, however, revealed that
obscuring the role of economic agendas in both causing
conflict and hindering peace-building is
counterproductive.

In some cases, conflict-prone economic agendas
have accordingly been addressed in the Security
Council's decision-making. Sanctions regimes and the
activity of independent panels of experts have
addressed some of the root causes of conflicts nurtured
by economic motivations. The Kimberley Process of
diamond certification is a recent case in point.

The time has come to build on the experience
accumulated in managing the economic factor as a
source of conflict. The Secretariat could thus put
together a report highlighting the significance of the
broader regional and global dimensions of the political
economy of contemporary intra-State conflict. A major
part of that report could dwell on the political economy
of post-conflict transformation. It is in that stage of
conflict that business sector involvement could take on
a really strong positive connotation.

Indeed, business and the private sector add an
economic dimension to the political aspects of post-
conflict reconstruction and development. Many
measures should be taken and questions need to be
answered. Our German colleagues raised a number of
them in the non-paper distributed in preparation for
this meeting. I will briefly try to present our
delegation's input.

Globalization drives the investment of
multinational companies all over the world. Recipient
countries may or may not be affected by conflicts at the
time when the investment decision is taken, but
companies investing in a developing country will
always look at their financial performance from the
long-term perspective, at their own image as a good
corporate citizen and at promoting economic
development in the respective country. Romania's own
recent experience shows that sustainable investment
and trade are essential factors for a successful
transition to the rule of law and a functional market
economy.

First, I would point out the fact that it goes
without saying that business needs a stable
environment, politically and legislatively. To give an
example, in today's Africa, there is growing
recognition that areas once seen as State preserves need
partnership with the private sector if they are to attract
the capital and skilled management they need for
economic growth and development. However, sub-
Saharan Africa attracts today less than 10 per cent of
total foreign direct investment in the developing world.
The challenge ahead is creating an enabling business
climate to provide facilities that would draw in
investors.

Secondly, foreign companies should themselves
generate stability through all their activities. The
private sector is called on to engage as a reliable and
substantial partner in the development process of the
respective countries. Corporate social responsibility is
now endorsed by many international declarations and
conventions that focus on the role business can play in
countries affected by conflicts.

Thirdly, help is also needed for the local private
sector, which may either have been eroded or distorted
following its involvement in the war economy, or
completely shattered by it.

Fourthly, business, be it local or foreign, is called
on to join other components of society in upholding
respect for human rights within its own sphere of
activity, thus making a direct contribution to preventing
and overcoming conflicts. It is essential that business
practices do not participate in human rights abuses and
refrain from any improper involvement in local
political activities.

Fifthly, the United Nations system should show
understanding and provide adequate support for the
responsibility the foreign business is asked to shoulder
when it enters or re-enters a country or a market in the
phase of peace-building and post-conflict
reconstruction. Due consideration should be given to
generating the right combination of incentives and
regulations at the national and international levels so as
to promote good corporate governance. Conventional
diplomatic and military interventions aimed at
preventing and resolving conflict need to be
complemented by more systematic regulation of global
trade and commerce, as well as by the provision of
more effective mechanisms to ensure the responsible
management of resource wealth and sustainable
development in vulnerable States.

Regionally-based approaches to peacemaking and
post-conflict reconstruction, starting with the Security
Council, should integrate business as a basic
component. Many contemporary intra-State conflicts
have strong regional economic linkages. Often, the
most entrenched conflict economies are those that are
embedded in regional conflict formations, such as
those in West Africa and the Great Lakes region.

A recent project of the International Peace
Academy on the war economy in a regional context
notes that not only has the political economy of
regional conflict complexes been neglected by peace-
builders, but this neglect has left many war-torn States
vulnerable to continued instability and poverty.

Finally, the conclusions of today's debate should
be followed up in a broader perspective - that of a
systematic coordination between a variety of public
and private sector actors and agencies, including the
Security Council. Effective cooperation and interaction
among key stakeholders is the way to ensure the
successful implementation of any economic or political
strategy in any country, based on a strong sense of
ownership. The Romanian delegation stands ready to
work closely with the German and other delegations in
ensuring an appropriate follow-up to today's debate.

