Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting on Kosovo and for your
continued interest in the Council's work. I should also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his very informative and useful briefing
on the progress made by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). My
delegation would like also to welcome the appointment
of Mr. Hans Haekkerup, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo. We
wish him every success in his new duties.

The current situation in the Balkans allows us to
consider, with cautious optimism, a constructive
political dialogue on the future of Kosovo. The
successful elections of 28 October 2000 and the
political stability in the region have opened new
prospects for the implementation of a regime with
substantial autonomy, as called for by Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

We feel that the province's new configuration
should take into consideration the right of all of its
inhabitants to security, to respect for differences and to
participation in public life. It should also outlaw hatred
and attitudes based on ethnic considerations, and
promote peaceful coexistence among all of the
communities.

In this regard, we welcome the fact that Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, has decided to open an office in Belgrade in
order to strengthen dialogue with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to prepare for the
holding of legislative elections in the province of
Kosovo.

One of the new Special Representative's priorities
will be to restore security by tackling the root causes of
the violence prevailing in the region. It should be
pointed out that these violent actions are clearly
political in nature and could destabilize the region.
Apart from the fact that the violence is continuing to
fuel tension among the inhabitants, it also prevents the
reconciliation of ethnic communities and undermines
the efforts of the international community. Those
actions are unacceptable. We welcome the initiative to
establish a special unit to fight organized crime
throughout Kosovo.

The violence has led to a new flow of displaced
persons in Kosovo and has made the situation even
more complex. We encourage the Kosovo Force and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to continue their efforts to rein in the activities
of extremists. In that regard, we believe that the
international presence in Kosovo is more necessary
than ever to maintain a climate of trust among all the
parties and to strengthen harmony among its
inhabitants. Any withdrawal by the international
community should take place only after thoughtful
reflection and the formulation of an exit strategy that
guarantees a lasting return of peace to the region.

The issue of detainees and disappeared persons is
particularly sensitive, and is one of the primary sources
of inter-ethnic tension in Kosovo. We welcome the
efforts of the Special Envoy on persons deprived of
liberty to seek out appropriate responses to this
tragedy. We invite all the parties to cooperate fully with
him in order to facilitate his task.

Establishing a reliable and impartial judicial
system is crucial for restoring peace in Kosovo. The
impartial and non-discriminatory application of the law
will reinforce Kosovars' confidence in the rule of law,
which is the sole guarantee of peaceful coexistence
between all the ethnic communities. My delegation is
pleased with the progress made in this area. We
encourage the Mission to continue its efforts to bring
about a reform of the criminal justice system in
Kosovo.

The issue of refugees and displaced persons is
crucial in the quest for a lasting solution to the problem
of Kosovo. We must therefore work to ensure their
return under satisfactory conditions, specifically, by
strengthening the security of minority communities.
This issue is even more crucial given the fact that
returns often take place spontaneously. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In conclusion, I wish to pay a well-deserved
tribute to Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo. I
thank him for his tireless efforts and commitment and
wish him the greatest success in his new duties.

