Mr. Motoc (Romania): The Pakistani initiative to
organize this open debate is highly commendable and
timely. We are witnessing an unprecedented increase in
the number and complexity of peacekeeping
operations, on practically all continents. The presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan to direct
the Security Council's proceedings speaks eloquently
of the topicality and importance of this item. We are
honoured by the personal participation in today's
meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I will confine
my intervention to highlighting certain aspects of
particular significance to us.

United Nations peacekeeping missions have
evolved tremendously during the past 50 years. A great
deal of experience has been accumulated; we should
continuously take stock of and analyse it with a view to
a permanent improvement of performance in the field.

The mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations have become increasingly complex,
multifaceted and multidimensional. They stand out as
an embodiment of the role that multilateral institutions
can play in safeguarding peace and security. At the
same time, this debate should also shed light on
expectations that have not been met in United Nations
peacekeeping and should explores ways and means to
ensure further mobilization of the resources that are
needed.

As Under-Secretary-General J can-Marie
Guehenno stated recently in a contribution to the
International Herald Tribune dated 19 April 2004,
"There is a peace dividend to be had, but not without a
clear-headed investment". That was the Vision that
prompted Romania to change its policy and to start
investing significantly in United Nations peacekeeping
after 1990. My country now ranks within the first tier
of troop-contributing countries. It also takes part in a
series of other United-Nations-authorized missions of
magnitude, at considerable risk and cost. Such
contributions have to be recognized and factored in
when evaluating how Member States shoulder
responsibility in the overall efforts of the United
Nations in the discharge of its peacekeeping function.

We welcome the contribution of the European
Union to these efforts and its recent initiative of setting
up a peace support operations facility aimed at
supporting African countries and regional
organizations in conflict management and resolution.
Of special importance is the Joint Declaration on
United Nations-European Union cooperation in crisis
management, signed on 24 September 2003, which sets
out concrete measures with regard to peacekeeping
operations.

The role of regional organizations must be further
emphasized. Romania believes in the benefits of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations for efficient use of resources, better
practices and enhanced long-term impact of
peacekeeping missions.

In its deliberations on specific conflicts or crises
the Security Council is increasingly taking on board
their wider regional aspects. This is matched by a
similar perspective adopted on the ground by United
Nations peacekeepers.

As a case in point, the United Nations presence
has reached critical mass in West Africa. Synergy
among the peacekeeping missions in that subregion
could be useful. The United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire could
increasingly share resources, particularly in terms of
expertise, transportation, medical components and
personnel. At the same time, the nature of conflicts in
Africa requires coordinated regional strategies to
approach cross-border issues such as: disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement; control of small arms and light weapons;
humanitarian services; and others.

Such developments should not undermine the
unity of action and political control of each separate
operation. The planning of all peacekeeping activities
must carefully mirror, primarily, the needs of the
affected population. Each mandate must consider the
social, economic and political context, the need to
prevent the worsening of the conflict, humanitarian
assistance, human rights, the organization of elections,
transition towards a democratic society and economic
development.

The relationship among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries needs to be
further strengthened. Resolution 1353 (2001) on
Security Council cooperation with troop-contributing
countries and the note by the President of the Council
(S/2002/56) on joint meetings of the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and troop-
contributing countries offer a valuable framework for
sound decision-making in peacekeeping operations.
Further steps should be taken to enable contributors to
peacekeeping operations other than troop-contributing
countries to have their views better incorporated into
the respective decision-making processes.

Generally, improving the basis for decision-
making in the Security Council by identifying ways
and means to involve major stakeholders would create
a considerable additional incentive for the general
United Nations membership to support peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations must be fully engaged in
facilitating the development of a comprehensive
Security Council approach to all peacekeeping issues
and must work together with the Secretariat and with
other Member States on how best to assess and address
the long-term implications of its decisions. Romania
also supports further work on improving
complementarity among the main United Nations
organs, as well as between them and the relevant
United Nations agencies, programmes and funds.

We should be innovative in order to find
responses to present and future challenges, including
the new set of threats. We must look beyond the
immediate horizon towards stabilization processes and
post-conflict peace-building. We must find a balance
between exit strategies and long-term developments,
including peace-building.

Against that background, the lessons previously
learned with regard to Haiti could, this time, make the
Haiti case itself a success story. We also trust that the
most recent United Nations operations will lead to a
boost in conceptual and managerial development, and
to enriching the stock of best practices in
peacekeeping.

We remain fully aware of the limited financial
and human resources available. These inevitable
constraints should entice us further to devise cost-
effective and innovative ways to make the most of
what is available in various contexts - worldwide,
regional or national - and thus to remain able to
respond jointly to the totality of contemporary security
challenges.

I wish to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the many achievements of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations under the
stewardship of Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno. I wish also to commend and praise United
Nations troops and commanders, and to pay special
tribute to those who have made the supreme sacrifice
during peacekeeping activities. Our best tribute to them
should be a meaningful outcome of today's debate that
takes stock of the experience gained by United Nations
staff serving in field missions and integrates it into the
planning of future activities.

We welcome the draft presidential statement and
remain ready to consider any follow-up that the
Security Council might envisage on this matter.

