Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Government of Peru for convening this
open debate to discuss linkages between international
terrorism and organized crime and for submitting the
concept note (S/2019/537, annex) on the topic.

Terrorism and related criminal activities continue
to represent a serious threat to international peace and
security, the enjoyment ofhuman rights and fundamental
freedoms and the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the social and economic
development of all Member States. Those activities are
unjustifiable regardless of their motivation, constitute
serious crimes and must be condemned and prosecuted.
Instances of shielding and glorification of terrorists
must not be tolerated.

The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan
and unresolved armed conflicts in the region increase
transborder threats, such as international terrorism and
related criminal activities. Since the end ofthe 1980s, as
a mean of realizing groundless and unlawful territorial
claims and as a method of warfare, externally directed
terrorist attacks have been repeatedly perpetrated
against my country, claiming the lives of thousands of
its citizens.

While recognizing the significance of addressing
all conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, it is
critical to intensify conflict resolution efforts in various
parts of the world. Areas of armed conflict, especially
territories under foreign military occupation, often
create opportunities for terrorists, organized criminal
groups and networks to benefit from the exploitation of
natural resources, illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in
cultural property, money-laundering and other crimes.

The strict compliance of all States with their
international obligations, including the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, is critical
to ensuring, inter alia, that their respective territories
are not used for terrorist and related criminal activities,
in particular for the financing of and providing, directly
or indirectly, any support to such activities under any
pretext or disguise.

It is important that, where terrorists or organized
criminal groups are engaged in unlawful commercial
activities, including in conflict zones and occupied
territories, corporate liability and the individual
criminal responsibility function in tandem to ensure
the prosecution of corporations or their representatives
for violations of international law. In that connection,
in addition to measures that States are entitled to take
at the national level to assert criminal jurisdiction
over crimes perpetrated by their nationals overseas,
international cooperation in criminal matters, with
mutual legal assistance as one component, is the
key to combating impunity for acts of terrorism and
related offences.

Azerbaijan strongly supports enhanced individual
and collective counter-terrorism measures, including
in particular those aimed at degrading and ultimately
defeating terrorist organizations, their affiliates and
networks. We recognize that significant efforts have
been made by the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations to promote
cooperation and coordination and to strengthen the
capacities of Member States in combating international
terrorism and organized crime. It is important that
those efforts continue and expand.

Although terrorism and organized crime have
different motivations and legal regimes, there is a need
for the further comprehensive examination of evolving
linkages between them. We commend the initiative
of holding this open debate to share and highlight
experiences, lessons learned, good practices and
context-specific challenges, and consider it useful to
continue discussions on the topic.

