Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): In this
era of globalization, the nature of conflicts has
radically changed. Classic inter-State wars have
virtually ended. Seeing no profit in it, nations avoid
war. Instead, we are witnessing a marked rise in intra-
State conflicts based on ethnic, religious or cultural
differences. In such intra-State conflicts, the proportion
of civilian victims has increased drastically. According
to a study, civilian casualties made up just 5 per cent of
all casualties during the First World War, while in the
Second World War that number increased to 50 per
cent. Civilian casualties now constitute a staggering 90
per cent. In the new kinds of conflicts prevalent today,
civilians are harmed in various ways, including by
forced displacement, forced conscription, violence,
indiscriminate killing, starvation, disease and loss of
livelihood.

My delegation would like to emphasize three
issues that we believe are important in protecting
civilians more effectively from armed conflict:
focusing on vulnerable people, taking a regional
approach and ending impunity.

First, we should keep in mind that the most
vulnerable people in armed conflict are women and
children. Indeed, acts of sexual violence against
women continue to be committed in many conflict
situations, while children are frequently recruited or
abducted and used as soldiers. In view of the serious,
lasting social impact of such egregious crimes and the
physical and psychological harm they inflict upon their
victims, effective protection measures are urgently
needed.

Secondly, we note that violence against civilians
in a given country directly affects the surrounding
region as a result of refugee flows, environmental
degradation and the proliferation of illicit arms trading.
Meanwhile, the role of neighbouring countries is
crucial to ensuring humanitarian access to civilians in
regions of conflict. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict therefore requires the further strengthening of
regional cooperation. We welcome the efforts of
regional organizations such as the African Union to
protect civilians while peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts are ongoing. Regional organizations should be
further supported to facilitate such efforts.

In this regard, we welcome the inclusion of the
concept of the responsibility to protect in the outcome
document of the 2005 world summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1). The United Nations should
continue to discuss ways to put it into practice. It goes
without saying that national authorities have the
primary responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. But when national authorities fail to
exercise their responsibility to protect, the international
community should use various means to help them to
meet those responsibilities, including through measures
taken by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

Thirdly, in order to prevent the recurrence of
crimes against civilians, the culture of impunity must
be brought to an end. In this regard, the establishment
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the ad hoc
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda and the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has great significance. Also crucial to
ending impunity is providing assistance for judicial
capacity-building in war-torn societies, with a view to
ensuring that law and order is restored.

In our globalized world, threats are
interconnected. No State can protect itself by acting
alone. Today's topic - the protection of civilians in
armed conflict - is an emerging security concern that
requires coordinated multilateral responses from the
international community. Building upon the progress
already made, we should redouble our common efforts
to achieve a more secure and orderly world in which
every human being is respected and protected under the
rule of law.

