Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your patience and your indulgence.

This draft resolution is not really about oil production,
about oil pipelines and oil sales: it is about the alleviation
of the sufferings of real people, the unintended victims of
the sanctions against Iraq. It is the view of my Government
that sanctions are not meant to be punitive of whole
populations, but to modify the behaviour of the leadership
of a country or of a party whose actions threaten
international peace and security.

In drafting the resolution, my delegation wanted the
sponsors to be sensitive to some important factors, first of
which is the need to respect explicitly the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. Having insisted, rightly, that
Iraq must recognize the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its neighbours, Council should not promote
policies or take actions that could be construed as
undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq.

Secondly, care must be taken, in our view, that the
resolution before us does not in any way prejudice or
detract from the provisions of earlier Security Council
resolutions, especially when we note that the timing of the
resolution before us coincides with the submission and
discussion of the six-monthly report of the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM).

We therefore appreciate the fact that some aspects of
these concerns have been addressed. In this regard, the
third preambular paragraph of the draft resolution is very
important to my delegation. We believe, as stated in the
text, that this is a "temporary" exercise; one that is long
overdue, but which will remain valid until the fulfilment
by Iraq of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such
fulfilment would then enable the Council to take further
action with regard to the prohibitions referred to in
resolution 661 (1990) in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 687 ( 1991), starting with its paragraph 22 -
this is in light of our assessment that we are almost at the
end of another important chapter in the ongoing efforts to
resolve the Iraq/Kuwait crisis, namely, the chapter of
disarmament.

My delegation believes that this resolution, unlike
resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991), is implementable,
and hopes that it will receive the effective cooperation of
the Government of Iraq, which cooperation is critical to
its success. In order to secure that cooperation, all of us
worked very hard to accommodate the concerns of Iraq.
Of course, my delegation would have wished to obtain
further concessions from the sponsors regarding
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, to the effect that no
reference would be made to the proportion of the oil to be
shipped through any particular pipeline or terminal: this
should, in our view, have been left to market forces.

However, my delegation is fully aware that this is
not a normal situation: Iraq is in a unique position; it is
under sanctions and therefore cannot be given a veto over
our decisions. The Council has a responsibility to all the
parties that have been affected by the conflict; in this

 

context, the controls, the checks and the monitoring
mechanisms contained in the draft resolution are necessary
to ensure transparency and compliance with extant
resolutions. In this respect, we will be looking forward to
the reports of the Secretary-General provided for in
paragraphs 11 and 12 to enable us to take a further look at
the operation, with a View on the one hand to fine-tuning
it if necessary or, on the other, to terminating it should the
authorities in Iraq fail to discharge their obligations in a
transparent manner.

While my delegation would like to reaffirm its view
that the present draft resolution is a humanitarian one aimed
at bringing relief to real people with real needs, it believes
that it is not unrelated to the larger issues concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait. Hence, I should like to
restate the principled position of my Government on the
central issues relevant to the objective of restoring peace
and stability in the region following the outbreak of the
crisis in 1990: in this context, we believe that recognition
of the basic principles of the Charter regarding the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all the
States in the region is non-negotiable; moreover, the use or
threat of use of force to settle disputes between States must
be rejected unequivocally. My Government has therefore
fully supported the resolutions of the Security Council
aimed at achieving these objectives. In this regard, we have
consistently called upon Iraq to recognize the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Kuwait and the international
border between them as demarcated by the United Nations
Iraq/Kuwait Boundary Demarcation Commission. The
recognition of Kuwait by Iraq was therefore an important
milestone.

We have also continued to insist that Iraq must
address seriously, and in a transparent manner, the issue of
Kuwaiti detainees, missing persons and seized property.

With respect to regional security, we have supported
and continue to support Security Council resolutions on the
destruction of all weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and
the establishment of a credible and effective long-term
monitoring system. The progress that has been made so far
in this field, as reflected in the latest reports by UNSCOM
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, leads us to
believe that a substantial part of the disarmament work has
indeed been completed.

Meanwhile, we cannot but issue a reminder that Iraq
still has a duty to continue to cooperate with UNSCOM. in
the discharge of its work by providing it with full and
verifiable information on all outstanding issues related to
weapons of mass destruction. This is vital for the
prospects of easing sanctions envisaged under
paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).

In this circumstance, and in light of our objective
assessment of the situation and the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, we reiterate that the
present draft resolution is a stop-gap measure necessary
to alleviate the immense sufferings of the Iraqi
population. It is, therefore, for this overriding reason that
we will support the adoption of the draft resolution, and
we call on Iraq to cooperate fully with the
Secretary-General in its implementation in order to ensure
that the goal we set out to achieve by this exercise is
realized.

