The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General,
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/612, which contains the ninth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.

I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.

Mr. Voronkovz I would like to express my
sincere condolences to Member States where recent
terrorist attacks have claimed hundreds of innocent
lives - Afghanistan, Egypt, Kenya, New Zealand,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, the United States of America and
others. My heartfelt words of deepest sorrow go to the
families who lost their relatives.

Last week, we commemorated the second
International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to
the Victims of Terrorism, reaffirming that their needs,
rights and resilience must be at the centre of our efforts.
This topic will be an integral part of the counter-
terrorism week at the United Nations in the summer of
2020, with the organization of the first global congress
of victims of terrorism.

I thank members for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the ninth report of the Secretary-
General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/20l9/6l2), as mandated by resolution 2368 (2017).

The report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, in
close collaboration with my Office, with contributions
from other United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities. I am grateful to
Mr. Fitton-Brown and Ms. Coninsx for their valuable
contribution to the report. It is a comprehensive
analytical document on the threat that ISIL continues
to pose today at the global and regional levels.

The report outlines how, despite its territorial
defeat in the Syrian Arab Republic in March, ISIL
continues to aspire to a global relevance. It capitalizes
on its affiliates and inspired attacks and has an
estimated residual wealth of up to $300 million dollars
at its disposal.

Acute concerns also remain about the challenges
posed by foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), returnees and
relocators, of whom between 24,000 and 30,000 have
survived out of the initial estimate of 40,000. Member
States must also contend with the threat posed by
frustrated travellers, whose number is hard to estimate.

The report highlights the relevant activities conducted
by United Nations entities over the past six months to
support Member States. Those efforts are in line with the
requirements under resolution 2396 (2017), as well as the
newly adopted resolutions 2462 (2019), on countering the
financing of terrorism, 2467 (2019), on sexual violence
in armed conflict, and 2482 (2019), on the links between
international terrorism and organized crime.

I would like to give the Council an overview of
the global and regional situations concerning the ISIL
threat. In the Middle East, ISIL's military defeat in the
Syrian Arab Republic was a watershed, bringing to
an end the dystopia of the so-called caliphate, which
cost the people of Syria and Iraq so much. Yet the fall
of Baghouz was not a fatal blow. ISIL continues to
evolve into a covert network, with attacks increasing
in areas controlled by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic. That follows the same pattern that we
have seen in Iraq since 2017, where ISIL insurgency
activity, reportedly designed to prevent normalization
and reconstruction efforts, continues.
Turning to Africa, there has been a striking
increase in ISIL- and Al-Qaida-linked recruitment
and violence in the West of the continent. The Islamic
State's West Africa Province is now one of the strongest
ISIL affiliates, with approximately 4,000 fighters. The
evolving threat posed by ISIL in Central Africa also
calls for Vigilance.

In Europe, radicalization in prisons and the
risk posed by returnees upon release from prison
remain major concerns, which compound the risk
of home-grown terrorism and domestically inspired
attacks at a time when ISIL finds it difficult to send
fighters to Europe.

In Asia, the threat posed by ISIL continues despite
military pressure. The group is estimated to have
between 2,500 and 4,000 fighters, including FTFs.
In Southeast Asia, ISIL affiliates remain capable of
launching attacks with two worrying developments:
first, the role of women in planning and executing
attacks; and secondly, the explicit targeting of places
of worship, as we saw on Easter Sunday in Sri Lanka,
which may indicate a new trend.

Over the past six months, thousands of suspected
ISIL fighters, together with their families, have been
detained in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Many
are stranded in overcrowded camps in dire conditions,
generating acute security and humanitarian concerns.
There are as many as 70,000 people in Al-Hol camp
in Syria alone, including women and children with
potential links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups.

The Secretary-General recognizes in his report
that Member States face significant, multifaceted
challenges related to the repatriation of their nationals,
including women and children, from territories
previously controlled by ISIL. At the same time, the
report recalls that Member States have the primary
responsibility for their own nationals, and that policies
and actions that lead to statelessness should be avoided.
In that regard, I would like to highlight that several
Member States, including Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, the
Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, have
repatriated women and children, including orphans,
from Iraq and Syria.

At the direction of the Secretary-General, in April,
my Office, together with other United Nations entities,
developed a set of key principles for the United Nations
system for the protection, repatriation, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children
with links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups. We
have shared those principles with Member States, as we
believe that they can assist them in designing their own
policies and actions in accordance with international
law and human rights standards.

We are now following up with the practical
implementation of the key principles. The United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of my Office is
developing a global programme in partnership with other
United Nations entities and regional and field presences
to provide tailored support to requesting Member
States on the screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals suspected or convicted of
committing terrorist acts, as well as their families and
associates. On 30 September, we will launch a handbook
on ensuring a child rights-based approach to addressing
the situation of children affected by the foreign fighter
phenomenon, which will support the implementation of
the key principles.

Let me just highlight my Office's key new
initiatives, which are mentioned in the report.
First, on law enforcement and border security, in
May we launched our Counter-Terrorism Travel
Programme - a multi-year, multimillion, multi-agency
programme with CTED, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Information and
Communications Technology and the International
Civil Aviation Organization. As of today, INTERPOL
has also joined the programme, which I think is a very
promising development.

The programme seeks to enhance the capacity
of Member States to prevent, detect, investigate
and prosecute terrorist offences, human trafficking
and other forms of organized crime by using travel
information such as advance passenger information
and passenger name record data in accordance with
resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). I would like
to thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for their
continuous technological and financial contributions
that enabled the programme, as well as the State of
Qatar and other countries and the European Union for
their support, including financial support.

Secondly, on the protection of vulnerable targets,
my Office will soon launch a comprehensive four-
year global programme with a focus on safeguarding
religious sites from terrorism-related threats, which is a
worrying trend. The programme will be implemented in
close coordination with CTED and the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in line with resolution 2341
(2017). I am grateful to Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Moratinos
for the excellent cooperation in that regard.

Thirdly, on countering the financing of terrorism,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of
my Office is expanding a global capacity-building
programme to include technical assistance on terrorist-
asset freezing, protecting the non-profit sector, sharing
financial intelligence and promoting public-private
partnerships, inter alia, in response to resolution 2462
(2019). I am grateful to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
its generous financial contribution to this programme.

Lastly, I would like to thank all Member States that
have been partnering with my Office to organize high-
level regional conferences, sustaining the momentum
for international cooperation and laying the groundwork
for the second United Nations High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States next year. We have already completed three
such conferences in partnership with Member States,
namely, in April with the Government of Tajikistan;
in June with the Government of Mongolia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and in July with the Government of the Republic of
Kenya, which was our biggest regional conference yet.
With close to 1,500 participants, the Kenya conference
galvanized the international community's support for
counter-terrorism efforts in Africa. It is very important
that all three conferences were organized with the
active engagement of civil society organizations. Next
week, we will organize our fourth conference in Minsk
with the Government of Belarus, focusing on the risks
and opportunities posed by new technologies in the
fight against terrorism.

The Secretary-General stressed in his report that
the current lull in attacks directed by ISIL may be only
temporary. We need to remain vigilant to mitigate the
risk posed by the evolution of ISIL and its affiliates,
deny it new recruits and prevent its resurgence. It is
essential that Member States keep a comprehensive
and long-term perspective in that fight. This requires
urgent political leadership and a principled approach
based on international law and human rights standards.

The United Nations system remains fully committed
to supporting Member States in countering terrorism.

The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for
his briefing.

I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.


