The President: I thank Mr. Je-yoon Shin for his
briefing and for the important work that the Financial
Action Task Force does to bring the world together in
order to fight this problem. We hope today's meeting and
draft resolution will help to enhance the effectiveness
of our effort.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/972, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Albania, Angola,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2253 (2015).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.

We come together at a consequential time and in
a historic setting. Never before have finance ministers
convened for an official Security Council meeting.
Today's unprecedented meeting underscores the
importance of combating the financing of terrorism,
the dedication of the international community to
destroying the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), and the critical role of finance ministries and
the broader international financial community in this
fight.

I would like to thank His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and the
commitment of the United Nations to this important
effort. I also thank President Je-Yoon Shin of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for travelling all
this way and for all that the FATF is doing to counter
terrorism threats. And I would like to thank Ambassador
Power for her work in organizing today's meeting and
finalizing the resolution we have just adopted, which
will help us protect the international financial system
from abuse and exploitation by terrorists. For coming
here to signal our collective resolve, I would like to
thank all of those in the Chamber, so many of whom
travelled long distances to be at this meeting.

I would like to reaffirm the continued commitment
of the United States of America to cutting ISIL
off from economic resources and the international
financial system, and to working with the international
community to use the measures in today's resolution
2253 (2015) and the tools we have honed over the past
14 years to make the world safer and better protected
from ISIL and other deadly terrorist groups.

After the 11 September attacks, the United States
and our international partners vowed to counter
terrorism with every tool at our disposal. Early on, we
recognized the need to target the financial resources
of terrorism networks and to deprive them of the funds
they need to recruit, train, travel, equip, attack and
murder. Since that time, we have greatly strengthened
the transparency and resilience of the international
financial system and developed tools to track and
disrupt channels of terrorism-funding. The impact is
real. Regulators and financial institutions alike are far
more sophisticated and attuned to the threat of terror-
financing, and have made it harder for terror groups
like Al-Qaida and Hizbullah to place and move funds.
Our financial system is more transparent, resilient and
stronger as a result.

We have uncovered and cut off channel after
channel of support to Al-Qaida, leaving its branches
hungry for funding and less capable of plotting and
carrying out attacks. We have also improved our ability
to deploy those tools in effective and sophisticated
ways against other illicit financial threats, most notably
in our successful multilateral effort to bring Iran to
the negotiating table in connection with its nuclear
programme.

But we have also seen the terror threats evolve in
dangerous ways. Different tactics, like lone wolf attacks
and shootings, are examples we have seen on American
soil. New groups have emerged with innovative
messaging, recruiting, military and financing strategies.
ISIL is the most dangerous manifestation of that new
threat. Since it emerged, ISIL has terrorized the people
of Iraq and Syria, Paris and elsewhere with its attacks,
and killed and wounded people from many nations and
religions. Our Governments, in coordination with the
United Nations and other multilateral organizations,
have been countering ISIL for some time. But we all
know that we need to do more together to degrade and
destroy that brutal force of terror.
Since 2014 the United States has been working to
destroy ISIL by drawing upon every aspect ofAmerican
power, as President Obama made clear again last week.
A critical part of the entire United States Government
strategy is the use of counter-terrorism-financing tools
and authorities to stop ISIL's operations by isolating
it financially and economically. As many here know,
ISIL is a challenging financial target. Unlike other
terror groups, ISIL derives a relatively small share of
its funding from donors abroad. Instead, ISIL generates
wealth from economic activities and resources within
the territory under its control. And ISIL's financing
has evolved from seizing territory and looting bank
vaults to leveraging more renewable revenue streams.
So far, ISIL has reaped an estimated $500 million from
black-market oil and millions more from people whom
it brutalizes and extorts.

At the same time, ISIL has financial vulnerabilities,
and the United States approach has evolved as well
so as to attack those vulnerabilities. ISIL's newer
financing methods are now targets. Because of its need
to control territory, ISIL requires large and renewable
streams of income to pay fighters, procure weapons
and provide basic services to local populations. In
order to sustain its oil infrastructure and its military
efforts, ISIL needs access to the international financial
system. Those dependencies present opportunities for
attack. To cut off ISIL's resources and funding streams,
most important the revenue from its oil sales, the
United States military has been working with coalition
partners to attack ISIL's entire oil supply chain, its oil
fields, refineries and its tanker trucks. Over the past
month, nearly 400 of ISIL's oil tanker trucks have been
destroyed.

While those attacks are having a real and growing
impact, the United States and the international
community must also work with countries bordering
Iraq and Syria to enhance border security and help
stop illicit cross-border flows. To sever ISIL from the
international financial system, the United States is
working with its partners to actively target ISIL's key
financial facilitators, sanctioning more than 30 of its
senior leaders and financiers. United States officials
have worked with the Government of Iraq to deny ISIL
access to the Iraqi financial system and, in collaboration
with law enforcement and foreign partners, United
States officials have worked with financial institutions
to strengthen their ability to detect activity associated
with ISIL supporters.

While we are making progress to financially isolate
ISIL, if we are to succeed we must all intensify our
efforts, on our own and together at an international level.
Today, we adopted a new Security Council resolution
that builds on previous measures and strengthens
our existing tools. It expands the focus of resolution
1267 (1999), concerning the Al-Qaida sanctions, to
specifically emphasize ISIL in the designation criteria,
making association with ISIL grounds for targeted
sanctions. It calls on Member States to ensure they
have the legal tools to criminalize the financing of
individual terrorists and terrorist organizations for
any purpose - recruiting, training, travel and other
activities - even in the absence of a link to a specific
terrorist act. It calls upon Member States to increase
engagement with the private sector to prevent the
terrorists' use ofthe financial system, and it encourages
Governments to better share information internally and
among nations so as to avoid missing critical information
about terrorist activities. Resolution 2253 (2015) is
a critical step, but the real test will be determined
by the actions that we each take after adoption. We
need meaningful implementation, coordination and
enforcement from each country represented here and
from many others. As we have all learned in our work
to counter Al-Qaida, ISIL and other groups to date, the
successful use of those counter-terror-financing tools
requires robust domestic implementation, extensive
collaboration with private partners, intense multilateral
coordination and information-sharing.

The importance ofthatcoordinationwas exemplified
this year when we at the United States Treasury worked
with our French and European counterparts in real time
to provide over 1,300 leads immediately following the
horrific Paris attacks in January and November. That
type of coordination is ongoing and essential, and we
must combine it with a relentless desire to adapt and
change our tools as the terror groups adapt to our
measures. The nations of the world standing together
and acting together represent a more powerful force
than our individual actions alone. We must also work
through other multilateral organizations. Last week,
the Financial Action Task Force held a meeting on
investigating and prosecuting terrorist financiers and
implemented targeted financial sanctions. The Counter-
ISIL Finance Group, which is co-led by the United
States, Italy and Saudi Arabia, is focused, among others
things, on expanding information-sharing in combating
the financing of ISIL affiliates.

Even as we continue that important work, we
must also remain steadfast in our commitment to
both protect the stability of the international financial
system and expand financial inclusion, so that the
benefits of global growth are broadly shared. Those
two objectives - protecting the financial system from
illicit activity while increasing access to financial
services - are complementary, not conflicting, as we
know that financial exclusion undermines the integrity
of the entire financial sector and that inclusion creates
stakeholders around the world committed to positive
change.

In conclusion, our joint work on counter-terrorism
financing over the past 14 years has taught us that we
can meet the long-term evolving terror challenge, but
we must keep adapting, and we must stay focused to
do so. The enhanced sanctions regime under the newly
adopted resolution and the robust implementation of the
resolution and other counter-terror-financing measures
will help us meet the terrorism threat, whether from
ISIL or others like Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram,
Hizbullah, the Al-Nusra Front or new individuals and
groups.

Once again, I thank the many participants who
have come here for travelling to take part in this
historic meeting and for their support of this important
resolution and this broader long-term effort.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Finance of
Jordan.


