We thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UN-Women for their continued leadership on this issue and the briefers for their insights. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, Ireland would also like to thank the Russian Federation for organizing today's open debate with a focus on better implementation. We hope that this occasion can be commemorated in a way that commits to advancing the agenda. Ireland aligns itself with the statements made by the European Union (annex 38) and on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). Let us be clear, we have fallen short of our ambition. In the past two decades, the women and peace and security agenda has seen significant normative advances and modest success in implementation. But progress on making women and peace and security a reality on the ground has been too slow. We see national actions plans being developed and implemented. Women have played a critical role in some peace processes, but not enough. I am saddened that, 20 years after its adoption, we are still discussing the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) rather than seeing the tangible results of its ground-breaking vision. We made clear commitments in 2000 and there can be no excuse for not having delivered on them two decades down the road. The truth is that, if the promise of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions had been fully realized, our work on sustaining international peace and security would look very different across the agenda of the Council. Put simply, the world would be a safer place. Yet here we are in 2020, still grappling with many of the same obstacles we faced in 2000. This is not a failure of language, as the 10 resolutions on women and peace and security show; it is a failure of political will to see that language translated into action. We know from the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946) that there remains a shocking dearth of women participating formally or informally in peace processes; we know that women's organizations are grappling with diminished funding; we know that gender-based violence and attacks on women human rights defenders are rising and impunity for conflict-related sexual violence is rampant. We know that support for agreed commitments is being diluted and that gains made on gender equality and sexual and reproductive health and rights are being reversed. We know that those persistent challenges are now being compounded by the disproportionate impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on women and girls. So my question today is: If we know what the issues blocking the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda are, why are we not doing more to address them? What is the problem? Our rhetoric has not matched, and is not matching, our reality. And sadly, the gap between what we say and what we do has consequences for women every day struggling with the impact of war and striving to build peace. Convening meetings once a year will not change this if we do not translate our own words into concrete action. For Ireland, this agenda is not merely words on a page. In Northern Ireland, we witnessed first-hand the transformative impact of including women at the negotiation table when the Northern Ireland Women's Coalition, a group of women from both sides of the political divide, fought for their voices to be heard. Their participation resulted in a more sustainable and inclusive peace agreement, focused on building a common future, while coming to terms with the past. This lived experience has given us a deep appreciation of the importance of implementing gender-responsive policies when it comes to peace and security. It is why, with over 60 years of continuous peacekeeping experience, we push for integrating gender perspectives and empowering women peacekeepers to enhance mission response. It is why we recently partnered with UN-Women and the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders to explore how the women and peace and security agenda was being experienced by grassroots women peacebuilders - including in the wake of COVID-19 - and how we can better support them. It is why we, along with other States and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, are working to integrate the women and peace and security and disarmament agendas across the multilateral system and include the issue in our national action plan, given that disarmament and arms control issues are central to the lives of so many women and girls in conflict situations. And it is why, over a year into our third national action plan, our Oversight Committee continues to actively review our implementation and will report to our Parliament on progress. We are holding ourselves to account. As an incoming member of the Security Council, Ireland will use our seat for two years to make sure that the women and peace and security agenda is implemented, not recited. We will work across the Council's agenda to highlight the differential impacts of conflict on women and demonstrate how women can be agents of change in conflict and post-conflict settings, by bringing those women to the table. In short, our aim will be to embed gender perspectives right across our Council activities. To close, I want to emphasise five key points. First, after two decades, we need to move beyond window dressing and actually implement the women and peace and security agenda by integrating it across all the Council's work; it is not merely a topic for reflection at an annual event. The Council must step up and more consistently integrate gender perspectives into its briefings, discussions, mandate renewals and products. Secondly, the Council needs to bridge the gap between New York and the realities on the ground. It needs to hear directly from experts, civil society and grassroots women's organizations, and ensure their safety when doing so. Field visits - be they virtual or in-person - must be used as an opportunity to listen to women affected by conflict, and those who are working to build peace, including at the grassroots level. The Security Council should not be an echo chamber. Thirdly, we must do more to connect the instruments at our disposal at the United Nations, from the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security to the Peacebuilding Commission, and ensure that the important work being undertaken by these bodies informs Council discussions and outcomes. Fourthly, we need accountability for the agenda. National, regional and organizational action plans, specifically those that are financed, are key ways to guide implementation. We must invest in initiatives that promote gender equality and provide direct assistance to women's organizations. And we must accelerate a gender data revolution on women and peace and security to ensure follow-up and inform decision-making at the United Nations. Fifthly, we will never stop saying it- we demand the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace processes. The first place to demonstrate that is here within the United Nations system, through building capacity and empowering women peacebuilders to facilitate their participation in all tracks of peacebuilding initiatives. United Nations mediation teams must include women and engage with women grassroots builders locally to ensure that gender perspectives are included in negotiations and peace agreements. When the Council meets in 20 years' time to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot hear the same tired excuses for staggered implementation. We must seize this opportunity to renew our commitment to the women and peace and security agenda and drive work on implementation, integrating the lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic to build back better. As we prepare to take our seat on the Council in January, Ireland is ready to work with you, Sir, to deliver the vision set out in resolution 1325 (2000), starting here, starting now.
