Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): The Secretary-
General's presence with us and the statement he has just
made testify to the importance of our debate tonight.

The situation in Sierra Leone is very serious. All of
us have followed the events of the past days in Sierra
Leone with a sense of foreboding. The present tragic
breakdown could have dire consequences. We are
especially conscious of the suffering of the people of
Sierra Leone. If the response of the United Nations and
the international community does not match up to the
challenge, the consequences will be far-reaching - not
just for Sierra Leone, but also for Africa, United Nations
peacekeeping and the United Nations itself. My delegation
is grateful to the African Group for taking the initiative in
calling this meeting, and grateful to you, Mr. President,
for arranging it so rapidly.

We must focus now on the immediate crisis. I do
not want to spend too much time and energy allocating
blame. But my delegation is in no doubt at whose door
the principal responsibility should be laid. Foday Sankoh
and his Revolutionary United Front (RUF) supporters
have flagrantly violated the peace agreements to which he
and they are a party. Sankoh stands condemned before the
international community, including in statements by this
Council. He and his colleagues must bear responsibility
for what has happened over the last few days. As the
Secretary-General and others have said, they must be held
accountable for their actions.

We must now take the action necessary to ensure
that Sankoh and his supporters do not succeed in breaking
the peace for which the ordinary people of Sierra Leone
yearn and which they so richly deserve. We are firmly of

 

the view that the cornerstone of our efforts must be the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). An
effective United Nations force, fully staffed and equipped
to meet its mandate, offers the best hope for restoring
lasting peace and stability in Sierra Leone.

The United Kingdom has taken a number of important
steps to support UNAMSIL. Last weekend we deployed the
British Spearhead Battalion to Freetown. That deployment
is primarily for the evacuation of United Kingdom
nationals. But we also believe that the deployment of our
troops, who have secured Lungi airport, made a real
contribution to the efforts of UNAMSIL. We have kept that
vital link open and thus freed up UNAMSIL troops to
concentrate on their wider task. I am grateful to the
Secretary-General for his kind words about the effect the
presence of our forces has had, and I will ensure that they
are passed on to those concerned.

Today, following a review of the situation in Sierra
Leone with Cabinet colleagues, Prime Minister Blair
confirmed that the British forces in Sierra Leone would
continue their mission to evacuate United Kingdom and
other nationals, and to secure Lungi airport, while the
United Nations force builds up over the next month. There
is no question of British troops being deployed in a combat
role as part of the United Nations force, nor of an open-
ended commitment. The arrival in the area of HMS Ocean,
with her embarked marines, will provide further force
flexibility and be in a position to relieve those forces
already in theatre, if necessary.

A United Kingdom military advisory team is also in
Freetown, at United Nations request, to help the United
Nations assess what technical support is needed to
strengthen UNAMSIL. The United Kingdom will continue
to offer technical and logistical support to help strengthen
the Mission.

UNAMSIL has borne the brunt of Sankoh's actions
and suffered the consequences. I pay an unreserved tribute
to the way in which its Commander, General J etley, and his
colleagues have dealt with the present difficult situation.
Similar tributes are due to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and those engaged on Sierra Leone in
New York. Our thoughts are with those UNAMSIL
personnel who have been detained by the RUF. As the
Secretary-General has said, they must be released, and
quickly. And our hearts go out to the families of those who
have given their lives in the service of the United Nations.

My delegation also wishes to pay tribute to the
efforts of regional leaders who have worked hard to
support the Government of Sierra Leone. It is imperative
that they, and all of us, put as much pressure as possible
on Foday Sankoh to return to the path of peaceful
dialogue and political progress charted in the Lorne
Agreement.

The response of the United Nations to the crisis
holds the key to its future solution. The Security Council
has a grave responsibility. It is essential that we get
things right. We must therefore keep our eye firmly on
the immediate objective: to reinforce UNAMSIL and get
it up to strength. We are grateful to the Governments of
India, Bangladesh and Jordan for expediting the
deployment of their battalions. That deployment must take
place as quickly as possible. We welcome the willingness
of the Economic Community of West African States
leaders, following their summit meeting in Abuja on 9
May, to consider, in the event of new involvement of
regional forces in Sierra Leone, the practical modalities of
such involvement. Any new troops should be blue-hatted,
properly equipped for the job they have to do, under a
single United Nations chain of command and with the
same rules of engagement.

Progress is now being made, and we obviously
welcome that. The United Kingdom team at Lungi will be
working with UNAMSIL to see how more air movements
can be handled through the airport, thus relieving this
potential bottleneck in efforts to strengthen UNAMSIL.
For the moment, UNAMSIL's mandate is sufficient
for it to carry out its tasks. It is already a strong one. It
contains elements that allow for the use of force in self-
defence and, where possible, in defence of the civilian
population. Clearly, as the situation evolves, we should
look at the tasks we expect UNAMSIL to carry out. The
decision on how to mandate the Mission will depend on
those tasks. Once the situation has stabilized, we will be
better placed to look at those issues. We will need the
Secretary-General's professional advice, which will no
doubt be based on Under-Secretary-General Miyet's
assessment. That need not take long to produce. But we
should be wary of adopting an over-hasty approach. The
Secretary-General was right to point out that changing
UNAMSIL's mandate will not of itself change it into an
effective peace enforcement mission; and moving to peace
enforcement would be a radical change of approach. We
should think carefully about whether this is right or
practicable.

 

It is clear what the immediate response to the crisis
has to be. We must not take our eye off the ball. We must
get UNAMSIL up to strength. Those who can help achieve
this must do so quickly. This Council must send a clear
message of political support for UNAMSIL, and it must be
ready to do anything necessary to assist UNAMSIL's
reinforcement. The United Kingdom has already done a
great deal. Our efforts will continue. The people of Sierra
Leone have waited for peace and stability for far too long.

