Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me begin by
congratulating Equatorial Guinea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and for organizing this debate on one of the
most immediate threats to international peace and
security - transnational organized crime at sea. We
also thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and Mrs. Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, for their informative briefings
earlier this morning.

In June last year, Sri Lanka was pleased to
participate at the ministerial level in the successful
Arria formula meeting on maritime crime as a threat to
international peace and security, which, Mr. President,
your country, along with Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, the
Netherlands, the United States and UNODC, hosted
and which provided an excellent forum to highlight the
emerging threats posed by maritime crime.

As an island nation strategically located in the
Indian Ocean, Sri Lanka is well aware ofthe importance
of creating a maritime order that can withstand the
emerging threats from transnational criminal acts.
With its sea lanes serving as major arteries of East-
West trade, the Indian Ocean carries approximately
half the world's container shipping and about two thirds
of its oil shipments. Heavy tanker traffic between the
Middle East and the Far East passes in close proximity
to the southern coast of Sri Lanka. Therefore, ensuring
security and stability and maintaining freedom of
navigation in the sea lanes of communication of the
Indian Ocean are of vital concern to Sri Lanka and of
importance not only to the global economy but also to
global security.

Increased mobility at sea and heavy traffic open
up opportunities for drug trafficking, the illegal arms
trade, migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons,
among others. Furthermore, it can give rise to a plethora
of corrupt practices, including illegal and unreported
fishing, bottom trawling, environmental degradation
and the destruction of coastal infrastructure. For Sri
Lanka, with its existence so inextricably linked to the
ocean and its resources, the impact of such actions
would be enormously detrimental to our very survival.
In addition, UNODC has highlighted a range of new
threats and crimes, including intentional damage to
fibre-optic submarine cables, and legal issues arising
from floating armouries, among several others.

Littoral States such as Sri Lanka are at the forefront
of the fight against drug trafficking through maritime
routes. The use of the Indian Ocean as a major drug
trafficking highway poses a threat to maritime security
and maritime law enforcement. One of the major
challenges is the lack of a legal conclusion, such as
prosecution, for the majority of drug seizures made
within international waters in the Indian Ocean region.

Sri Lanka has historically been a champion of a
rules-based order for the maritime domain. In 1973, we
chaired the historic third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea, which led to the adoption of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea - a
comprehensive constitution for the oceans. For those
reasons, and recognizing the unique nature of the high
seas, which fall outside the jurisdictional domain of
a single State, Sri Lanka calls most emphatically for
concerted and collective international cooperative
measures to provide the requisite regulatory framework
to counter such threats. Given the nature of the current
challenges, such crimes must not be allowed to fall into
an area where there is a legal vacuum.

In that context, it is also relevant to mention that in
October last year Sri Lanka organized an international
conference entitled "The Indian Ocean - Defining our
Future", where Prime Minister Ranil Wickremasinghe
addressed two core issues related to the Indian Ocean,
namely, freedom of navigation and freedom of digital
connectivity. While the former is absolutely vital, the
safeguarding of the freedom of digital connectivity is
of equal importance, especially given the rapid increase
in technology and the fact that the presence of undersea
cables has grown exponentially in the past few decades.
It is known that more than 80 per cent of Internet
traffic is transferred using undersea cables. Internet
connectivity is inextricably linked to the economies
of most countries, and the seabed is fast becoming a
tangle of ungoverned undersea cables.

That aspect presents a new threat to international
peace and security. Although the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea deals with submarine
cables and provides a basic framework, nevertheless,
new threats have emerged since then. In recognition of
that, on 11 December 2018, through resolution 73/124,
on oceans and the law of the sea, which Sri Lanka
co-sponsored together with a large number of other
States, the General Assembly addressed the issue of
fibre-optic submarine cables and their susceptibility to
intentional and/or accidental damage.

Consequent to that General Assembly resolution,
last week the UNODC Global Maritime Crime
Programme held an event in Colombo, Sri Lanka,
for legal experts, which was followed by a high-level
ministerial meeting on the existing legal regime
governing fibre-optic submarine cables. In a world that
is now heavily reliant on connectivity for everything,
from military operations and flight reservations to
basic navigation, a damaged or destroyed cable can
have a tremendous impact on all aspects of life. Some
examples of the vulnerability of those cables and how all
States are reliant on submarine cables were highlighted
at the meeting in Colombo.

Sri Lanka therefore fully endorses the recommendations
put forward by UNODC to address that new threat in
order to support all States, namely, classifying submarine
cables as critical communications infrastructure and/or
critical national infrastructure, developing a national
action plan for resilience in addressing the protection
of submarine cables, enhancing the legal treatment of
submarine cables in line with public international law
and encouraging States to designate a lead agency on
the protection of submarine cables.

To that end, Sri Lanka encourages the exploration
of mutual assistance at the international and regional
levels for resilience in the face of interference with
submarine cables and the harmonization of laws on the
protection of submarine cables, including cooperative
law enforcement initiatives for their protection.

In conclusion, we need to encourage greater
dialogue and cooperation among all States in assessing
the security imperatives, threats, vulnerabilities and
responsibilities given the increase in undersea cables on
the seabed. As a State strategically located in the Indian
Ocean, much of the digital connectivity between the
East and the West traverses over the seabed adjacent to

Sri Lanka. We therefore call for immediate international
action in seeking urgent measures to address that new
and imminent threat.

