Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): It is most gratifying to see
you, Sir, presiding over this important meeting of the
Council. Allow me to express also my delegation's thanks
and appreciation to you and to the other members of the
Council for convening this important meeting. We look
forward to what we trust will be a fruitful outcome.

On 25 September last year, at that historic
ministerial meeting of the Security Council on the
situation in Africa, which was held in this very Chamber,
the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert
Mugabe, in his capacity as Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) raised many issues which
concern Africa. Among them was the Lockerbie tragedy
and the issues which have emanated therefrom.

 

Similarly, on many occasions Namibia has continued
to express its concern over this issue.

We in Africa do not condone gross violations of
human rights, nor do we seek to trivialize the loss of life
from that tragedy. Indeed, the pain emanating from the loss
of life in that tragedy will remain, and in this connection I
wish to take this opportunity to express our profound
sympathy to the families of the victims who lost their lives
in that tragedy. The international community should leave
no stone unturned in establishing the truth in this matter.
The perpetrators of this horrendous act of terrorism should
not go unpunished.

Furthermore, we should work together to avert the
continued suffering of many other innocent third persons
who continue to suffer as a result of the continued
sanctions imposed on Libya. It is unfortunate that those
sanctions were imposed even before the suspects could be
proved guilty by a court of law.

An impasse on this matter will prolong the pain and
agony for all concerned; hence, Africa has already, at the
highest level, declared its readiness to assist in moving the
matter along. We do so in our resolve to transform Africa
from a continent of conflict and gloom to one of hope and
peace, stability and development.

The Security Council has an important duty to fulfil:
that of maintaining international peace and security. In
addition, however, with regard to Africa, in so doing we all
should learn from present and past conflicts there. As the
Secretary-General of the OAU stated here on 25 September
last year, we should heed the calls made by African leaders.
Only then can we prevent sparks from turning into a blaze.

The United Nations therefore has, by its Charter, a
responsibility and moral obligation towards the African
continent. It is that responsibility that we all must seek to
uphold. We wish to reiterate the position of the OAU that
the agreement by Libya for its two suspected nationals to
be tried under Scottish law by Scottish judges in a third
country or at the International Court of Justice, should now
receive the Council's serious consideration so that the
matter can be resolved equitably. Thus Namibia welcomes
the two Judgments issued by the International Court of
Justice on 27 February 1998 on the Lockerbie case. It is
our fervent hope that this recent development will help in
breaking the impasse.

Finally, the meeting of the OAU Council of Ministers,
which concluded in Addis Ababa on Saturday, 28 February
1998, among other things, reconfirmed the staunch
position urging the States concerned to take concrete
action to ensure a rapid and definitive settlement of the
disaster. The Council of Ministers also reiterated its
urgent appeal to the Security Council to quickly lift the
sanctions unjustly imposed on the people of Libya.

