The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Philippines.

History has shown that States are willing to do all
they can in the name of peace. They have gone to war
and sent their brave men and women into battle. They
have shown a willingness to divide their people,
compromise their territory, surrender their resources
and risk their future. They have been willing to do all
this in the name of peace. What they have not been too
willing to do was to allow individuals or groups of
individuals to participate in preventing or settling
conflict. That has been reserved to States and the
institutions they created.

For far too long States jealously guarded the
prerogative to wage peace. Many States have resisted
the entry of civil society into the realm of State-to-
State relations, particularly in the area of international
politics and security.

In spite of that resistance, civil society has proven
itself an important partner in preventing and settling
conflict. Those of us who laboured with civil society in
building internal and regional peace, trust and
confidence, even in the face of profound potential
conflict, can attest to this.

Last year, in June, the Philippine presidency of
the Security Council convened an open debate on the
role of civil society in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Council's 4993rd meeting marked the first extensive
discussion by the Security Council on the contribution
civil society can make in ensuring that once peace is
achieved, conflict is not allowed to return.

That meeting provided the historic opportunity -
the first time ever, I believe - for representatives of
civil society to participate in the debate of the Council.
It opened the doors even wider for civil society in the
most delicate affairs of States, in the maintenance of
peace and security of mankind - which is the primary
responsibility of this Council.

Knowing full well the role that civil society can
play in carrying out its primary responsibility, the
Security Council must nurture and encourage a
meaningful role for civil society in preventing conflict
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

Today, the Philippine presidency is once again
privileged to convene an open debate on the role of
civil society. The Philippines deeply appreciates the
active participation of Member States in this open
debate. We are also grateful to the three representatives
of civil society for their views and practical
suggestions. Their contribution is most valuable, as it
is borne of experience and reality.

The complex nature of threats to international
peace and security is a theme that has received much-
deserved attention, not only during the meeting of
heads of State and Government last week, but for much
of the year, starting from the issuance of the report of
the High-level Panel in the fall of 2004. It is now
recognized that the need for a comprehensive strategy
for conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes is vast and urgent. We now realize that
Governments have real and serious limitations in being
fully responsive to the need to effectively meet these
complex threats.

My own country's experience teaches this
important lesson. After years of violence, the
Philippines is one step away from successfully
concluding its search for peace in the southern
Philippines. We were able to achieve dramatic progress
in our peace talks with secessionists because of the key
role that our partners for peace have played. Malaysia
brokered the peace talks and led the international
monitoring team; Brunei and Libya contributed peace
monitors; other individual members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference extended
political support; and donor countries and aid agencies
increased the prospects of growth and progress as
peace dividends.

However, our search for peace would not have
reached that far if not for the active role played by civil
society. Civil society helped in making both sides
understand difficult issues, study best practices and
appreciate the value of peace. Religious civil society
groups were primary movers in building understanding
and tolerance by encouraging interfaith dialogue and
cooperation. They helped reduce the potential for abuse
of religion and faith as further fuel for conflict. It is
this particular experience that provided one of the
inspirations for my country's interfaith initiatives here
in the United Nations. The role that civil society can
play in promoting interfaith dialogue and cooperation
was once again highlighted in last week's historic
Interfaith Summit.

Communities, donor agencies and civil society
must be integrated in any approach to a comprehensive
strategy for conflict prevention and the pacific
settlement of disputes. All sectors involved -
Governments, communities, donor agencies and civil
society - must coordinate efforts and act on the basis
of their respective strengths to support and complement
each other in achieving the goal of preventing and
resolving disputes. The goal must be holistic and not
merely involve the limited objective of stopping
conflicts. Overall development resulting in social
stability would deflect discontented elements in a
society in conflict from resorting to violence again.

When conflicts break out within a State,
sometimes the biggest barrier to peace is the inability
or the unwillingness of parties to talk and enter
dialogue. Non-governmental organizations often serve
as communication links between governmental and
opposition forces, even as they carry out their
humanitarian and development roles. In our region, we
have seen civil society actually help broker peace. In
Aceh, for example, I believe that the seeds of peace
planted helped bring about the peace that we are once
again building.

While its important role in peace-making
activities is recognized, civil society, as a player in
interdicting the conflict cycle, should also continue to
evolve new and future-oriented ideas. If it positively
directs its attention towards community growth and the
promotion of the welfare of society, its voice will grow
stronger in a way that is supported and strengthened by
international and local actors.

In my region several possible conflicts have been
peacefully managed, thanks to the help of civil society.
Among those issues was the potentially difficult
situation of the conflicting claims in the South China
Sea. Track Two workshops explored the possibility of
cooperative regimes in the South China Sea to build
trust and confidence and to create an atmosphere in
which disputes could be addressed. Today, we have the
ASEAN-China Declaration on the Code of Conduct in
the South China Sea. Civil society has helped
transform the South China Sea from waters of
contention to a sea of peace and cooperation.
Sixty years ago, the peoples of the world brought
forth the United Nations. No role was given to civil
society. Today, civil society has proven its worth in our
common search for peace. States have shown their
willingness to share with civil society, which is a close
and meaningful partner, the task of building peace. Let
us now show that together we can expand the frontiers
of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I invite the representative of Canada to take the
floor.

