Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): I would like to begin
by congratulating Ukraine on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your invitation. It is a pleasure and an honour for me
to brief the Security Council on behalf of the members
ofthe Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in my capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic Peacebuilding
Commission country-specific configuration.

I would also like to welcome the very detailed
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous, on the
situation in the Central African Republic. I also wish
to commend him and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
for their tireless efforts to build peace in the Central
African Republic.

I will brief Council members on current challenges
and opportunities with respect to peacebuilding
in the Central African Republic. As mentioned by
Mr. Ladsous and pointed out in the report (S/2017/94)
of the Secretary-General, the security situation in
the country remains volatile despite the efforts of the
Government and the presence of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

Recent clashes pitting the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique, led by Noureddine
Adam, and the Mouvement patriotique pour la
Centrafrique of Al-Khatim Mahamat, against the
Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, led by Ali Darassa,
as well as other clashes - notably those highlighted by
Mr. Ladsous in his briefing this morning - have led
to the loss of hundreds of lives and the displacement
of thousands of women, men and children. Those
unacceptable attacks serve to highlight the need to
focus our efforts first and foremost on the stabilization
of the security situation in the country in order to
avoid more loss of life, displacement, and also to avoid
actions that might compromise the progress achieved
thus far in different key areas.

In that regard, the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration welcomes the
commitment of the national authorities to move
forward, and we congratulate them for the adoption of
the national strategy for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation; the national security
policy; as well as the five-year plan for capacity-building
and development of the police and gendarmerie,

Furthermore, the adoption of the strategy for
national reconciliation, as well as the recent vote
by Parliament on legislation for the establishment
of institutions enshrined in the Constitution, will
contribute significantly to the long-term stability of the
country. We have reached a critical juncture where the
leadership of the Government, with the support of the
international community, must be bolstered in order to
build peace and combat the deep-rooted causes of the
conflict, thereby paving the way for lasting peace in
the Central African Republic.

We would like to congratulate all of the
stakeholders who contributed to the success of the
Brussels Conference for the Central African Republic
held on 17 November 2016. In preparing for that
conference, a meeting of the configuration was
convened on 2 November 2016. During that meeting,
configuration members were briefed by Ambassador
Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the European
Union Delegation to the United Nations; by Mr. Jean-
Christophe Garret, Director of the country office of
the World Bank for the Central African Republic; and
by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacebuilding Support and Head of the
Peacebuilding Support Office, who also spoke on
behalf of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

During the same meeting, the representative of
the World Bank underscored the excellent cooperation
on the ground generally speaking with MINUSCA, in
particular in preparing for the Brussels Conference. I
also noted that the representative of the World Bank
warned against the risks ofunderinvestment in security
and disarmament, which he considers as priorities and
necessary for the success of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan.

The Brussels Conference resulted in significant
commitments of more than $2.2 billion of the
$3 billion needed to implement the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. The Plan includes three key
pillars: promoting peace, security and reconciliation;
renewing the social contract between the State and the
population; and facilitating economic recovery. In that
context, the Central African Republic configuration
will devote a meeting to each of the three pillars,
bringing together all the players concerned in order to
discuss how to best support the advisory council for
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, which was
established by His Excellency President Touadera.

Our efforts will also be devoted to the successful
implementation of the Mutual Engagement Framework,
a mechanism with which the Peacebuilding Commission
has extensive experience, given that similar agreements
have been implemented in other countries that are on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, such as
Liberia and Guinea. As mentioned by the Secretary-
General in his report, the configuration encourages the
Government, as well as its international partners, to
make use of the monitoring mechanisms of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and of the Mutual
Engagement Framework in order to promote progress
in different key areas, such as security, reconciliation
and the provision of basic public services.

The ongoing projects supported by the Peacebuilding
Fund are already aligned with the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan and the Mutual Engagement
Framework. In 2016, an initiative to reduce community
violence was implemented by the International
Organization for Migration, under the leadership of
MINUSCA, and provided temporary employment
to approximately 2,000 ex-Seleka combatants and
members of the communities to which they returned. In
addition, the Fund supported the restoration of public
security and basic services, including the rehabilitation
and equipping of administrative buildings in the Obo
and Birao prefectures. A major support package from
the Fund for the fight against impunity, security sector
reform and the promotion of political dialogue will be
deployed in 2017 to help kick-start the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
the Mutual Engagement Framework.

With regard to the subregion, which has always
played an important role in the Central African Republic,
the configuration would like to encourage the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union in their recent mediation efforts with a view
to strengthening the dialogue process initiated by the
Government with the armed groups. The configuration
also welcomes the upcoming participation of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the first meeting of the
International Support Group, a mechanism established
to take the place of the International Contact Group on
the Central African Republic.

The configuration would also like to welcome the
African Union Solidarity Conference for the Central
African Republic, which was held on 1 February,
following the twenty-eighth African Union Summit,
held in Addis Ababa. This African Union initiative is
aimed at mobilizing additional support in Africa for
post-conflict reconstruction and development, as well
as for peacebuilding efforts in the Central African
Republic in line with the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan.

Finally, the configuration will continue to support
the establishment of the special criminal court and to
inform its members through the reference group on the
rule of law in the Central African Republic, with the
support of the Global Focal Point. In that context, the
configuration welcomes today's appointment of the
Special Prosecutor. We hope that the appointment of
the international magistrates will take place as soon
as possible so that the court can convene as quickly as
possible. We also welcome with gratitude the pledges
to finance the Court's operations.

I would like to conclude by thanking the
Central African authorities for their support for
the configuration's activities. I would also like to
thank the members of the configuration and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and his team, as well as the Peacebuilding Support
Office, for their assistance, efforts and support for
the work and contribution of the Central African
Republic configuration.

