Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Mr. Nqakula for his briefing.
I would also like to welcome the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, and the Permanent
Representative of Burundi, Mr. Joseph Ntakirutimana.

Since the successful conclusion of the peace
process in Burundi, the persistent rebellion of the
Forces Nationales de Liberation (FNL) has constituted
the most serious risk factor for the security of the
population and the stability of the country. It is for that
reason that we welcomed with hope the launch of
negotiations that started last year following the signing
of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of Dar es
Salaam on 7 September 2006. France would like to
bear homage to the ongoing efforts made by South
Africa, in particular the personal efforts undertaken by
Minister Nqakula, to support the peace process. We
hope that these efforts will continue and that the
Council, as Mr. Nqakula just requested, express its
support. In my personal capacity as the chair of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflicts, I would like to assure Mr. Nqakula
that what he has just said touches us all and that I shall
do my utmost to ensure that our Working Group will
take up the situation of children in Burundi in the
nearest possible future. I believe that he has outlined in
the most moving and accurate terms the reasons for
which this situation should be addressed.

The continuing block in the negotiations is a
matter of great concern for us all. It is crucial that the
FNL rejoin the peace process as soon as possible, and,
in particular, that they return to their place within the
Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism without
delay and without any preconditions. At the same time,
we wish to encourage the authorities in Burundi, as
well as international partners in the process, to
continue their efforts in order to enter into dialogue
with this movement, as we are of the View that it is
only in this way that we will give peace the greatest
possible opportunity.

Our Council will have the opportunity to
re-examine the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). Without
entering into the details of this future discussion at this
point in time, my delegation would like to confirm its
full support for the renewal of the mandate, as we
believe that BINUB has provided the most valuable
support for the efforts of the authorities in Burundi in
order to help build peace and stability within the
country. We would like to encourage BINUB to
maintain and increase its support for the peace process
between the Government and the FNL by working
together with the Facilitators.

Finally, beyond this process, our delegation
would like to welcome the recent political
developments that have taken place in Burundi through
the establishment of a new National Unity Government
on 14 November, as well as the framework agreement
of 2 November on transitional justice. Thus, once
again, the people of Burundi have shown that the spirit
for dialogue and social cooperation that has always
been welcomed by our Council continues to prevail
and has made it possible for the country to make
progress in peacebuilding.

