Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, I wish to
thank Japan for convening this important debate and
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.

While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I wish
to add a few observations in my national capacity.

The words "comprehensive", "integrated" or
"holistic" are not just buzzwords that dominate our
discussions at the United Nations nowadays. They are
real reflections and much-needed calls for actions,
given the intertwined challenges of our time. There are
anchors to our work.

First is putting further emphasis on prevention. The
need to shift our focus towards preventing conflicts,
as opposed to merely reacting to them, is clearly self-
evident. I believe that the only way to achieve and
preserve peace within and among societies is through
dialogue. I am therefore encouraged by the dedication
of the Secretary-General to start a surge in diplomacy. I
would also like to reiterate Hungary's firm commitment
to the role of preventive diplomacy and mediation. To
assist the United Nations in their activities in this field,
my Government made voluntary contributions in 2016
and in 2017.

Preventive processes should include intercultural
and interreligious dialogue and reconciliation, in
tandem with moderate religious and community leaders
and faith-based organizations, in order to build trust
and mutual understanding and respect. Cultural and
science diplomacy, education and awareness-raising
are key in that regard. For example, this year's World
Science Forum, held in Jordan and co-organized
by Hungary, proved the power of science for peace,
which encompasses reconciliation and the prevention
of conflict.

Secondly, we must address peace, security and
development as one. A smooth transition between
political solutions, humanitarian action and development
cooperation is key to ensuring that countries will not
relapse into conflict. Sustainable development is our
best available tool in preventing conflict, and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development created a new
impetus for all organs and the entire membership of the
United Nations to work together in new ways. Besides
changing the narrative, we 4 United Nations organs
and Member States alike - must all change the way in
which we operate.

There is no sustainable peace without respecting
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Member States, in partnership with international
organizations and civil society, should build resilience
in our societies against the risks of destabilization and
radicalization. That should start, we believe, with the
protection of the most vulnerable. Hungary fights for
the rights of national, ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, and of women, girls and children, among
others, by ensuring that their human rights and
fundamental freedoms are fully respected. We have to
fight modern slavery and human trafficking in every
corner of the world, and Hungary is firmly committed
to fighting terrorism and supporting the new United
Nations counter-terrorism system.

Addressing complex contemporary challenges to
international peace and security is a daunting task, one
that no country can achieve on its own. Our mission
is to make sure that we combine our efforts, use the
considerable tools at our disposal and ensure that the
terms "comprehensive", "integrated" and "holistic"
will not remain mere words.

We know that water is a source of life but also of
conflict. Hungary is committed to addressing water-
related challenges. The scarcity of fresh water resources
constitutes a serious challenge to the international
community. In Hungary, we say that water connects;
it does not divide. That was said both in 2013 and
2016, during the Budapest Water Summit. I was very
honoured to co-moderate the water dialogue, together
with Tajikistan. We believe that discussing the added
value and the drawbacks of platforms that talk about
the strengthening of the UN-Water system would
provide coherent policy guidance, and monitoring and
follow-up are necessary tools that we must strengthen.
I encourage convergences so that water can find its best
place in the United Nations development system.

Finally, in taking reform forward, we take it
seriously. Today we have a rare opportunity before of
us to help both the Organization and its Member States
to address the structural shortcomings of the United
Nations and empower it to move out of the functional
silos, integrate the prevention approach and enhance
the coherence of United Nations activities in the field.

It is more important than ever to enhance the
performance of the Security Council, which faces an
unprecedented number of conflicts and complex crises.
The world has too often been witness to devastating
consequences due to the non-action of the Security
Council in certain situations. As a member of the
Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency group,
we wish to stress that the Code of Conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes has already been
signed by 114 Member States.

Sitting here as an ambassador and a female
permanent representative, I must conclude by saying
that we cannot address enough the role of women in the
maintenance of peace and security. I believe that each
century has its defining moral issue. If slavery was the
towering moral issue of the nineteenth century and if the
fight against totalitarianism and colonialism dominated
the twentieth century, then the rights of women and the
struggle to uphold them in every corner of the world
will be - and has been - the moral imperative of the
twenty-first century.

I wish to congratulate Japan on its work in the
Security Council and wish everybody happy holidays.

