Mr. Kubis (Slovakia): I would like to thank
Mr. Moratinos for his statement and for a very
interesting insight into the work of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) under the
Spanish chairmanship. Indeed, what the OSCE needs at
present is this kind of realistic attitude that we are
finding in the day-to-day performance of the current
chairmanship. The approach that Spain applies is based
on the principle of the three Ps - priority,
perseverance and patience - which has shown its
effectiveness. I especially welcome the active
discussion of the OSCE priority themes initiated by
Spain well in advance of the Ministerial Council. I
believe that the results, when reviewed at the end of
the year, will show the Spanish chairmanship to have
been very successful.

This year, for the first time, the OSCE is
experiencing its work in the three-committee structure.
Slovakia has the privilege of chairing the work of the
first of these, the Security Committee. I can now
confirm that our cooperation in this capacity with the
Spanish chairmanship is very good and effective.
Slovakia came up with a proposal to prepare an OSCE
review of the organization's basic norms and principles
in the field of security sector and governance reform.
As Security Council members know, this was also the
topic for Slovakia's presidency of the Council and gave
an impetus to the work of the United Nations and will,
I hope, soon lead to the submission by the Secretary-
General of a report on security sector reform. I am
particularly grateful to the Spanish chairmanship for
understanding and strongly supporting that idea.

I would also like to commend the efforts of the
Chairman-in-Office to achieve the peaceful settlement
07-52101
of protracted conflicts still present on OSCE territory.
The appointment of a Personal Representative by the
Spanish chairmanship was the right and proper reaction
to the August incident in Georgia and is, in our
opinion, worth following in other situations of that
kind as well. The effort to strengthen dialogue and to
eliminate aggressive rhetoric between hostile parties to
all frozen conflicts is also noteworthy.

But it is not only protracted conflicts that
command our attention. I fully agree that it is
necessary to strengthen the role of the OSCE in
Kosovo. That will be very important in the days,
months and even years to come. OSCE expertise is
irreplaceable and could bear valuable fruit in the area
of cooperation with other multilateral sectors,
including - soon, we hope - the European Union.

In addition to the new ideas and concepts
mentioned by Chairman-in-Office Moratinos, I would
like to highlight some of the more traditional areas and
experiences from which we, working in the OSCE,
benefit. First of all, I would like to highlight conflict
prevention as such. I very much hope that the efforts of
the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon could benefit from
the experiences of the OSCE. I can say that, as a
member of both the OSCE and the United Nations, we
will work towards linking the two organizations as
much as possible, including in this area, so that they
can work better and, to the extent possible, jointly.

The second area is that of new threats and
challenges, many of which were mentioned by the
Chairman-in-Office. I would like to mention only one:
the experience of the OSCE in the area of small arms
and light weapons. Here, we in the OSCE set an
example for the wider international community, and I
am very glad that the example was taken up; many of
the lessons learned from the OSCE experience are
being implemented in other regions of the world.

The third area is that of human rights, respect for
minorities, the building of democratic institutions and
all that falls under this particular umbrella of the core
business of the OSCE. Just to highlight one thing, I
would like to mention the work of the OSCE that is
being very strongly promoted by the current
chairmanship in the area of combating intolerance and
working to instil understanding among cultures and
religions, because this is, indeed, a task for all of us,
not only for today but for tomorrow as well.
07-52101

Another area that I consider to be extremely
important in the work of the OSCE is that of field
missions. I have mentioned Kosovo, but there are many
others. Again, in this respect, the OSCE is a very good
partner for the United Nations family. Various offices
of the United Nations and the broader United Nations
family are present in parts of the world where the
OSCE also operates.

Political and military affairs and confidence- and
security-building measures are another area where the
OSCE plays a trailblazing role and where we work
very strongly. It too is something on which we can
work together with the United Nations. I would like to
echo the words of Chairman-in-Office Moratinos when
he spoke about the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe (CFE). The Treaty is the cornerstore
of European security, and we in Slovakia highly value
it. I hope that we will find a solution to the current
challenges to the CFE Treaty.

The OSCE provides a good forum for
consultations and cooperation among equals, and it is a
forum of inclusiveness. Therefore, I would again like
to repeat here the words of the Chairman-in-Office,
Foreign Minister Moratinos, in highlighting the
importance of the candidature of Kazakhstan for the
OSCE chairmanship. My country supports such a
chairmanship not only because of our bilateral
relations, but also because of the importance of having
a representative of one of the Central Asian nations
members of the OSCE chairing the organization.

Our work with other partners for cooperation is
important, and Afghanistan is an area where our work
together to help the stabilization and development
processes in that country is very valuable.

On one last specific point, as regards OSCE
added value, I would like to mention cooperation with
other international organizations, including the United
Nations family, and also with non-governmental
organization (NGOs). I believe this is an area that is
underdeveloped; we need to do more about it when
speaking about the role of the United Nations.

I would like to conclude my statement by once
again stressing our allegiance, both as a member of the
OSCE and as a Member of the United Nations, to the
work of the OSCE, and our support for the OSCE
chairmanship of Spain. I wish Mr. Moratinos good luck
in his endeavours.
5

