The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Qatar.

I should like to welcome Mr. Rucker, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
and to thank him for briefing the Council. We
commend him and all members of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for their efforts. I wish also to welcome Ms. Raskovic-
Ivic.

The crisis in Kosovo has been going on for far
too long, as has the suffering of the peoples of that
territory. It is time to resolve that crisis and to find a
solution to all the problems resulting therefrom. It is
encouraging to witness the significant efforts that have
been made so far to that end. The United Nations has
played a central role in those efforts alongside other
parties.

Those efforts have begun to bear fruit. State
institutions in Kosovo have started to take shape and
are managing the territory's affairs and serving its
people in an efficient and stable manner. However, the
territory continues to require a great deal of support
from the international community and the United
Nations in order to strengthen its institutions and
ensure stability and development.

Achieving long-term stability, however, will
require settling the status of the territory. In that
regard, the positions of both parties are still largely at
odds. But it is encouraging to see that dialogue is
continuing, which has helped to resolve numerous
technical, constitutional, legal and other issues.
One of the conditions for finding a permanent
settlement concerning the future of Kosovo involves
ensuring the effective participation by Kosovo
Albanians and Serbs in the Government and in all State

06-6573]
and social activities, which, in turn, should be based on
a recognition of a multi-ethnic society. All segments of
society must take part in the dialogue on the future
status of the territory, as that would endow it with
legitimacy and sustainability. Both parties should
encourage such participation and refrain from any act
that would hinder or undermine it.

The efforts made to achieve progress and
implement the special standards for Kosovo and the 13
priority areas identified and submitted by the Contact
Group to the Kosovo Government are promising, but
those steps should be completed in order to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The level of return of refugees remains
unacceptably low, due to the economic situation, which
is still in need of improvement. The international
community must support that process. However, a
more important reason for the low number of returnees
is the uncertainty and ambiguity that prevail with
respect to the future status of Kosovo.

In closing, we commend the role of UNMIK, the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Contact Group
for their efforts to strengthen stability, promote
development and determine the future status of the
territory of Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Finland.

