Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): First
let me commend you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting, and I thank Sergio Vieira de Mello for coming
all this way. It is a long way to come, and I think it
symbolizes his own commitment to working closely
with the Council, but also his personal stamina -
having to travel so far and then sit so still all day long.
We appreciate it, and I think this is a very useful
dialogue. Similarly, I think it is a pleasure to have Mr.
Ramos-Horta here. He has become a well-known figure
to us all, and I hope it will stay that way.

This meeting and the wide range of
participants - which I think is unusual for a meeting
of this sort - and the various troop-contributors'
meetings - thanks to the leadership of our President,
these were some ofthe highest-level discussions - and
very frank discussions - that we have had with the
troop contributors - underscore the commitment of
the United Nations as a family to support East Timor
and the people of East Timor as they move towards
independence and a secure a stable environment.

The involvement of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the international
financial institutions and particularly the General
Assembly, with the President of the General Assembly
having been out to the region, is, I think, an
encouraging sign that we all realize that we have to
work together for East Timor's future. I think that both
Mr. Vieira de Mello and Mr. Ramos-Horta can take a
clear message back to the people of East Timor that the
international community's attention to East Timor will
not end with UNTAET's mandate, when it closes down
towards the end of this year. I think that one of the
hardest problems will be to keep the international
community engaged in East Timor. Once it has the
impression that the crisis is over, attention tends to go
elsewhere, and I think everyone who has spoken here
today is committed to ensuring that that does not
happen. I hope that that message will be strongly
conveyed to the people of East Timor.

Obviously, any plan that is developed would have
to be developed in close consultation with the people
of East Timor, the first elected government and the
United Nations. We certainly take notice of the
Secretary-General's View recommending an integrated
mission under a special representative, mandated by
the Council and funded from assessed contributions.
That is something that we will have to discuss in depth
over the next month. I hope that you will stay very
engaged in that issue. It is one that we will certainly
take under advisement.

The United States, for its part, has its own troops
there. We are assisting in the efforts and continuing to
strongly support UNTAET and the people of East
Timor. As you go through a really fascinating
transition, I think that you are pursuing a very
ambitious calendar that you have defined together,
which the United States will certainly remain quite
focused on. To actually engage in the creation of a
nation and to watch that occur is a rare privilege for all
of us. I think it is one that we will work on side by side
with you. I found the trip we went on as part of the
Security Council's second mission out there just
fascinating - watching the country being rebuilt from
the ground up. I would certainly hope that the Council
and the various United Nations agencies stay very
much engaged.

I think that there are going to be some key
benchmarks along the way. Let me just put them for
your consideration and discussion over the next year.
There are four main ones, and I think that both of you
are very well aware ofthem.

The first is the progress that has been made to
incorporate the East Timorese into the transitional
government. It is always important to be cautious in
coining a new word, but the Timorization process, I
think, is well under way, and the Council is strongly
supportive ofthe authority that Mr. Vieira de Mello has
transferred to the day-to-day governance of the East
Timorese government, as well as of the involvement of
the people of East Timor in that effort, which is a very
difficult one. I do not think that people pay enough
attention to how much has been done in this respect
and to the priority that has been put on that.

The second is the holding of free and fair
elections, which will be open to a wide range of parties
and candidates in East Timor's successful transition to
independence. I would anticipate that a large
involvement of the international community would be
requested in that respect. We would want to play a role
in that process to ensure that participation is as broad
as possible in that process, so that the outcome has the
strongest possible support among the people.

The third point concerns the continued threat of
militia incursions and the potential for internal
instability between now and the foreseeable future, but
particularly in the period leading up to the elections.
For that reason, we would support maintaining the
current ceiling on the troop numbers for UNTAET, and
we also support the mandate, which, we would remind
everyone, includes the robust Chapter VII authority. I
commend Mr. Vieira de Mello and the United Nations
leadership for their interpretation of the authorities
there. The use of forceful action by UNTAET in
protecting itself, I think, has saved an enormous
number oflives and took some courage. I hope that that
will become the norm for peacekeeping operations in
future - that they will not tolerate threats against their
personnel. I think that lives were protected through the
taking of that forceful stand, which we have been
strongly supporting.

Lastly, the coordination of the bilateral
programmes assisting the creation of the East Timor
defence force will be key to maintaining stability after
the United Nations presence leaves and throughout the
process of building up an independent country. I think
we all took to heart your comments on how to move
forward with that programme, and I think that the
international community will be very much looking
forward to working with you.

Just a few other quick points. Jose Ramos-Horta
made an interesting recommendation on the
reconfiguration of the civilian police as national
contingents, as the peacekeeping forces are now. While
civilian police officers are currently assigned to
multinational contingents, switching to national
contingents is an idea that needs further study. But it
could well help move towards effective policing, and
any other comments that either of you would have on
that would be useful.
Certainly one of the major points emphasized by
the Security Council mission in which I participated,
upon its return, was the need for an independent and
objective judiciary and its link to the issue of
reconciliation, as justice is needed for reconciliation
and vice versa.

We would appreciate any feedback on what will
happen with the serious crime investigations and the
prosecution post-independence. I think that is
something that we should begin to prepare for now. Is
there anything else we should be doing to prepare for
that issue? Because certainly establishing the rule of
law is going to be key in the transition to democracy.
That is definitely the message we got: that as long as
there is a fair process, the chances of reconciliation are
much, much greater.

I think it is also vital to note the importance of
cooperation with the Government of Indonesia on this
front, and the American delegation, over the last few
months, has been pushing very hard for the
Government of Indonesia to deepen its cooperation
with UNTAET on this as well as move forward on
some of the high-profile cases. It is worth noting that
there are some important trials going on in Indonesia
right now, particularly that of Eurico Gutierres, which
is now under way. The international community will be
watching that very closely, as it will the trial of the six
who are responsible for the death of United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) workers, a
question this body has dealt with in the past. I think
that is a very significant step forward on that front, and
hopefully it will help to move forward the Whole
process of reconciliation.

With respect to the commitment of the
international community, I think the presence here of
the international financial institutions underscores the
need for those agencies to continue medium-term
planning for the development of the East Timorese
society. As our French colleagues have underscored,
encouraging the international financial institutions,
United Nations funds and other concerned countries to
increase their activities there will be key to ensuring
that the resources are available to help the East
Timorese create the society that they need. We would
appreciate any comments on what more we could do on
that front by taking advantage of the expertise of the
various entities involved in capacity-building,
development, nation-building - anything more we can
do that is going to be key to ensuring that the
international community does its part.
When we were in Dili in the fall, Mr. Vieira de
Mello made it very clear that he needed some
additional flexibility in how the assessed funds are
used. I think that the comments made by Mr. Holkeri,
the President of the General Assembly, on
recommendations that the Council, the General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies look at
ways to increase that flexibility are ones that we owe
Mr. Vieira de Mello. We have given him a very
difficult mandate, and we have to try to work with him
to get the flexibility that we need.

In closing, I think that it is important to step back
and look at how much has been done in East Timor. A
year ago, there was a real humanitarian crisis going on
in East Timor, and it has now moved from a
humanitarian crisis into the more political arena of
trying to build an institution and a government. I think
that it is largely to the credit ofthe United Nations and
the international community that that has happened, not
to mention the people of East Timor. If one steps back
and looks at what has happened in the last year, it is
really stunning. I was lucky enough to see it on the
ground, and I think it is important for the international
community to note what is happening there. Your
leadership, Mr. Vieira de Mello, has been key to
showcasing what the United Nations can do and how to
do it right. You deserve great credit for doing it right.

There are still problems remaining, such as that
of the refugees in West Timor. I know that is not your
direct insight, Mr. Vieira de Mello, but when we were
there before, you talked about the need to have a ship
to be able to transport refugees back and forth. I know
there have been meetings with some of the signatories
of the letter to the Security Council President. Do you
have any insight on that matter, or if there is anything
more we could do to try to move the refugees?

Let me just say in closing that I think the year
ahead is going to be an exciting one. Even though it is
difficult to get back here to New York, I hope you will
be a regular visitor - both of you - and I commend
you for your tireless efforts.

