Mrs. Camara (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
I wish at the outset to offer you my warmest
congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for January. I also wish to pay tribute to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, and to reiterate the support and
gratitude of my country, the Republic of Guinea, and
particularly its President, General Lansana Conte, to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, whose
initiatives, actions and resolve continue to help counter
the dynamic of war and sometimes to avert it altogether
in many countries whose populations face the danger of
the sort of fratricidal conflict we have seen in Liberia.
Lastly, I wish through you, Mr. President, to thank the
other members of the Security Council and all those who,
in the field and sometimes at great risk and peril, are
helping to restore peace in Liberia.

My country's vulnerability to the collateral effects of
the situation in Liberia is hardly surprising, given the
historical and geographical links between our two peoples.
Beyond this aspect, and aware of its twofold position as
a founding member of the Mano River Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), my country continues to play a very active
role in the Community's Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
and to shelter more than 600,000 Liberian refugees in its
territory. Moreover, in bringing the leaders of all the
Liberian factions together in Conakry last November, my
Government again gave proof of its determination to work
for the restoration of lasting peace in that brotherly
country. That is why, having studied the Secretary-
General's very informative report, my delegation feels
that the dividing line between respect for and violation of
the Abuja Agreement has grown so tenuous that, given its
particular urgency, the situation in Liberia requires
renewed thoughtful consideration rather than hasty or
improvised measures.

Though we must welcome the clear resolve of all
factions to implement the Abuja Agreement, it would be
naive to believe that, without the political support, and
particularly the financial and logistical support, of the
international community, such incidents as that which
occurred in Tubmanburg, and which we deeply deplore,
will not recur simply because the protagonists have given
their word.

In endorsing the Secretary-General's
recommendations, I should like to ask the Council, first,
to consider extending the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) for an additional
four-month period; secondly, to appeal to the Liberian
National Transitional Government and the faction leaders
to extend their full cooperation to ECOWAS and
UNOMIL in order to stabilize the situation and make
rapid progress in the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement, since elections are scheduled for August
1996; thirdly, to call on the international community to
continue providing the resources which ECOMOG

 

requires to carry out its responsibilities effectively; fourthly,
to urge those who are helping to finance disarmament and
demobilization operations to invest in socio-economic
projects so as to ease the reintegration of ex-combatants;
fifthly, to consider offering protection and humanitarian
assistance to the displaced populations and refugees within
Liberia and to Liberian refugees in neighbouring countries,
such as Guinea; and, lastly, to call on the international
community to give renewed priority consideration to its
support for ECOMOG and to ensure that the necessary
assistance is extended to that force.

To put the Liberian situation into context, we must not
forget that, as we speak, hundreds of thousands of Liberian
refugees and displaced persons are dying of hunger and
disease. The task before the international community is
certainly enormous, but not impossible. We must
understand that what remains to be done can be done only
if we work together to silence the guns in Liberia, where
for the first time a group of African countries is committed
to settling a regional conflict.

For the sake of the mission of peace, solidarity and
social order to which we are all duty-bound, let us agree
once and for all to come to the aid of the Liberian people
in order to make it possible for them in the near future to
live in a world of justice and harmony.

