The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Kingdom of
Morocco.

I would first like to thank the delegation of the
friendly State of India for its distinguished leadership
of the Council in November.

Today the Council is seized with the question
of the situation in the Sahel, in the light of the many
major and long-term security, humanitarian, food and
environmental challenges facing the region.

I would also like to take this the opportunity to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his personal
participation in this meeting. We are also pleased to
have with us today Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, whose mission,
under resolution 2056 (2012), is to prepare and develop
an integrated United Nations strategy for the Sahel, in
order to increase synergies and coordination among the
various United Nations entities working on the Sahel.
We hope the strategy will be submitted to the Council
early next year.

The Sahel region is negatively affected by a
number of factors. Besides dealing with such problems
as desertification, poverty, malnutrition and famine, in
the last few years the Sahel has become a safe haven
for terrorist groups, ideologically and methodologically
affiliated with the international Al-Qaida network, as
well as separatist groups and traffickers in drugs and
human beings that are a threat to international and
regional security.

We should recall that concrete and specific
indications of the existence of challenges that should
be overcome began to emerge a few years ago, although
the international community did not address those
threats and their root causes or take or accelerate the
measures that might have helped to block or limit the
proliferation of such illicit activities. It was therefore
quite normal that Morocco, as an old African State
focused on the security and stability of Africa, would
place that serious question at the heart of its concerns
during its presidency. The Council should focus on this
question given its historic relations with the region.
We feel the threats being faced by the Arab Maghreb
Union, to which we belong.

Terrorists, separatists and criminals have
committed acts of violence on over two-thirds of the
national territory of Mali. That constitutes a threat
to the security and stability not only of Mali but also
throughout the region. That dangerous precedent on
our continent is a call to the international community,
which is represented by the Council, to act swiftly to
support Mali by assisting it in responding firmly and
effectively to the situation. Any delay in the resolution
of that grave crisis will only strengthen the stranglehold
and control of terrorist and criminal networks on the
region, which grow in strength daily, transforming
the area into a base for and source of terrorism. We
believe that it is vital to give priority to supporting
Mali on various fronts - political, economic, security
and humanitarian - so that the country can restore
its territorial integrity and deal with all of the entities
threatening its stability.

We would like to commend the efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States to
resolve the crisis. It is our ardent hope that the Council
will be able, as soon as possible, to respond positively to
the requests made in unison by the African continent to
assist Mali in fighting these threats. The international
community should strengthen its support to States in
the region to help them build their national capacities,
establish effective security institutions and fortify their
borders. It is vital to emphasize efforts undertaken in
these areas by relevant United Nations entities.

With regard to coordination, a number of
praiseworthy initiatives have been undertaken at the
national, bilateral, subregional and regional levels, with
a view to providing solutions to the challenges facing
the Sahel, and this was already achieved before the
Malian crisis. Unfortunately, those initiatives have not
yet enabled us to deal with the problems in an integrated,
comprehensive and coordinated manner. The time has
therefore come to overcome those obstacles and to
institute inter-regional cooperation and coordination
between the States of the Sahel and the Maghreb for the
stability of this strategic area of Africa.

The various organizations brought together here
today provide an appropriate platform to lay the
groundwork for the sort of interregional cooperation
that would be effective in the Sahel. Such cooperation
is needed to organize humanitarian assistance in a
comprehensive manner and to focus on the regional
dimension. In this context, we welcome the tremendous
work carried out by various actors, in particular the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, in addition to the various specialized
humanitarian agencies on the ground. We hope that
they will achieve concrete results for the Sahel and deal
with the problems in a manner based on sustainable
development, which, in turn, requires cooperation with
the international community, including the World Bank,
the African Development Bank, whose representatives
are present today, and the Islamic Development Bank.

The mutli-dimensional and interconnected crises
in the Sahel must be addressed through a holistic and
integrated approach that takes into consideration, in a
coordinated and synchronized way, all of the political,
economic and social threats facing the region. These
crises require the urgent implementation of measures
because time is on the side of terrorists and criminal
groups.

The Kingdom of Morocco participated in the Rome
meeting, which allowed us to identify ways to achieve a
comprehensive and coordinated approach for the Sahel,
including the State of Mali, and would like to reaffirm
its commitment to supporting the outcome of that
meeting. We are committed to the security and stability
of the Sahel, which draws its legitimacy and relevance
from a commitment deeply rooted in our history and
geographical location.

We reiterate our full readiness to support all
sub-regional, regional and international efforts aimed
at stabilizing the Sahel and West Africa in general.
Our great hope is that the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2012/26) and the ideas presented
during this meeting will help us develop an integrated
United Nations strategy for the Sahel so as to bring
security, stability and development to the peoples and
States of the region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

