Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank your presidency of the Security Council, Sir,
for proposing this important briefing on combating
terrorism in Africa in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

No cause whatsoeverjustifies terrorism. The values
of life, safety and security are values that terrorists do
not share. Nonetheless, they are values shared by most
States. Africa and its people are no exception. Terrorism
is a threat to the values and humanity we all share, as
well as to the development and prosperity we all want
for our countries and peoples. It is a real and growing
threat to peace and security. Its defeat is an imperative
we must pursue. The Council's dynamism in this regard
is highly commendable.

The concept note (S/2013/264, annex) for this
briefing makes a pertinent observation. Terrorism in
Africa is becoming more complex and transnational.
Indeed, there are clear signs that Africa could become
the epicentre of this global vice. Regardless of their
purported objectives - political, religious, social or
economic - the perpetrators of terrorism are only
criminals. We must unite to fight them, and never must
they be in doubt about our collective resolve to do so.

The activities of terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram,
Ansar Dine and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa are an affront to everything African. These
groups and their sponsors demand urgent and undivided
action on the part of the international community,
including this Council.

In 1998, Kenya and Tanzania suffered coordinated
terrorist attacks in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam. A few
years later in 2001, New York was attacked in what is
now known as the 9/11 tragedy. It was in that regard
this Council adopted resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001) to address the spectre. In the same manner, the
General Assembly unanimously adopted the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006 to guide our
collective endeavours in the fight against terrorism.
These and other national, subregional, regional and
international instruments for fighting terrorism are
essential tools. Their implementation is critical if we
are to see any meaningful impact on the ground.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides a
practical framework for combating terrorism. It has to
be complemented with adequate support and resources
for the study ofthe root causes ofterrorism, for it is only
through proper diagnosis that can we apply appropriate
tools in uprooting the scourge. This rationale has driven
our support for a holistic approach in the implementation
of the pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In this regard, we see three critical aspects.

First, in any effort to address terrorism in
Africa, we must not ignore the aspect of poverty. Its
pervasiveness and spread throughout the continent
offer breeding grounds for unrest, particularly in
communities affected by the spectre of terrorism.
Indeed, local and transnational terrorist organizations
thrive in these conditions. Other potentially permissive
and indirect causal factors of terrorism - such as rapid
population growth, especially burgeoning male youth
unemployment, urbanization, social inequality and
exclusion, dispossession and political grievances - also
need to be taken into account.

Secondly, our efforts to combat terrorism must go
hand in hand with building strong partnerships at the
national, regional and international levels. They are
our best defence against extremism. In an increasingly
complex and interconnected world, we can succeed
only by working together in building strong and stable
States with shared values of tolerance, mutual respect
and commitment to the rule of law and democracy.

Thirdly, capacity - and institution-building must
be central in our common endeavours. In Tanzania,
the Government has put in place several mechanisms
for combating terrorism, including the Prevention of
Terrorism Act of 2002 and the Anti-Money Laundering
Act of 2006, as well as the establishment of the
National Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Financial
Intelligence Unit. Our goal is to continue to strengthen
our law enforcement and police capacities, improve
aviation, maritime and border security, and combat
money-laundering and terrorist financing. We wish
in this regard to acknowledge the useful support we
have received from bilateral and multilateral partners
including the United Nations.

Regrettably, only recently we suffered another
terrorist attack in Arusha, where three lives were lost
and more than 40 persons injured. President Kikwete

reminded us that terrorism remains an enduring threat
and that we can never relax our vigilance. Reports of
another attack in Libya this afternoon are yet another
reminder that we cannot let down our guard. It is in
this sense that the United Republic of Tanzania remains
steadfast in its resolve to fight terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, whenever and by whomsoever

disposal to succeed, including by building partnerships
such as those only this Council can foster.

