Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing the Netherlands to take the
floor. We would like to add a few remarks to this
debate in view of our commitment to peace, security
and development in Afghanistan. We are offering
support as a donor, in line with our commitment made
during the Paris Conference and in support of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, as well as
by providing around 2,000 Dutch soldiers as part of the
International Security Assistance Force mandated by
the Security Council.

Let me start by expressing our deep appreciation
for the tremendous efforts undertaken by the United
Nations family in Afghanistan under the able
leadership of Ambassador Eide. We are grateful to
Ambassador Eide for his clear and sober introduction
this morning and for his tireless efforts.

We continue to support the consolidation and
expansion of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, notwithstanding the difficult
circumstances. A stronger United Nations footprint in
Afghanistan will help enhance the unity of purpose of
the international community in Afghanistan.

In his recent report (S/2008/6l7), the Secretary-
General refers to the deteriorating security situation in
parts of the country. We share his observations and
concerns. Indeed, the Taliban is stepping up its attacks
on Government representatives and aid workers and
has intensified a campaign of violence and intimidation
against the local population.

This terror and violence should strengthen our
resolve to keep working towards our long-term
objectives. There are no easy shortcuts, and we should
not trade in our long-term objective of a stable
Afghanistan free of terrorism and at peace with the
outside world for short-term security gains.

The strongest weapon against the Taliban is not a
military one. It is a civilian one: it is a competent
Afghan Government which is viewed as legitimate and
which enjoys growing credibility among the Afghan
population. The administration needs to be embodied
by officials of personal integrity who are willing to
reach out to all tribes and communities under their
jurisdiction. We therefore respectfully encourage the
Afghan Government to redouble its efforts in fighting
corruption and involvement in illicit activities within
its ranks and to appoint officials on the basis of their
competence, integrity and ability to reach out to all
communities. We hope and trust that the recent
appointments by President Karzai will contribute to
strengthening this governance.

The elections next year are a vital test which we
cannot afford to fail. First and foremost, we have to
ensure that the elections are conducted in a safe
environment. Here, the international forces have an
important role to play, but the Afghan security forces
will be at the forefront. Increasingly, those forces are
taking responsibility for security in a growing number
of zones. By and large the Afghan army is doing a
professional job, thereby commanding respect and trust
from the population, and we would hope to see similar
developments in the Afghan police force. Training
efforts to bolster the strength of the Afghan National
Police have to be a priority for all those involved.

We are aware that much more progress in the area
of security is needed, not only with a view to the
upcoming elections, but also to allow the Afghan
Government, with our support, to increasingly provide
basic services such as health care, education and
improved infrastructure for the Afghan people. Those
are the features that will help to strengthen the belief
and trust of the Afghan population in their Government
and that thus will help rebuild and further stabilize the
country.

