Ms. Pires (Timor-Leste): I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month and to thank you for
inviting me and my delegation to address this meeting.
I wish also to thank Mr. Modibo Toure, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-
Bissau, and the African Union Special Representative to
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Ovidio Pequeno, for their briefings
today. I also commend Mr. Toure for the efforts he has
undertaken since he assumed his post.

I am honoured to address the Council on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil, Cabo Verde,
Equatorial Guinea, Guinea- Bissau, Mozambique,
Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, and my own country,
Timor-Leste.

The CPLP member States regret the evolution of
the political situation since the last Council meeting
on Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.7632) and are deeply
concerned at the current political impasse. The CPLP
will continue its close cooperation with all partners in
Guinea-Bissau in order to ensure sound coordination in
all our efforts.

We welcome the efforts being made by ECOWAS
to support Guinea-Bissau, in particular the decision to
nominate the Heads of State of Sierra Leone, Senegal
and Guinea to meet and conduct discussions with the
political leadership in that country with a view to
finding a political solution and preventing the escalation
of the conflict.

We call on all stakeholders, namely, the organs
of sovereignty, the political parties, civil society
and others, to continue to engage in a constructive,
inclusive political dialogue while respecting democratic
principles and the Constitution. Statesmanship is
required at this time to move the country forward so
as to meet the aspirations of the people of the Guinea-
Bissau for greater political stability and socioeconomic
development, as well as for the consolidation of the
rule of law and the protection and promotion of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights.

The CPLP also wishes to acknowledge the armed
forces of Guinea-Bissau, which have displayed
remarkable professionalism by not interfering in the
political crisis, and wishes to urge the armed forces to
maintain this position.

The document presented by President Jose Mario
Vaz and former Prime Minister Domingos Simoes
Pereira at the donor round table in Brussels in March
garnered the support of the international partners. It is
deeply concerning that the instability in the country has
forced international partners to delay disbursements of
pledges made in March. Such delays will only affect the
people of Guinea-Bissau, who are already suffering a
highly negative social and economic impact.

The CPLP wishes to recognize the concerted
efforts of the international community to assist Guinea-
Bissau in this crisis. In this regard, we appreciate and
commend the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), in particular those of the Ambassador of Brazil,
Antonio Patriota, in his capacity as chair ofthe Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the PBC, as well as the support
provided by the European Union, the African Union and
the United Nations. We would also like to acknowledge
the important role of the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau, and remain prepared to co-organize
its next meeting.

To conclude, we recognize that the path travelled
by Guinea-Bissau has been difficult, but we stand
firmly in solidarity with our Bissau Guinean brothers
and sisters and we are confident that Guinea-Bissau is a
country with a bright future.

