Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your successful presidency of the Security Council
this month. I thank you for convening this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on behalf of the
Secretariat. I align myself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Mauritania on behalf
of the Arab Group and the representative of Tajikistan
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

This year has seen a serious move forward by the
Quartet and the States sponsors of the peace process.
The efforts of the United States resulted in the conduct
of indirect negotiations and the launch of direct
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides.
Arab countries have shown a serious desire for peace
and created a climate conducive to stimulating the
peace negotiations, but that will not continue
indefinitely.

On behalf of the Arab States, in September 2009
the State of Qatar addressed a letter to the United
States mediator seeking guarantees that Israel would go
along with the Arab position. Now, more than a year
later, the world has seen the radical positions of the
Israeli Government, which evades its internationally
agreed obligations and recently brought the
negotiations to a deadlock.

The Israeli Government persists in its policy of
illegal settlement in the occupied Palestinian territories
and the occupied Syrian Golan, in defiance of the
demands of the Arab Peace Initiative ministerial
follow-up committee in its statements. The latest such
statement was issued at the end of the meeting held on
8 October in the city of Sirte, Libya, under the
chairmanship of the State of Qatar, before the special
summit.

There is an international consensus that the
Palestinian issue will be resolved when there are two
States living side by side in peace. However, Israel's
expansion of settlements, particularly around East
Jerusalem, undermines the chances of achieving a two-
State solution based on the 1967 borders, and threatens
the contiguity of the Palestinian territory as one of the
basic components of statehood.

The Israeli Government seeks to justify the
expansion of settlement activity by pointing to so-
called natural growth. This concept is completely
unacceptable because the settlements are neither legal
nor the product of natural growth. The Israeli policy
encourages settlement in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly East Jerusalem, by providing
Government subsidies and incentives to encourage the
transfer of its civilian population to Palestinian
territory, in contravention of international law.

In addition, the international community should
not be deceived by the so-called temporary freeze on
settlement construction. It is necessary instead to stop
settlement activity and dismantle all settlements
established in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, in conformity with relevant United Nations
resolutions. A lasting, just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East can be based only on the principle of
land for peace, the terms of reference of relevant
Security Council and General Assembly decisions, and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which will have to be
reconsidered following a loss of confidence in Israel's
intentions.

We emphasize that it is essential to engage all
segments of the Palestinian population towards the
success of peace efforts, and that our Palestinian
brothers ought to do everything in their power to foster
national unity in the interests of the Palestinian people
and to guarantee the geographical and political unity of
the Palestinian territory. However, it is wrong to think
that the current crisis in the Palestinian national
dialogue is a Palestinian issue alone, since the parties
that called for the rejection of the results of the 2006
democratic elections caused a split in Palestinian ranks,
thus easing pressure on Israel, the occupying Power.
It is equally important to provide protection from
Israeli criminal acts, which are imprescriptible and
may require those liable to provide compensation
under international law. It is high time to take action to
ensure that such acts do not recur, particularly as they
are catalysts of international terrorism. Furthermore,
many of these acts are considered to be acts of
international terrorism and have not been forgotten by
the international community.

There is no need to describe these acts in detail,
as there have been so many such Israeli attacks on
many Arab countries, not to mention instances of
murder through espionage and maritime piracy, the
division of occupied territory and all-out military
aggression with internationally prohibited weapons.

It is of critical importance to break the illegal and
inhumane siege imposed on the people of Gaza as a
whole. Worse yet, Israel impedes the efforts of the
United Nations and others to rebuild what was
devastated by the Israeli military assault on the Gaza
Strip. Is this civilized behaviour?

We reiterate our firm rejection of the illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
and its attempts to change the Arab identity,
demographic composition, legal status and religious
character of the city. We stress that all these attempts
are null and void and without legal effect. The
international community must reject the attempts of the
Israeli Government to desecrate Islamic and Christian
holy sites, demolish houses in the city, expel its Arab
residents and withdraw their identities with the aim of
Judaizing the city. Such attempts violate the
obligations of Israel, the occupying Power, under
international law, are in contravention of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and undermine the
foundations of a peaceful solution of the Palestinian
issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict.

While the Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory
continues, we must point out the ongoing Israeli
violations of Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution
1701 (2006), which are summarized in the letters that
have been circulated by the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations. Those violations,
which are acts of provocation and arrogance, must end
if the Israeli Government does not seek to destabilize
the region, as it claims.

Moreover, Israel continues to occupy the Syrian
Golan Heights and to deplete its wealth. We reaffirm
here the decisions of the General Assembly declaring
the Israeli decision to annex the Golan invalid and call
for its return to Syria, the implementation of Security
Council resolution 497 (1981), and the return of the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories to Lebanon.

