Mr. Hasegawa: It is indeed a great pleasure for
me to address the Council on the progress made in
consolidating peace and building democratic
institutions in Timor-Leste. As guided by resolution
1573 (2004) of 16 November 2004, we have intensified
efforts to implement the exit strategy by increasing
Timorese involvement and ownership at all levels. At
the same time, following the suggestions of several
Council members, we have finalized the task of the
transition working groups to assess the
accomplishments and identify remaining challenges.

Today, let me first start with recent political and
security developments and then address the status of
the progress made in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). Finally, I will share with the
Council my own assessment of the remaining
challenges identified by the transition working groups.

The first elections since independence took place
in December 2004 in an atmosphere free of
intimidation for village chiefs and councils in the
districts of Bobonaro and Oecussi. The next round of
elections will be held in March in Lautem, Baucau and
Manatuto districts, followed by the remaining eight
districts from April to June.

On the diplomatic front, Timor-Leste has
continued to make progress in strengthening its
relations with neighbouring countries, particularly
Indonesia. Indonesia and Timor-Leste held a summit
meeting in December and enhanced the relationship of
mutual confidence and appreciation when President
Gusmao delivered to President Yudhoyono a check
from the people of Timor-Leste for tsunami relief
efforts. Recently, the two countries have established
the Truth and Friendship Commission to deal with,
among other things, crimes committed in 1999.

Tangible progress was also made in building
democratic institutions in Timor-Leste. The organic
law of the Superior Council for Defense and Security
was approved by Parliament on 14 February and
promulgated by the President on 17 February. The law,
together with the organic law of the Council of State,
represents another step in strengthening the principal
organs of sovereignty. The draft law on freedom of
assembly and demonstration is expected to be adopted
shortly. The Council of Ministers also approved on
9 February laws on foreign and domestic investments.
Another praiseworthy accomplishment of the
Government is the drafting of the law on the petroleum
fund, which will ensure accountability of petroleum
revenue management.

In spite of the tangible progress made on many
fronts, a number of major challenges indeed remain.
The most demanding challenge is the land-border
demarcation negotiations. A provisional line
comprising more than 95 per cent of the borderline has
been agreed upon at the technical level, yet it has not
been possible for the two countries to resolve the
remaining borderline issues and to establish a
transportation corridor linking Oecussi with the rest of
Timor-Leste.

As the second transition working group has
pointed out, the fight against corruption is a newly
emerging challenge for the country that requires not
only the formulation and implementation of legislation,
but also the establishment of ethical standards and a
culture of transparency and accountability. The
National Parliament is expected very shortly to appoint
a long-awaited Provedor for Human Rights and Justice.
That will be a big step towards governance based on
transparency and accountability not only for human
rights, but also in the fight against corruption.
Furthermore, I hope that it will be possible to adopt a
law on the office of the inspector general, along with
other laws to establish the high administrative, tax and
audit court and other administrative courts of first
instance.

Let me now turn to the status of the
implementation of the UNMISET mandate. On the first
programme - regarding institution-building - efforts
have continued to made and progress has been
registered. Some State institutions are now less
dependent on international experts. For example, the
total number of UNMISET international advisers in the
finance and banking institutions has declined from 35
two years ago, when I arrived in Timor-Leste, to 16
last year. By May of this year, we should be able to
reduce the number further, to nine. Nevertheless, it has
become clear that several ministries and State
institutions continue to require international advisers to
function effectively. That is most evident in justice,
legal and security matters, as well as in the finance and
monetary sector, where highly specialized expertise is
required. The Prime Minister has therefore requested
the retention of 58 "most critical" posts. While
recognizing the continuing need for many of those
posts, closer scrutiny on our part suggests that perhaps
45 posts may be sufficient.

In order to identify possible "responsible hands,"
we have embarked upon intense consultations with
bilateral and multilateral partners, including the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
World Bank. UNDP is making arrangements to make
available the resources to fund 9 out of 58 posts, but
only for a period of six months. The World Bank
intends to implement the planning and financial
capacity-building programme by early next year, when
it will know how many posts it can indeed fund. Other
than those promises, there has been no firm
commitment. Without some form of continued
international assistance, it is almost certain that several
State institutions will not be able to discharge their
sovereign functions adequately, if the most critical
civilian advisors are discontinued after May 2005. We
hope that bilateral development partners will be able to
make concrete commitments at the development
partners conference, which is to be held in Dili on
25 and 26 April.

I shall now turn to the second programme, on
support for the development of law enforcement in
Timor-Leste. United Nations police continue to play
their advisory role, focusing on the improvement of
policing capability, professional development and the
institutional strengthening of the Timor-Leste national
police. The professional skill development plan is now
concluding its second phase of training national police
officers in all 13 districts. United Nations police
advisers are working closely with bilateral partners on
developing the national police of Timor-Leste,
including through the Timor-Leste Police Development
Project - which is sponsored jointly by Australia and
the United Kingdom - the delivery of the "training
the trainers" course and the design of a course for
station commanders.

Despite significant progress made in training
officers of the Timor-Leste national police on human
rights issues, the excessive use of force and
professional misconduct by the national police remain
major challenges. Technical advisers of the United
Nations police are advising and training national police
officers to deal with a large backlog of professional
ethics cases at the headquarters of the national police.

Let me now turn to the third programme, on the
security and stability of the country. Timor-Leste has
remained relatively calm and stable, but the operational
environment remains fragile. Members of the Timor-
Leste national police and the Timor-Leste national
defence forces (F-FDTL) have clashed in recent
months. Armed elements with possible links to ex-
militia groups made incursions into Timor-Leste in
January and February, posing a potential threat to the
security of the country. The border remains difficult to
control, and illegal trading, smuggling and illegal
crossings continue to take place. There is a need to
enhance the border-management capacity of the Border
Patrol Unit (BPU).

The absence of an agreed border and a legal
framework to manage the border after 20 May 2005
will add considerably to that problem. Despite our
hopes, it remains highly unlikely that a final land-
border agreement can be concluded by 20 May. The
critical vulnerability remains the effectiveness of the
Border Patrol Unit to maintain the security situation
along the border. The BPU assumed border
management responsibilities on 20 May 2004, but has
not yet gained sufficient experience, confidence or
capacity to manage border affairs alone, without the
support of United Nations military liaison groups. Its
relationship with the Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI)
is still at an initial stage of development, relying
heavily on the facilitation of military liaison officers.

The UNMISET military component will continue

to assist with the development of the F-FDTL through
its skills and knowledge transfer programme, covering
five training modules. That programme complements
various existing bilateral arrangements. At the same
time, the military component is also assisting the
development of the BPU, in cooperation with United
Nations police. The military liaison group began
providing six training courses out of a total of 23
modules, which will conclude in March. In view of the
lack of adequate border arrangements and the
insufficient capacity of national security agencies, I
consider it necessary to retain at least 35 military
liaison officers.

The success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Timor-Leste was largely due to
Indonesia's genuine acceptance of the independence of
Timor-Leste and the determination of the people and
the leaders of Timor-Leste to build peace and stability
anchored on the principles of democratic governance.
It is in that context that the international community
may need to address the remaining challenges.
According to the findings of the transition working
groups, there remain major challenges in four areas:
security and stability; the development of police
capability; the public administration and justice
system; and human rights and promotion of good
governance. All of those are important in the post-
conflict situation. If the United Nations totally
withdraws the military liaison officers and police
trainers upon the completion of UNMISET's mandate,
on 20 May, Timor-Leste may face insurmountable
challenges on its path towards peace and stability. I
therefore fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to maintain a United Nations mission,
with an appropriately scaled-down structure as
described in the report before the Council (8/2005/99),
for a period of up to 12 months, until 20 May 2006.
That period could be shortened if, within that time
frame, bilateral and multilateral arrangements are
identified to assume the critical responsibilities
currently performed by UNMISET.

Just before I departed Dili for New York, legal
advisers brought to my attention the urgent need to lay
out basic legal frameworks for several ministries.
Similarly, the Timorese authorities have asked me how
they can combat emerging corruption by not only
strictly adhering to the rule of law but also
implementing disciplinary measures. Here is a country
that has been created by the United Nations and whose
national leaders are eager to build transparent and
accountable State institutions. And they are asking for
continued support from the Security Council, which
they consider to be their guardian. In a separate
meeting with the Secretary of Defence and the
commanders of the East Timorese national defence
force (F-FDTL), they pleaded that the United Nations
not abandon them, reminding me that the national
defence force had been created by the United Nations
under the leadership of the late Sergio Vieira de Mello
when he was exercising sovereign power.

Before I conclude my statement, let me comment
briefly on the serious-crimes process. The prosecutors
made strenuous efforts and ended all investigations in
November 2004. The trials will be completed by May
of this year, as mandated by Security Council
resolution 1543 (2004). The Serious Crimes Unit and
the Special Panels are in the process of preparing a
database that will allow electronic searches of all of the
Unit's cases. Increasing national ownership remains
important, as approximately 340 indicted persons
remain outside Timor-Leste and may return in the
coming years.

It is clear that the serious-crimes process will not
be able to respond fully to the desire for justice on
behalf of all the victims of the 1999 violence. In that
regard, the Secretary-General has established a
commission of experts that will assess the outcome of
the two judicial processes under way in Jakarta and
Dili. The commission of experts will also consider
ways in which its analysis could be of assistance to the
Truth and Friendship Commission. I look forward to
receiving the commission's recommendations to the
Secretary-General.

The tolerance of the people of Timor-Leste and
the balanced leadership exercised by President Kay
Rala Xanana Gusmao, Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri,
National Parliament President Francisco "Lu-Olo"
Guterres and Foreign Minister Jose Ramos-Horta have
enabled Timor-Leste to move forward steadily on its
path to peace and stability. It is clear from my close
interaction with the Timorese leaders how much they
appreciate and respect the constructive role played by
the United Nations. I am most pleased today to see
Timorese Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta and
Ambassador Jose Luis Guterres in this Chamber.

Finally, I wish to express my appreciation for the
valuable work carried out by my Deputy, Atul Khare,
and by all the staff in the civilian, police and military
components of UNMISET for their dedicated efforts in
discharging the mandate of the Mission in its
consolidation phase.

