Let me start by congratulating Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for convening this timely debate. Portugal aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union (annex 31) and would like to convey the following additional remarks. As per Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council is mandated to "determine the existence of any threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression". As the threats that we face change and evolve, so must the scope of the threats considered by the Security Council, so that it may carry out its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Climate change, for instance, is not only a sustainable development issue but also a security issue. It is at the intersection between those areas, where the threats exacerbate each other, that we should focus our collective action. Portugal, a member of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security, welcomes the fact that these issues are being debated in the Security Council. Countries that are most in need, as well as populations in situations of vulnerability, are already aware of the impact on their security posed by emerging and complex challenges such as climate change, water scarcity, food insecurity, biodiversity loss, pandemics, hate speech, disinformation, terrorism and organized crime, among others. That is evident when persistent drought or erratic climate patterns cause food insecurity, when underdevelopment hinders responses to pandemics, when sea levels rise and when people are faced with threats to their very livelihoods. Even if these are not the direct causes of intercommunal violence and conflict, they are certainly drivers of conflict and insecurity. It is also true that countries that are already in conflict situations or in contexts of fragility cannot properly address these challenges on their own. It is not enough to adopt a reactive attitude towards international security. In line with the Secretary-General's preventive agenda, early action mechanisms such as the Climate Security Mechanism are good practices, and their work should inform the work of all relevant United Nations entities, including the Security Council. A holistic approach to peace and security that bridges information, analysis and practices across the whole United Nations system is of critical importance. The Charter of the United Nations stands the test of time as the Organization was built upon three interdependent pillars of equal importance - human rights, peace and security and development. A cross-pillar approach is therefore truly necessary. Having the United Nations deliver as one will be essential in the efforts to recover from the global impacts of the current pandemic. Building back better must mobilize the whole of the international community in a spirit of genuine cooperation, without silos or turf wars and without overlapping and wasteful duplications. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change clearly outline the road ahead. We should ensure that the process is inclusive, particularly with regard to women, and collectively strive for their full implementation by developing partnerships and mobilizing resources to that end. The ongoing review of the peacebuilding architecture also confirms the importance of the holistic approach of reforms undertaken and the need to focus on implementation. Through its convening and advisory roles, the Peacebuilding Commission presents a unique framework to ensure that our collective action is sensitive to these contemporary challenges and the need to bridge the action of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council. We have the architecture, the plans and the foundations. We have multilateralism as the most reliable cement. What we mostly need now is to pool our work and resources together and act.
