Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It gives
me great personal pleasure, Sir, to see you presiding
over the Security Council today as head of Ghanaian
diplomacy and to read out to the Security Council a
statement by His Excellency Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, who, due to the situation in the Middle East, is
unfortunately unable to participate in this important
meeting in person, in response to your kind invitation.
His statement reads as follows.

"Mr. President, I wish to express to you
personally and to the Government of sisterly
Ghana my gratitude and appreciation for your

initiative in calling for this important meeting of
the Security Council at the ministerial level to
debate peace consolidation in West Africa, which
is a significant component of our efforts to
achieve peace and stability in the African
continent and of the maintenance of international
peace and security. This initiative, taken together
with that of the United Republic of Tanzania last
January on peace, security and development in
the Great Lakes region, testifies to the importance
that African countries attach to assuming a
leading role in the settlement of their regional and
subregional problems and to contributing
effectively to meeting the aspirations of both
Africa and the international community.

"Egypt is strongly committed to working
with its brothers and sisters in Africa to achieve
peace, stability and development. As a current
member of the African Union's Peace and
Security Council and the Organizational
Committee of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission, Egypt attaches great importance to
reinforcing the regional approach in addressing
peace consolidation. To that end, Egypt believes
in the need to develop and strengthen the
institutional partnership between the African
Union and the African subregional organizations
on the one hand, and the United Nations on the
other.

"However, in order to ensure the success of
such institutional relationships and to increase its
potential to achieve its objectives, the requisite
partnership must be based on a comprehensive
vision for peace consolidation that addresses the
concept of peace in an integrated manner,
including the security, political, development,
cultural, social, and human dimensions and
ensuring the coordination of the efforts and roles
of all influential actors. All that should be
founded on the principles and purposes enshrined
in the United Nations Charter and the principles
of international law. Such a comprehensive
approach to peace is the only sure way to prevent
conflict and relapse into conflict, as well as to
ensure security, stability and development in
Africa.

"Despite the important role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security, experience has shown that there are
limits to the capacity and role of the Council in
addressing the requirements of the transition from
conflict to comprehensive development,
particularly as it has repeatedly hesitated to open
channels of genuine and effective coordination
with the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the relevant regional and
subregional organizations.

"Consequently, the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory
intergovernmental forum for coordinating the
efforts and roles of the organs and actors capable
of contributing to peace consolidation was an
important achievement for the United Nations
and for Africa. Egypt, as the coordinator for the
African Group in New York on that issue,
supported the initiative and contributed to all
stages of its realization. I am confident that the
substance and conclusions of our discussions
today will enrich the prospective discussions of
the Peacebuilding Commission on Sierra Leone
in particular, as well as its future thematic
discussions relevant to peace consolidation in
Africa in general.

"Allow me now to lay out Egypt's views on
the elements proposed by you, Sir, as the focus of
our discussions today, as contained in the
valuable concept paper that was distributed
earlier and on which I congratulate you.

"West Africa has undoubtedly entered a new
phase in the settlement of the conflicts that
hampered its potential over the past decade. The
achievement in Sierra Leone in the past few years
is a model for the convergence of the will of its
people, together with their neighbours in other
West African States, the African Union and the
international community, as represented by the
United Nations, the European Union and other
partners. Equally encouraging are the confident
steps taken by Liberia on the same path to peace
and national reconciliation, which will enable it
to achieve the required peace and stability.

"Moreover, we believe that with more
international economic and technical support,
Guinea-Bissau should witness increasing political
stability and sustainable development. We are
also confident that the wisdom and the will of the
united people of Cote d'Ivoire will enable it to
transcend its temporary plight with the help and
support of the African Union. All those
developments prove that West Africa is set to take
a major political, security and economic leap,
supported primarily by the firm resolve and
resilience of its peoples and their aspirations to
own their future and to espouse a spirit of
tolerance and reconciliation, together with their
efforts to reinforce the rule of law and the
foundations of democracy and to expand their
political and economic participation.

"Equally important is the need to address
cross-border issues with implications for regional
stability, such as the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and its links to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources; the recruitment
of mercenaries; improved settlement of the status
and future of refuges; the settlement of land
ownership disputes; and other issues that could
fuel conflicts and wars in the subregion.

"To that end, we need to adopt a two-tiered
integrated strategy for peacebuilding and peace
consolidation. The first tier should focus on the
direct and individual needs of the countries under
consideration, while the second tier should
address the needs of West Africa from a
subregional perspective aimed at enhancing
cooperation among the West African States in the
areas of security and economic development and
at supporting the pioneering role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
those areas.

"As for the direct needs of individual
countries, the proposed peacebuilding strategy
must emanate from a national vision presented by
the country under consideration, depicting its
own priorities in a manner that would allow for
the most efficient coordination among the various
contributing actors, with the aim of capitalizing
on the existing political momentum and available
resources. We expect the Peacebuilding
Commission to play a lead role in ensuring such
coordination. Moreover, past experience has
shown that the point of departure for achieving
sustainable peace is the institutional, human and
legislative capacity-building of the country
emerging from conflict, in parallel with the
rehabilitation of public services, such as
education, health and security. We need to ensure
parallel progress on both tracks of peacebuilding.

"I wish to emphasize, in that context, that
the success of any regional or international effort
is linked to the degree to which such efforts
correspond to the nature and specificities of the
country under consideration and to which they
avoid the imposition of uniform models,
concepts, approaches and ideas that do not take
those specificities into account and that could be
interpreted as an attempt to impose trusteeship on
those countries, thus rendering all such efforts
counterproductive to the objective of sustainable
peace. Egypt insists that any approach to
addressing the needs and requirements of
countries emerging from conflict must reinforce
national ownership of all peacebuilding activities
and related concepts.

"Moving to the second tier of the integrated
strategy, aimed at meeting subregional
requirements for peace consolidation, we believe
in the importance of further enhancing the roles
played by the African Union and ECOWAS in the
establishment of a system of security and
integration based on respect for the sovereignty
of States over their own territory, including
measures to secure borders against the illicit
trafficking of arms and other illegal commercial
activities. In that respect, in cooperation with the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Africa, from 17 to 19 June 2006, Egypt hosted a
meeting of an international working group on
combating the illicit exploitation of the
non-natural resources in Africa. We believe that
such measures must also include the initiation of
an early warning system capable of containing
conflicts by capitalizing on regional good offices,
the completion of ongoing efforts to establish a
stand-by force for the purposes of peacekeeping
and rapid deployment, and enhancing cooperation
in the area of exchange of information and
experience on lessons learned from the
management of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Other measures aimed
at encouraging trade and facilitating movement
across borders for the purpose of social and
commercial exchange are also of immense
significance.
"All such measures would also require
strong support from the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and the donor
countries through the provision of technical and
financial assistance, as well as other necessary
expertise and support, to the African Union and
ECOWAS in order to enable both organizations to
discharge their roles in that sphere.

"Egypt maintains high-profile relations with
all West African States and is committed to
enhancing their capacity to achieve their national
priorities and interests through existing bilateral
mechanisms. The Egyptian Fund for Technical
Cooperation with Africa is one important
mechanism in that area and is currently preparing
to support the reintegration programme in Liberia
through small projects aimed at providing
employment opportunities to demobilized
elements and to contribute to security sector
reform and capacity-building for the Liberian
national police. Egypt remains prepared to
support the efforts of its sisters and brothers in
West Africa in their quest to build and
consolidate comprehensive and sustainable peace
that would fulfil their aspirations."

