The Dominican Republic decided to abstain in the consideration of resolution 2533 (2020), submitted by the co-penholders of the humanitarian file, regarding the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. At the outset, I would like to reiterate in the strongest terms the full support of the Dominican Republic to Germany and Belgium. To Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Christoph Heusgen and their teams, I say that in no way has this decision anything to do with the role that they tenaciously and patiently performed as co-penholders. This is a decision based uniquely on the following points. We are disappointed that the Security Council has once again been unable to collectively and constructively address one of the greatest humanitarian tragedies of our time. The humanitarian needs of the people in Syria are dire. Ten years of conflict have had devastating impacts on the civilian population, including women, children and particularly the displaced. From its creation up to now, the cross-border mechanism has been a lifeline for them. Now, amid a global pandemic, coupled with the looming possibility of yet another offensive and a devastating economic situation, Syrians could be facing yet another chapter in their nightmare, maybe the worst. Yet the Council has turned its back on that reality. Although we renewed the mechanism, we were not up to the immense challenge that was put in our hands. Our failure to reopen the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah and our decision to close the Bab Al-Salam crossing will have terrible consequences for the lives of hundreds of thousands of children. Who are we to determine their future? Are we not supposed to facilitate the humanitarian assistance and the protection they are entitled to? To whom will they turn now that so many services they were receiving thanks to the cross-border mechanism have been shut? The flagrant politicization of the decision that we just took is not one of which we should be proud. We still hope that the Council will be able to overcome the many differences, divisions and fears that prevent it from taking principled, people- centred humanitarian decisions.
