The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 868
(1993) and expresses its grave concern at the recent
increase in attacks and the use of force against United
Nations and other personnel associated with United
Nations operations, as well as personnel of
international humanitarian organizations, including
murder, physical and psychological threats, hostage
taking, shooting at vehicles and aircraft, mine-laying,
looting of assets and other hostile acts. The Council is
also gravely concerned at attacks on and violations of
United Nations premises. The Council is concerned
that these attacks and the use of force have in some
instances been carried out by certain groups with the
deliberate goal of disrupting negotiating processes,
international peacekeeping activities and hampering
humanitarian access.

"The Security Council reiterates its condemnation
of such acts. It emphasizes the unacceptability of any
acts endangering the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel, as well as personnel
of international humanitarian organizations. The
Council urges all Member States and others concerned
to prevent and bring to an end all such acts. It stresses
that the perpetrators of such acts bear responsibility
for their actions and should be prosecuted.

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
of ensuring the safety and security of United Nations
and associated personnel, as well as the inviolability
of United Nations premises which are essential to the
continuation and successful implementation of United
Nations operations. In this context it emphasizes that
the host country and others concerned must take all
appropriate steps to ensure the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and premises. It reiterates
that the cooperation of all Member States and others
concerned is indispensable for the mandates of
United Nations operations to be carried out and
demands that they respect fully the status of United
Nations and associated personnel.

"The Security Council supports all efforts
effectively to promote and protect the safety and
security of United Nations and associated personnel.
In this context the Council recalls the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, adopted by the General Assembly on 9
December 1994.

"The Security Council pays tribute to all
military, police and civilian staff of United Nations
and other personnel associated with United Nations
operations, as well as personnel of international
humanitarian organizations, for their courageous
efforts to achieve peace and to alleviate the suffering
of the people living in conflict areas."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 pm.
