Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and timely report on the situation in
Liberia (S/ 1995/ 881). In our View, his report represents a
fair assessment of developments on the ground in Liberia
since the Council adopted resolution 1014 (1995), on 15
September. The momentum for peace in Liberia is greater
today than at any other time since the war began in 1989,
and now that the peace process in Liberia has entered a
new and crucial phase a concrete expression of
international support is required as a matter of urgency.

The recent positive developments, particularly since
the signing of the Abuja Agreement in August this year,
have given my Government cause to be optimistic. Over
the past two months, the Liberian parties have re-
established a cease-fire, installed a Council of State and
shown a greater willingness to take concrete steps towards
the restoration of peace and stability in their country.
These are remarkable achievements and, as a result, a real
opportunity now exists for ensuring that the peace process
in Liberia becomes irreversible. These encouraging signs
in the peace process need to be highlighted.

At the same time, we are concerned about some
negative actions of the parties, particularly the cease-fire

 

violations and the slow progress of disengagement of
forces, as well as delays in removing checkpoints in certain
areas. We have drawn this to the attention of the Liberian
parties and urged them to take immediate steps to remove
these obstacles.
We also realize that the true test of the commitment of
the parties to peace lies ahead, when the process of the
assembly, disarmament and demobilization of over 60,000
combatants commences. While the main responsibility for
the implementation of the peace agreement rests with the
Liberian parties, the critical phase of disarmament and
demobilization requires the assistance and support of the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL) and all the leaders of the region.

In this regard, Nigeria has decided to increase its
contingent in ECOMOG by two battalions and we have
disbursed additional funds for the procurement of
communications and other vital equipment for ECOMOG.
None the less, our efforts in the region need to be
supplemented by those of the international community to
provide ECOMOG with the logistical support, assistance in
transportation and communications equipment and fuel that
will enable it to discharge its functions effectively. In this
regard, we can only recall that, for UNOMIL to discharge
its functions, ECOMOG must be in a position effectively to
undertake its own primary assignment.

It is in this connection that we thank the Secretary-
General for organizing the recent Conference on Assistance
to Liberia. We are encouraged by the initial response to the
appeal and we look forward to a timely disbursement of
those commitments, so that the momentum so generated
does not fizzle out owing to a long delay between the
pledges and actual disbursement.

We support the proposed adjustment to the mandate of
UNOMIL as well as its new concept of operations. The
recommendations and proposals contained in the report of
the Secretary-General have taken account of the evolution
of the problem in Liberia and the current realities, which
are very different from what they were at the time of the
signing of the Cotonou Agreement. The Secretary-General' s
proposals and recommendations which we are about to
approve through this draft resolution would, in our view,
enhance the ability of UNOMIL effectively to complement
ECOMOG in the peace process.

My delegation agrees with the conclusion in the
Secretary-General's report that it is ultimately the people
and leaders of Liberia who must give peace a chance. It
is also true, however, that, because of the delicate and
positive stage of the peace process in that country, the
international community should give peace a chance by a
renewed determination to help Liberians help themselves.

