Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes today's discussion on security sector governance and reform. We commend South A frica through you, Mr. President, for this initiative, and we thank the briefers for their insightful remarks. The complex security challenges facing our world today can be successfully resolved only through integrated and coherent strategies that address the root causes of insecurity, strengthen social cohesion and bolster national ownership of political and peace processes. Security sector governance and reform play a central role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace by streamlining critical governance functions and reordering institutional arrangements to promote stability, enhance community engagement, build public trust and create an environment conducive to national development plans and priorities. In conflict-affected countries, especially those that suffer the deleterious effects of armed group activity, security sector reform has an important normative impact. As those with the responsibility for protecting civilians, upholding the rule of law and providing security become more organized and professionalized, a culture of security permeates throughout society as people become predisposed to building lasting, peaceful and stable relationships. Such mending of the social fabric can be facilitated only through effective, transparent and accountable institutions that are responsive to the needs of citizens. It is therefore essential that all security sector governance and reform efforts be based on inclusive public consultations that allow for the engagement of all segments of society, including civil society organizations, women and youth advocacy groups, faith-based organizations, academia and the private sector, as well as regional and subregional organizations and other partners that assist Member States with their reform agendas. We welcome the capacity-building assistance provided to conflict- affected countries in the areas of police, justice and corrections through the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law, as well as the programmatic activities of the Peacebuilding Commission. To maximize the impact of security sector governance and reform, these initiatives must be linked to wider development efforts to enhance the judicial and legislative system, improve training and education and address structural barriers to social, economic and political participation. In that regard, it is crucial that a holistic view of the drivers of conflict across the peace and security, development and humanitarian nexus be incorporated into the reform process. The effects of contemporary drivers of insecurity, such as climate change, environmental degradation, health crises and cyberactivity, should not be overlooked. It must also be highlighted that the positive social changes envisaged through these initiatives can never be externally imposed - they ought to emerge organically from within the State with the support of those actors who have the expertise and contextual understanding of local and regional security dynamics. There can be no one-size-fits-all approach to security sector governance and reform. These processes must be context-specific and structured around the unique histories, cultures, politics and the material circumstances of development that exist within each particular country. In the light of the foregoing, we underscore the importance of the African Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform and the range of measures spearheaded by the African Union (AU) to enhance continental peace and security, including the Silencing the Guns initiative and the AU's Agenda 2063. We encourage closer collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union in providing operational guidance to those peacekeeping operations mandated to provide security sector reform assistance to host-countries in Africa. We also encourage the donor community to increase its efforts to provide predictable, reliable and sustainable financing to security sector reform initiatives through their overseas development assistance programmes. In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes that all security sector governance and reform efforts must place people at the centre. Security architecture must provide protection and access to justice for all, without discrimination, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As we commence this important Decade of Action for the Sustainable Development Goals, let us recommit ourselves to building a more peaceful and prosperous world.
