The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Kazakhstan, Lebanon,
Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Norway,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer ofthe Observer State ofPalestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General; and Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

Mr. Mladenov is joining today's meeting via video-
teleconference from Jerusalem.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge d'affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Saikal,
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.

