Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Ambassador Pierce and her team for their
effective and efficient presidency of the Council last
month. Their time management was commendable.
Secondly, we warmly congratulate you, Madam
President, and your team on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Let me assure
you of the support of our Mission and of my personal
support for your presidency in this ambitious month.

We welcome the opportunity to discuss the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations with regard to the
situation in Nicaragua. We thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke
and Mr. Felix Maradiaga for their valuable briefings.

Historically, warm relations have existed between
the peoples of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
of Nicaragua. That is the premise of our continued
engagement with Nicaragua and why we have had
intense conversations with Minister Moncada about
our deep concerns with regard to recent developments
in Nicaragua. We welcome Nicaragua's Minister for
Foreign Affairs to the Council today and believe that
dialogue is a crucial element of prevention. We thank
him for being here with us.

I will focus on three issues today: first, our concerns
about the situation in Nicaragua; secondly, the issue of
prevention and, thirdly, support for mediation efforts.

My first point involves our concerns about the
current situation. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
deeply concerned about unfolding events in Nicaragua
since 18 April. More than 350 people have been killed
and more than 2,000 people have been wounded since
then. The Government has not protected its civilians.
It has not guaranteed the right to peaceful protest. It
has not protected freedom of the press. On the contrary,
there have been many serious human rights violations,
including the disproportionate use of violence,
extrajudicial killings and disappearances. According
to reliable sources, a majority of those crimes has
been perpetrated by Government officials, para-police
groups and armed third persons. We are specifically
concerned about the violence, repression and arbitrary
detentions that have been taking place since the start of
those protests. In addition, there are signs that access
to health care for protesters has been obstructed, while
more than 100 medical personnel have been dismissed.
We have a simple message - the repression must stop.

That brings me to my second point: the issue of
prevention. We welcome the fact that we are discussing
the situation in Nicaragua in the Security Council
today, and we see this as an opportunity for dialogue.
We therefore welcome the briefing by Mr. Maradiaga,
and we look forward to the statement to be delivered
by Minister Moncada. Early warning and conflict
prevention are important priorities for the Kingdom
of the Netherlands. We see a key role for the Security
Council to play in conflict prevention by addressing root
causes, such as human rights violations. The Council
should therefore support preventive and mediation
efforts with regard to the situation in Nicaragua, with
a view to sustaining stability and promoting peace in
the region.

That brings me to my third point: the role of
local and regional organizations. In our view, the
engagement of local and regional actors is essential to
addressing the current crisis. We applaud the hard work
of the Bishops of the Catholic Church in Nicaragua
as mediator. We applaud the important efforts of the
Organization of American States (OAS) to support the
dialogue in Nicaragua. We also welcomed the early
invitations by the Nicaraguan authorities to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Inter-American Commission for Human
Rights and the European Union to visit Nicaragua and
support the dialogue.

However, the lack of progress regarding the
dialogue is worrying. We regret the decision of the
Nicaraguan Government to terminate the presence
of the mission of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which runs contrary to the spirit of dialogue and
the principles of full accountability for human rights
violations and securing justice for victims of violence.
We expect the authorities to seriously consider the
findings of the High Commissioner and to take urgent
action to implement recommendations in his report. We
urge the Nicaraguan authorities to fully cooperate with
the relevant international organizations and to provide
the necessary access to information. The independent
investigation into human rights violations is paramount
to a sustainable solution. Perpetrators of human rights
violations must be brought to justice.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands, in that
regard, supports the activities of the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, as well as those of
the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts
of the OAS, which aim at strengthening Nicaraguan
institutions and contributing to investigations into
recent violent events. We urge Nicaragua to fully
cooperate with the OAS and the United Nations.

I should like to conclude my statement in Spanish.
(spoke in Spanish)

We call on the Nicaraguan authorities to immediately
cease the violence and to protect their citizens and
their right to peaceful protest. We welcome and further
encourage the firm engagement of the Organization of
American States and other regional actors in addressing
the current situation. We call on the Nicaraguan
authorities to implement the recommendations made
by the Inter-American Commission for Human
Rights and by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights without delay, and in particular to
take all the steps necessary to reactivate the dialogue
on democratization and justice, which will pave the
way to a sustainable peaceful solution to the situation
in Nicaragua.

