Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At the outset, let me warmly welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica. I also warmly welcome His Excellency the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, who has just
joined us. I wish him every success in his new
functions.
Let me also welcome Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and
thank him for the briefing he has just given us. My
delegation takes note of the report he has submitted to
us. As a party to the Statute of the International
Criminal Court and as a member of the Security
Council, Burkina Faso has closely followed the
activities of the Court. It attaches the greatest
importance to its efficient functioning and to
compliance with Council resolutions.

Given the complexity of the conflict in Darfur
and the seriousness of the crimes at issue, the task of
the Court is very delicate and difficult. That is
evidenced by the fact that almost two years elapsed
between the opening of the initial inquiry, on 1 June
2005, and the issuance of the first arrest warrants, on
27 April 2007. It is for that reason that this matter as a
whole must be addressed with the highest degree of
caution, rigour, impartiality and patience, while the
approach must be strictly legal.

We regret the delays experienced by the
mechanisms established by the Government of the
Sudan to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes. Given
that those mechanisms must play an important role in
revealing the truth and prosecuting the guilty, we call
on the Government of the Sudan to take all the
necessary steps to ensure that they begin to function
quickly and effectively.

My delegation believes that no solution must be
excluded and no effort spared to shed light on the
crimes committed in Darfur and to prosecute the
perpetrators. However, those goals cannot be achieved
unless the Government of the Sudan and the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court maintain a
constructive dialogue and strengthen their working
relationship.

As indicated in paragraph 46 of the Prosecutor's
report, a number of States and international
organizations - including the African Union and the
League of Arab States - are cooperating with the
Court. That proves that the international community is
concerned about the crimes committed in Darfur and
the crucial need to ensure the protection of civilians in
the region and throughout the Sudan.

Despite numerous efforts by the United Nations
and the whole of the international community, the
conflict in Darfur is continuing, with civilians being
the first and principal victims. We therefore once again
appeal to all actors to respect the lives of civilians and
to allow humanitarian access, in accordance with their
obligations under legal instruments on the protection of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

In that regard, we recognize that the Government
of the Sudan is primarily responsible for the security of
its civilians. We nevertheless believe that significant
progress in the deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur will
contribute to alleviating the suffering of civilians in
Darfur.

The crimes committed in Darfur, as elsewhere,
should not go unpunished. To that end, all parties
should cooperate with the International Criminal Court
in order to render justice to the victims and to ensure
that the perpetrators are punished.

Nevertheless, the only way to put an end to those
crimes continues to be the advent of lasting peace in
Darfur, in the Sudan in general and in the subregion.
We urge the participants in the various conflicts to
dedicate themselves to that goal; and we call on
neighbouring countries, regional and subregional
organizations and the entire international community to
assist them in good faith to that end.

