Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Sir, I would like to thank you for this
opportunity for non-members of the Security Council
to express their viewpoints on the situation in the
Middle East and the Palestinian question. I would also
like to congratulate you on your work as President of
the Council for the month of January. Allow me as well
to thank in particular the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his
thorough briefing this morning. We would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been in the
agenda of the Security Council for more than 60 years.
Taking into account the time that has passed and the
situation of instability that it provokes, it is of high
priority to achieve a lasting peace in that region, which
would lead to the establishment of a viable, democratic
and contiguous Palestinian State, living side by side
with Israel, in peace and security, in conformity with
Security Council resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Argentina recognizes the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to build a viable and
independent State. In this regard, we insist that Israel
must cease its military operations in the occupied
territories, as well as all practices that contravene
international law, ending its policy of illegal
settlements and the construction of the wall. We also
recognize the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours, within safe and internationally
recognized borders, and, at the same time, we condemn
terrorist actions of Palestinian armed groups against
the Israeli civilian population.

Argentina believes that restarting the peace
process will require the support of the international
community, as well as the active mediation of the
United States, with a view to putting an end to illegal
settlements, finding a solution to the Jerusalem issue
and promoting international support for addressing the
question of possible compensation for Palestinian
refugees. In this context, Argentina values the efforts
of the United States Middle East Envoy, George
Mitchell, to restart the peace talks with a view to
making effective progress towards the establishment of
two States as a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We also believe that the Arab League's land
for peace proposal contains a core of initiatives that
could help the peace process move forward, and we
hope Israel will take them into consideration.

We also express our disappointment at the
difficulties that appear as we try to move ahead with
the peace process and resolve all the final status issues,
including Jerusalem. In this regard, Argentina is
concerned about high-level Israeli authorities' expressed
refusal to freeze the building of settlements and
proclamation of Israel's presence in the Jordan Valley.
On another issue, my country has repeatedly expressed
its concern with the deepening humanitarian crisis
affecting the Palestinian people and by the failure to
implement resolution 1860 (2009); because of this, we
participated actively in the donor conferences in Paris
in December 2007 and Sharm el-Sheikh in March.

After the Israeli attack on Gaza between
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, the Human
Rights Council decided to set up a Fact-Finding Mission
for Gaza, which produced the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48). At its sixty-fourth session, the General
Assembly, with the positive votes of 114 members,
among them Argentina, adopted its resolution 64/ 10,
endorsing the report of the Human Rights Council,
which approved the Goldstone report and called on the
parties to carry out credible investigations into the
events that led to the convening of the twelfth special
session of the Council and the subsequent report.

Argentina's vote in this regard must be
considered in the context of our own recent history,
which prompts Argentina, in every appropriate forum,
to support objective and complete investigations when
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law are in question. In accordance with
our principles and convictions, we could not refuse to
support the request that the United Nations investigate
accusations of war crimes on both sides during
Operation Cast Lead.

We hope that this open debate of the Security
Council will provide a new impetus for restarting the
Middle East peace process, which requires the strong
and determined support and commitment of the
international community.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that
Argentina's commitment to human rights and the fight
against impunity has led it to become a member of the
Task Force for International Cooperation on Holocaust
Education, Remembrance and Research. On this
International Day of Commemoration in Memory of
the Victims of the Holocaust, we would like in this
forum to pay tribute to the victims, as we do every year
in our country.
