Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak in this second open debate of your
presidency. We very much appreciate the opportunity
to contribute to the Council's consideration of such
vital matters in this way. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing, and
to welcome the participation in the debate of Foreign
Minister Al-Malki.

Many countries today have spoken about the
conflict in Gaza and southern Israel in December and
January. We spoke in this Council during that conflict,
and we were deeply saddened by the tragic events.
Australia supports Israel's right to self-defence, and
supports it strongly. Rocket attacks must cease.

This does not alter, however, our fundamental
concern over the humanitarian situation of the civilians
of Gaza before, during and after the conflict. We called
on parties during the conflict to avoid actions which
caused unnecessary suffering to civilians, and we call
on the parties now to act to prevent the continuing
humanitarian crisis - a situation that is unacceptable.
We call for border controls to be eased. Equally, arms
smuggling must stop. During the conflict, Australia
said consistently that all parties had to do everything
they could, legally and morally, to ensure that civilian
casualties were avoided. Australia has also made it
clear, at the time and since then, that it supported a
proper investigation of any allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

It is crucial that such matters be dealt with
seriously and carefully. For this reason, Australia again
calls on the parties to undertake the proper
investigation of the allegations that have been made
concerning all violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. We outlined in Geneva
on 29 September our preference that consideration of
the report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission
on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/ 12/48) remain within the
Human Rights Council to allow the parties time to
pursue those investigations.

The ineluctable lesson that must be drawn from
the Gaza conflict is that a lasting resolution of the
Israel-Palestinian dispute can be brought about only
through peaceful means. All efforts to secure a just and
enduring peace in the Middle East must be pursued by
all of us as a matter of compelling urgency. Australia's
long-standing position is that peace between Israel and
the Palestinians has to be predicated on a two-State
solution, where both Israelis and Palestinians can exist
in peace and security within their own defined borders.
The parties must honour the agreements they have
already entered into, including the Road Map for
peace. Israel must halt settlement activity and work to
normalize the day-to-day life of Palestinians. In turn,
the Palestinians must continue to dismantle terrorist
infrastructure and halt violence and incitement.

We commend the United States efforts and the
commitment of President Obama and his team, and we
call on the parties to resume negotiations urgently. The
ongoing positive engagement of the broader
international community, including the Quartet
members and the countries of the region, is clearly also
essential. As we have said previously, we recognize
and value the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative.

In the interests of time, I would draw attention to
my distributed remarks and, in conclusion, say that
Australia strongly supports the peace process and is
contributing to the development of Palestinian
institutions as well as providing humanitarian
assistance. Since late 2007, we have given more than
$75 million in development and humanitarian
assistance and will continue to provide a high level of
assistance. We urge all parties to work towards a just
and enduring resolution of this terrible conflict, and we
stand ready to continue to provide what help we can to
support such an outcome.

