Mr. Insulza: I would like to begin by greeting
the Argentinian presidency of the Security Council,
led today by Her Excellency Cristina Fernandez de
Kirchner. I would like to thank her for giving us the
opportunity to share our experience of regional and
subregional efforts in the area of international peace
and security.

Article 1 of the Charter of the Organization of
American States (OAS) stipulates that "[w]ithin the
United Nations, the Organization of American States is
a regional agency". Article 2 adds that the Organization,

"in order to put into practice the principles on which
it is founded and to fulfill its regional obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations, proclaims
the following essential purposes: (a) To strengthen
the peace and security of the continent".

There is no more essential or valuable area
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations than the maintenance of
peace and security. That goal suggests the essence of
multilateralism - achieving peace and harmony among
nations, within a framework of respect for the law and
creating a climate of security for all. The States of the
Americas and their regional organization, the oldest
expression of multilateralism in the world, have always
been guided by those principles and have contributed,
through their own reality and as their own abilities
permit, to their spread and vigour on a global scale.

Thus, along with the foundation ofthe OAS in 1948,
we signed the American Treaty on Pacific Settlement,
the Pact of Bogota, which since it was established
has formed the foundation for settling every possible
conflict situation that has developed in our region over
the years. That instrument, together with others signed
during the period of the Panamerican Union and after
1948, has succeeded, over more than half a century of
multilateral action, in making our continent the most
peaceful region in the world. It is a region that during
this period has not been involved in any conflicts on
a global level or been a theatre for significant armed
conflicts between its countries. It has, however, endured
internal conflicts that have unfortunately frequently
led to violence and disruption of the political process.

Since 1966, the OAS has not deployed military
missions of any kind and the implicit decision has been
taken not to do so, in the understanding that one way
of strengthening international institutions is to respect
the primacy of the Security Council in that area. The
occasions that have required such deployment have
been few and far between, and when they have required
missions with a military component, they have been
organizedbythe UnitedNations, withthe OAS supporting
them in tasks of a civilian nature, or deploying its own
civilian missions, with particular attention to restoring
the democratic process. That is what happened in the
cases of Haiti, El Salvador and Nicaragua, as well as,
among more recent ones, Colombia, with the Mission
to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, the Mission
to the Belize-Guatemala Adjacency Zone and the Good
Offices Mission in Ecuador and Colombia, between
2007 and 2009. The Haiti, Colombia and Guatemala-
Belize Missions are still active.

At the same time, the OAS has undertaken tasks
aimed at remedying the most lasting effects of internal
conflicts. Our demining programme has already
achieved the goal of declaring Central America a
territory free of anti-personnel mines. This year
our firearm destruction programme has destroyed
thousands of weapons, many of them dating to the
period of internal conflicts, with others related to
the criminality that plagues the region. Furthermore,
regional treaties or conventions have strengthened
peace in our hemisphere.

In the context of security, the key treaties and
conventions consist of the Charter of the Organization
of American States, which enshrines the principles
of non-intervention, sovereign equality, peaceful
settlement of disputes, collective self-defence in
case of aggression, respect for fundamental human
rights and strengthened representative democracy;
the aforementioned American Treaty on Pacific
Settlement, which describes all available means for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, good offices and
mediation, investigation and conciliation protocols,
arbitration and judicial procedures, including appeals
to the International Court of Justice; the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean; the Inter-American Convention on
Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisitions;
the Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials;
the 2003 Declaration on Security in the Americas; the
Inter-American Democratic Charter and the American
Convention on Human Rights, also known as the Pact
of San Jose'; and the Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment and eradication of Violence
against Women, also known as the Convention of
Bele'm do Para.

It should also be mentioned that the OAS actively
promotes the signing and ratification of all conventions
on limiting and prohibiting arms and armaments, under
the framework of the United Nations. Also included
in the list are defensive white papers and consolidated
confidence- and security-building measures, which
have made a major contribution to forging a culture
of respect for peace and security in the region. I have
not included the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance, known as the Rio Treaty, which was signed
in Rio de Janeiro in 1947, one year before the creation of
the OAS, as it is not currently in operation and has not
been fully implemented in the inter-American system.

Despite the long period of peace experienced in
the region and the fact that most conflicts have been
resolved, the Americas still face various security
threats that are very different from armed conflict,
but which produce significant damage. I am referring
specifically to threats posed by organized crime and
drug trafficking, as well as increased natural disasters
and the risk of pandemics. That multiple reality led
to the formulation, in the Special Conference on
Security held in Mexico in 2003, ofa new doctrine and
fundamental guiding principles on multilateral action
in the field ofpeace and hemispheric security, based on
the concept of multidimensional security. The concept
was developed in the inter-American sphere, along with
the concept of human security, which has been adopted
by the United Nations and promoted by like aspirations.

The multidimensional nature of security establishes
complementarity among the subjects and actors related
to security based on sovereignty and armed forces of the
States of the region, and new issues and actors related
to the identification of new threats, including crime
and natural disasters. That concept of multidimensional
security enjoys full legal force and was adopted by
nearly all States members of the OAS and ratified at
the 2004 summit of Heads of State and Government of
the Americas. It thereby acquired official status and
currently guides decisions in the security field, adopted
by the Organization of American States.

In that context, a great number of ongoing projects
could be cited, among which I will mention only one, due
to Argentina's important role, namely, the Coordination
of Volunteers in the Hemisphere in Response to Natural
Disasters and the Fight against Hunger and Poverty.
Also known as the White Helmets Initiative, it was
adopted in 2007 by the OAS General Assembly and
faithfully expresses the concept of multidimensional
security.

With the increase in violent activity, our capacity
for cooperative and collective action is being tested, not
only within our region but also in the extra-regional
bodies of the United Nations system. The OAS has
expanded its work to other areas, especially those
related to drug trafficking. We recently submitted a
report that was requested by the Heads of State last
year. Organized crime, trafficking in persons and
weapons, and other crimes generate high rates of
violence in some countries of the region, despite the
absence of armed conflict. Those issues have assumed a
higher profile than the more traditional security issues.
The OAS has worked with specialized United Nations
agencies, and such action has been strengthened. In that
context, I note our work with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Inter-American Drug Abuse
Control Commission, the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism and other OAS entities to develop
and complement regular consultations and actions of
the United Nations.

At the beginning of this statement, I recalled the
character of the Organization of American States
as a regional body of the United Nations. It follows
that the areas of current and potential cooperation
between the two organizations are much broader than
those described in these few minutes. They include
issues related to the strengthening of democracy,
comprehensive development, the environment, the
defence of vulnerable groups, promotion of equal rights
and gender equity, among others.

I must therefore conclude by reaffirming our desire
to cooperate with the main body of the international
system in all areas of its activity, among which the
issues related to the maintenance of peace and security
and the peaceful settlement of disputes represent a
fundamental aspect.

