Mr. Davide (Philippines): Tomorrow we
celebrate the commemoration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Only last 24 October, we
also celebrated the sixty-third anniversary of the entry
into force of the United Nations Charter. Above all
measures, these are historic milestones for the United
Nations and are events of unparalleled significance.

One of the purposes of the Charter is to maintain
international peace and security and to that end, inter
alia, to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace. In its
preamble, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
declares that the recognition of the inherent dignity and
of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace in the world and that disregard and contempt
for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts that
have outraged the conscience of mankind. These rights
include the rights to life, liberty and security.

There can be no doubt at all that terrorist acts are
threats to international peace and security. Hence, the
holding of this debate on the agenda item "Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts" is certainly very timely and appropriate. Thus, the
Philippines commends and expresses its gratitude to
the President of the Security Council for organizing
this debate.

More than enough has been said and recorded in
the United Nations system on terrorism. The latest
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General under
agenda item 118 of the General Assembly at its sixty-
second session, entitled "United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy: activities of the United
Nations system in implementing the Strategy"
(A/62/898), shows us the complexity of the problems
created by international terrorism as it affects
international peace and security; the progress made
thus far in combating it; and the measures
recommended to be pursued to prevent or counter
terrorism.

In my speech at the tenth annual International
Judicial Conference, held in Strasbourg, France, in
May 2002 under the sponsorship of the Center for
Democracy, the Council of Europe and the Furth
Family Foundation, I asserted that we must resist the
temptation to attribute to terrorism some kind of
mythic magnitude that makes it larger than life. I told
the audience that terrorism is man-made; therefore, it
can be solved by men and women of resolve.

Today, I say that there is one body that is much
greater than the men and women of resolve. It is the
United Nations, with its 192 Member States. Not only
does it have the resolve, it has the will, the power, the
might and the resources to counter and solve terrorism
and to demolish, if it wishes to, every act of terrorism
in any part of the globe. With the deadly tentacles of
terrorism spreading over many places, the latest of
which was Mumbai, India, the United Nations must
now more than ever assert its power and might.

For this debate, allow me to contribute a few
thoughts on how the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, can move further forward in this
fight against terrorism from the legal and judicial
perspectives, with which I have some familiarity.

I respectfully submit, as I did at the Strasbourg
Conference I mentioned earlier, that there should now
be a universally accepted definition of terrorism and a
condemnation thereof as a crime, with a recognition of
the criminal intent of fomenting fear and terror. I find
in the report of the Secretary-General, referred to
earlier, that there is an Ad Hoc Committee, established
by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17
December 1996, that is tasked with drafting a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and is ably supported by the Office of Legal Affairs.
While having achieved some progress, the Committee
is finding some disagreements among Member States
regarding the scope of the convention, and attempts
will be made to resolve them in the Sixth Committee
during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly.
The convention could be the proper document for the
definition of terrorism.

At that same Conference, I also stated that the
United Nations lost its first opportunity to establish a
definition of the crime of terrorism when the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court was
deliberated upon and approved by 160 Member States.
Moreover, the Statute could even have included
terrorism as one of the crimes recognized by the Court.

I hope that the Security Council and the General
Assembly can do something to expedite the adoption of
the convention on terrorism, which is still in the
drawing board of the Ad Hoc Committee. Likewise, I
wish to reiterate here the proposal I made before the
same Strasbourg Conference for national legislatures to
enact laws defining and punishing terrorism as a crime.
It could be treated as a crime in violation of the law of
nations. This would have two legal consequences.
First, it would make applicable the doctrine of
universal jurisdiction. Secondly, it would provide for
concurrent jurisdictions between international courts
and domestic courts and allow the latter to yield
jurisdiction to international courts according to treaty
obligations.

The Philippines has already enacted a law, the
Human Security Act of 2007, defining and penalizing
two crimes: first, terrorism; and secondly, conspiracy
to commit terrorism.

Finally, allow me to state that among the strong
and effective deterrents to the commission of crimes
are the expeditious prosecution and trial of cases
against the offenders and the rendition of just, fair and
impartial judgement. Delays in the prosecution, trials
and judgement of terrorists would send wrong signals
to them and their co-conspirators. It would either
embolden them to assert their strength and make a
mockery of the weakness of the processes aligned
against them, or give them reason to claim that their
comrades in detention are deprived of due process and
then instigate an escalation in their terrorist acts.

Things would have been entirely different if, for
example, there had been expeditious prosecution and
trials and the meting of justice to terrorists involved in
the 9/11 tragedy and similar tragedies. Continuous
trials of these cases must be adopted as a standard
practice. In this regard, the United Nations must do
something.
