Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Ms. Mueller for her very
useful briefing. I also reiterate my appreciation for the
outstanding commitment of all humanitarian personnel
in Syria.

More than ever, we must focus our efforts on three
areas. The first, which must be an absolute priority, is
the implementation of the ceasefire in Idlib. We are very
concerned about the resumption of air strikes last week,
following the announcement of a unilateral ceasefire
on 31 August. We will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground and to call for the strict
implementation of the Sochi memorandum, one year
after its signature between Turkey and Russia. Every
effort must be made to ensure an effective ceasefire
in the north-west with a View to halting hostilities and
to instating a nationwide ceasefire, in keeping with
resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, we support
the draft resolution submitted by Germany, Belgium
and Kuwait.

The second area of focus is respect for international
humanitarian law, which is binding on all and
non-negotiable. In that connection, I would like to
recall two imperatives.

The first is the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel. The fight against
terrorism, which is undisputedly an essential issue,
cannot be invoked to justify violations of international
humanitarian law. For that reason, we welcome the
launch of an internal investigation by the Secretary-
General into the attacks on de-conflicted infrastructure
in the north-west and reaffirm our full support to him.
I repeat that the fight against terrorism cannot under
any circumstances justify the sacrifice of civilian
populations, let alone children, nor does it justify
indiscriminate bombing or the deliberate destruction
of hospitals and schools. The crimes committed in
Idlib and the rest of Syria cannot and must not go
unpunished. Those who commit such acts will one day
be held accountable by the courts.

The second imperative is guaranteeing immediate,
safe, secure, comprehensive, sustainable and
unhindered humanitarian access to the entire Syrian
territory for those who need it most. For that to happen,
the violence in Idlib must stop immediately. We reiterate
our call on those with the means to do so to exert the
necessary pressure on the regime to ensure unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout Syria, in particular in
the areas under its control, including the territories it
reclaimed in 2018 in the south-west, eastern Ghouta
and the Rukban camp. Ensuring humanitarian access
also implies - and this is an essential point - that the
United Nations have access to displaced persons and
refugees who have returned home.

Thirdly, the urgency of the situation in Idlib is a
cruel reminder that only an inclusive political solution
can bring lasting peace and stability to Syria and
enable refugees to return to their country. We reiterate
our full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Geir Pedersen,
with the aim of concluding a balanced agreement
on the constitutional committee, regarding both its
composition and its rules of procedure. We take note
of the latest encouraging developments related by
the Secretary-General and call for the launch of the
constitutional committee as soon as possible, under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva. The
procrastination must stop.

It is important that, in parallel, the Special Envoy
work on the basis of all the elements of resolution 2254
(2015), in particular on the preparation of elections and
confidence-building measures. We hope that the high-
level week of the General Assembly will provide an
opportunity to increase mobilization in support of the
political process. In the absence of any progress and
without the prospect of a political settlement, France
and the European Union cannot participate in the
financing of reconstruction. That will fall to the regime
and its allies. We call on each and every member of the
Security Council to take responsibility for putting an
end to the tragedy that is unfolding before our eyes in
Idlib, and we invite them to vote in favour of the text
presented by Germany, Belgium and Kuwait.

