Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The report
before us (S/2005/72) shows that the existence of
international norms and standards and the prevention
and protection measures undertaken so far have not
been sufficient to stop the atrocities committed against
children in situations of conflict. The list of armed
groups that recruit child soldiers has not become
smaller since last year. On the contrary, new groups
have emerged that use children in one way or another
in their combat operations. This confirms findings of
other recent studies that the use of child soldiers has
become commonplace in modern warfare, in keeping
with the changed nature of armed conflict and the
increasing use of small arms and light weapons.
Engaging in dialogue with those groups is necessary
and may also have led to improvements in some
situations, but it is clearly not enough in itself.

More pressure has to be exerted on parties to
conflict in order to make them realize that the costs of
using child soldiers outweigh the benefits. Introducing
a reporting, monitoring and compliance mechanism,
combined with effective follow-up, is certainly an
important step an "era of application", as called for by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
While the recommended measures - such as travel
bans, freezing of assets, exclusion from amnesty
provisions and governance structures and imposing of
arms embargoes - will be effective in some situations,
they do not necessarily have the intended impact in
others. It is therefore crucial that measures be tailored
to their respective targets in all situations. We also
have to think about how to achieve immediate
improvements on the ground, as Security Council
sanctions tend to take effect in the long run rather than
immediately.

We welcome the listing of armed groups that
recruit child soldiers or commit other war crimes
against children and wish to stress that the inclusion of
actors in situations that are not on the agenda of the
Council is necessary for the credibility of the Council's
work.

Putting an end to impunity for crimes against
children and prosecuting the perpetrators are among
the most important measures to be taken. Where
national judiciaries that have the primary responsibility
in this respect are not in a position to carry out that
task for reasons of inability or unwillingness, the
offenders have to be held accountable at the
international level. The International Criminal Court is
now carrying out an investigation into war crimes in
northern Uganda, where thousands of children were
abducted, forced to fight and kill and used as servants,
and where they became victims of sexual crimes. We
hope that that investigation creates a precedent for
holding accountable perpetrators responsible for war
crimes against children, and we believe that this will
serve as effective deterrent for future violations.

We wish to highlight the urgent need to include
the conduct of international peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel in the monitoring process. The
report of the Secretary-General mentions that the
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by peacekeeping personnel appear to be more serious
and more widespread than previously known.
Perpetrators of such crimes must be brought to justice
and effective means to prevent further misconduct have
to be found - both for the security of children and
other possible victims and for the standing and
credibility of the United Nations.

We must not forget to talk about the indirect
impact of conflict and war on children. As was pointed
out in a panel discussion organized by UNICEF last
week, the breakdown of conflict economies - with
investment collapses and the loss of livelihoods and
employment, combined with a stoppage of education
and health services - has severe long-term negative
effects on children. It deprives them of their childhood,
while the lost years of nutrition, education and
socialization reduce their prospects for the future.
Experts argue for continued development assistance in
times of conflict as well, in order to maintain
livelihoods and public services. We should keep that in
mind when we talk about humanitarian assistance and
development aid, particularly now that we are engaged
in discussions on how to improve international
development cooperation on the basis of the
Millennium Project report.

