The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
participating in this meeting of the Security Council.
The Council has the important responsibility to maintain
peace and safety. Now more than ever, we should work
to build bridges and not walls and to promote popular
dialogue and diplomacy to solve all our conflicts for the
benefit of life.

It is an honour for me to preside over this meeting.
I should like to share some reflections on a theme that
affects and commits to life, the welfare of all people
and the balance and subsistence of our Mother Earth.
I refer to water. This topic has an important impact on
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Our planet, the human family and life on Earth are
experiencing a water crisis that will intensify in the
coming decades. According to data provided by the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the
planet will have a global population of approximately
10 billion people by 2050, which will require a 50-per
cent increase in the demand for food. The Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, by that
same year the demand for water will have increased
by 54 per cent. If consumer patterns hold, two-thirds
of the world population will live with water shortages
by 2025.

The situation is very serious. More than 800 million
people lack access to drinking water, and more than
2.5 billion do not have access to basic sanitation.
According to the United Nations, every day between 800
and 1,000 children under five die of diseases related to
lack of access to drinking water and sanitation. It is also
enlightening to know that since 1947, 37 conflicts have
erupted between States because of water-related issues.

I wish to thank the United Nations and highlight the
role it plays through its agencies in addressing this issue,
which remains one of the most important challenges to
humankind. In that regard, 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development has deepened our understanding of the
need to achieve universal access to water and sanitation
that is equitable for all humankind.

Additionally, States have the obligation to manage,
responsibly and an integrated manner, water resources
at all levels, including transboundary waters, under the
principle of cooperation. In 2010, I proposed, on behalf
of my country, that the General Assembly declare
the access to water a human right so as to promote
its enforcement and to gradually ensure its universal
recognition and application. At its sixty-fourth session,
in July 2010, the General Assembly adopted resolution
64/292, which recognized drinking water and basic
sanitation as a human right that is essential to the full
enjoyment of life and of all other rights. In that regard,
we continue to put forward our proposals so that all
basic services are eventually declared human rights.

Unlike other resources for which alternatives can
be found, such as oil, clean water does not have a
substitute. There is no life without water. There are now
7 billion people using the same available sources of
water - a limited, vulnerable and scarce resource that
we must use judiciously. I come from a country with
many indigenous peoples who live in rural areas. Our
people have always considered water to be the source
of life and a public good that belongs to everyone,
not just to one set of people in particular. It a nutrient
that Mother Earth produces and should be respected
and conserved.

With regard to water, our peoples and communities
were treated unfairly during the colonial era, as well as
in the more recent republican era. We were not consulted
about how the water was to be used, and that affected
our rights to our land and other natural resources. The
essential value of water as a social and cultural good
and its link with our own identity was disregarded.
During the neoliberal phase in my country - and I state
this in all sincerity - the drinking water supply was
privatized, as greater emphasis was placed on profits.
The increasing needs of cities could not be met. Costs
increased, which led to protests to have it returned
to the control of the State. Against that backdrop, in
their new Constitution of 2009, the people of Bolivia
agreed that natural resources are strategic resources
and belong to the public. They fall under the direct,
indivisible and imprescriptible control of the people.
We also stipulated that water is a fundamental right and
vital to life; it is an indispensable resource that allows
humankind to live in harmony with Mother Earth.

We are facing a complex water crisis that leads to
the emergence of new challenges, which traditional
water-management polices and modalities are ill-
equipped to address - for example, the fact that water
is considered to be a human right and not a private
business or commodity. It defies logic that water is
subjected to market conditions that focus on its use as
opposed to it being freely accessible and universal; the
urgent need to identify priorities for its use for vital
purposes and to earmark increased available funds for
water and basic sanitation infrastructure to shore up the
global deficit of financing for water projects - which
contrasts sharply with exorbitant military spending - its
impact on human and economic development, its many
uses, protection of the environment and respect for the
cultural values of communities.

Similarly, we must point out that the vast majority
of the world's most important reservoirs are currently
being overused and are at risk of being polluted. A
high percentage of fresh water sources are shared by
two or more States, while agreements do not always
exist as to their origin, ownership or use, thereby
causing conflict that should, more or less, become
opportunities for effective collaboration. According
to the United Nations, there are 276 transboundary
water basins in the world - 60 in Africa, 68 in Europe,
46 in North America and 38 in South America. Two
hundred and fifty-six of those basins - 92.7 per cent
of them - are shared by two, three or four countries.
Twenty of those basins - 7.2 per cent - are shared
by five or more countries. We are all closely linked by
water. Traditional water-management policies are the
result of the effects of climate change and have exposed
a crisis that spark new local, regional and global
tensions, which jeopardize the peace and security
of nations. They are clearly important because the
Security Council has already addressed the complexity
of the topic on multiple occasions. Developments in
international water law, which is a key component in
the United Nations system, encourages new paradigms
to be identified and adopted, with a View to promoting
more effective water management. Water conflicts can
then be resolved through renewed effective preventive
diplomacy of transboundary waters. Since 1947, three
hundred international conventions on water have
been agreed.

As the Secretary-General mentioned, the United
Nations was established to prevent wars. Increasing
competition for resources in recent times means that the
focus is on preventing conflicts and sustaining peace.
The water crisis we face is one of the greatest threats
posed to life on the planet. The organs of the United
Nations, on the basis of their respective mandates, must
redouble their efforts so that together we can stymie
that threat. In that regard, I would like to share a few
observations with the Council, which will, no doubt, be
built upon today and in future debates.

First, water is vital to sustaining the life of all
people and living beings and for maintaining balance
on Mother Earth. Water is shared but vulnerable
universal heritage.

Second, fresh water is limited and cannot be
replaced. As such, all of its sources must be conserved
and safeguarded against pollution, the effects of climate
change and overuse in activities that are not essential.

Third, the fresh water available is found in areas
that are shared internationally. Its use must pave the
way for opportunities that promote collaboration,
interaction and harmony among peoples, not that spark
conflicts surrounding its origin, ownership or use. Water
jeopardizes peace and security among peoples; it must
not be the cause of domestic or international conflicts.

Fourth, water must bring together all States,
nations, communities, peoples, social movements and
individuals so that together they can share their concerns
and knowledge, reach consensus and develop more
effective and collaborative water-management policies.

Fifth, water has inspired the development of new
instruments of international law that incorporate
principles surrounding its use, conservation,
cooperation efforts, the sharing of information and
technology and focus on its use for vital purposes,
which all deserve States' full attention.

Sixth, water should inspire a new global awareness,
with a view to protecting and conserving the resource
for future generations, while ensuring its universal
access and seeking to avoid conflicts.

Seventh, States should consider entering into
governance agreements that emphasize the sustainability
of transboundary water resources and provide for the
establishment of institutional mechanisms that ensure
the reasonable use of such resources.

Eighth, States have a duty to actively and
permanently cooperate with each other. They should
provide timely information on any significant
changes emanating from the use of transboundary
water resources.

Ninth, States should refrain from adopting
unilateral measures that endanger or affect the rights
of other States with which they share transboundary
water resources.

Finally, as the Charter of the United Nations
establishes, States have an obligation to seek solutions
to their disputes through negotiation, investigation,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
recourse to regional agreements and organizations and
other peaceful means, such as good offices. Where
water flows, peace must also flow.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for International Development Cooperation
and Climate.

