Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to
take the floor in my capacity as the coordinator
of Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT), a cross-regional group of 22 States. ACT is
currently composed of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Hungary, Ireland, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania and Uruguay.

ACT was launched in May 2013 as a new initiative
to improve the working methods of the Security
Council. The name is an acronym - accountability,
coherence and transparency - which stands for our
common conviction that these qualities are needed
in all the Council's activities. ACT is convinced that
the Council, whatever its composition, can and should
improve its working methods through a set of pragmatic
and concrete measures.

Let me be clear: ACT is independent of the
negotiations on the comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. ACT takes no position on the reform,
composition and enlargement of the Council, and it will
remain outside of that process. ACT intends to work
constructively with members of the Security Council
and with the broader United Nations membership to
increase the involvement of non-Council members and
the accountability of the Council to the entire United
Nations membership.

Today's meeting is an opportunity to enhance
that dialogue, and ACT welcomes today's open debate
organized by Azerbaijan and the excellent concept note
(S/2013/613) distributed.

ACT encourages all States Members of the United
Nations to dedicate their energy and their knowledge
to the improvement of the Security Council's working
methods. Under the Charter of the United Nations,
Member States confer on the Security Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council acts on behalf of all
Member States, and all Member States agree to accept
and carry out those decisions. Therefore, all of us have
a fundamental interest in the Council's decisions and
the process leading to them.

Recently, the Council's responses to activities in
different areas have shown how much support is needed
from Member States. Member States have been ready to
join their efforts together, to take risks and, sometimes,
to grieve the loss of nationals engaged in missions. That
is valid for the domain of peacekeeping operations, but
it is also true in regard to special political missions and
to economic and/or other sanctions. In the latter case,
all Member States are obliged to implement measures
in connection with listed individuals and entities. In all
domains, the effectiveness of all decisions - mandatory
or not - greatly depends on the support and level of
implementation by the Member States.

It is therefore crucial for every country to be
more involved in the Council's decision-shaping and
decision-making. It is our right and our responsibility.
The Security Council itself would benefit from the
full support of the wider membership. Moreover, the
relationship of the Council with other organs can and
should be strengthened, for instance, with regional and
other international organizations. Concrete action is
also needed to improve the Security Council's practice
of referring situations to the International Criminal
Court. Dynamics should be improved between the
Council and the peacebuilding configurations, too, in
order to maximize the impact on the ground.

ACT recognizes past efforts of the Security
Council to improve and adapt its working methods.
ACT also commends former and present chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and acknowledges the note by
the President of the Security Council (S/2013/515) on
working methods issued in August, which detailed ways
to improve the Council's dialogue with non-Council
members and bodies.

ACT takes note with appreciation of the greater
level of interactivity achieved in recent months through,
for instance, horizon-scanning sessions and interactive
wrap-ups. In 2013, wrap-ups have taken place regularly
and in different formats. We are seeing greater interest
on the part of Member States, with steadily increasing
attendance being a clear demonstration of the value,
relevance and demand for such mechanisms.

While ACT warmly welcomes resolution 2118
(2013), aimed at destroying Syria's chemical weapons,
we should not forget the Council's long paralysis in
addressing other aspects of the Syrian crisis, which
is a particularly vivid illustration of the need and the
imperative to make progress in the field of working
methods.

ACT welcomes the proposal made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs for France, Mr. Laurent Fabius, that
the five permanent members themselves voluntarily
regulate their right to exercise a veto in the case of
mass atrocity crimes. We are convinced that this
pledge indicates the need to find new avenues in order
to respond efficiently to crises and to live up to the
responsibilities deposited in the hands of the Council.
ACT encourages the other permanent members to
further explore that proposal.

ACT has organized itself in subgroups that
have started their work and have already developed
concrete ideas on issues ranging from accountability,
transparency, follow-up to the note S/2010/507,
and improvements in working methods relating to
peacekeeping and conflict prevention. During today's
debate, various ACT members will inform the Council
about the practical work under way in the subgroups.
As our work continues to gain momentum, ACT may
broaden the scope of its efforts according to needs and
relevant developments.

We are aware that many of our suggestions are
already included in the past commitments assumed by
the Security Council in existing President's notes. We
encourage the Security Council to ensure the full and
consistent implementation of the commitments in the
President's notes, and indeed other existing and future
recommendations on working methods. Moreover, ACT
will monitor the Council's existing commitments in all
aspects in order to promote transparency and improve
the accessibility of information.

Our suggestions and interests cover a wide range
of issues, but ultimately have one goal - a Security
Council that carries out its duties in the maintenance of
international peace and security in a more effective and
open manner. All Member States, including members of
ACT, have a responsibility to support the Council and
to hold it accountable for the consistent and effective
implementation of its resolutions and decisions.
Today's debate on working methods is the fourth in
what has become, since 2010, an annual practice. It is
an important milestone for all of us and one that we
strongly encourage Council members to uphold.

ACT pledges to continue to carry on that important
dialogue with all Member States, and in particular with
the members of the Security Council, constructively
and openly.

