Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I, too, would like
to welcome Prime Minister Ceku here today, for the
first time since his appointment. I also welcome
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic and thank her for her statement.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

The United Kingdom would like to express its
gratitude to the Special Representative, Mr. Saren
Jessen-Petersen, for the absolutely outstanding work
that he has done for two years in Kosovo. He has
transformed and reinvigorated the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and has worked relentlessly with the Provisional
Institutions to ensure genuine progress on standards
and minority rights. The fact that Kosovo was in a
position last autumn for the status process to begin is
due, in no small part, to his efforts. His and his team's
tireless commitment, energy and perseverance do
them - and, as a consequence, the United Nations -
enormous credit. We thank his family, too, for the
support that they have given him as he has carried out
his Vital task. The United Kingdom would like to wish
him every future success.

His successor will have a hard act to follow. The
United Kingdom looks forward to having a productive
working relationship with him or her, as UNMIK
continues to reform and Kosovo learns difficult lessons
about accountability and responsibility. More hard
work will be needed, especially to continue Soren
Jessen-Peterson's good work in reaching out to
minority communities to help create an environment in
which all communities can coexist in stability and
prosperity.

I would like to make four brief points on
priorities for the coming months.

First, the Secretary-General's report makes clear
that substantial progress has been made on standards
implementation and outreach to minority communities.
That is welcome, but it must be sustained. Further
progress is needed across the board, for example in
minority rights legislation and the reconstruction of
damaged and destroyed property. We look forward to
some important steps in that regard being taken by the
Assembly in the coming weeks.

The international community and the Council
remain focused on monitoring concrete results, as
shown by the Contact Group letter to Pristina of
9June, which specifies - as the representative of
France mentioned - 13 priority areas with set time
boundaries for progress.

I would like to strongly echo what the
representative of Peru said, that the future of Kosovo is
as a functioning democracy and economy. I also
endorse what he said about the European vision. Of
course, we want that European future to apply to
Serbia, too.

Secondly, the Kosovo Government's efforts to
reach out to minorities have been impressive. The
inter-faith conference hosted by the Serb Orthodox
Church, and President Sejdiu's visit to Kosovo Serb
areas, are very positive signals. Such initiatives,
however, can make meaningful progress only if they
are reciprocated. It is hard to see how Belgrade's
persistence in actively discouraging Kosovo Serbs
from joining Kosovo's institutions or political life
serves their interests. It does not serve the interests of
the Kosovo Serbs. The future of the Kosovo Serbs in
Kosovo is as active participants and contributors, not
as an insular and disenfranchised community.

Thirdly, the Contact Group's letter to Belgrade of
9 June called on the Serbian leadership to stop
obstructing processes that can only improve the lives
of Kosovo Serbs. Belgrade's active and constructive
engagement in the Kosovo status process is the best
way to preserve, protect and promote the interests of
Kosovo's Serbian community. But it is also a vital part
of Belgrade's own rapprochement with the rest of
Europe, so that it can take its rightful place there.
I welcome what Ms. Raskovic-Ivic said about the
importance of Kosovo Serb participation in the
political life of Kosovo. That is very welcome, but I
encourage Belgrade not to make it conditional on
agreement to decentralization. Decentralization is an
important part of Kosovo's future. Talks are under way
in Vienna, and they deserve our support. But Kosovo
Serb participation is needed now, without
preconditions.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the United
Kingdom continues to support, unreservedly, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Kosovo's
future, Martti Ahtisaari. I will reserve our comments on
status until his presentation later this summer. But I
would like to respond to a couple of points that have
been made today, including one point from
Mrs. Raskovic-Ivic about international order and
legality.

The United Kingdom recalls the Contact Group
ministerial statement of 31 January, which was
supported by the United Nations, the European Union
and NATO. The solution to status must be acceptable
to the people of Kosovo. There is a sound basis for that
in the United Nations Charter.

I would also like to echo what the representative
of China said about the great specificities and
complexities of the Kosovo situation. It is true that the
day-to-day problems of Kosovo, particularly in the
economy, are not unique to that place. But Kosovo is
uniquely placed in the panoply of post-conflict
situations by virtue of the events of 1998 and 1999,
resolution 1244 (1999) and the existence of the status
process, led by Martti Ahtisaari. The resolution of
status will enhance regional stability, not detract from
it.

The United Kingdom is serious about the
commitments the Contact Group expressed in its
guiding principles and the 31 January statement. We
are working intensively towards a settlement during
2006. The international community cannot allow the
future status process to be delayed.

