Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and
continued service.

I have always followed Kosovo with great interest
since the time I spent from 1999 to 2000 serving as
Chief Political Officer in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Today, I
have brought with me a bottle of wine from Kosovo, a
cabernet sauvignon from the Bodrumi i Vjeter winery.
Now, I know that the Security Council is not a place to
talk about wine, but I have a reason for doing so. I want
to share a short anecdote with the Council.

In the Prizren region in the southern part ofKosovo,
there are high-quality vineyards, believe it or not. But as
a result ofthe conflict in the late 1990s, these vineyards
fell into disuse and were abandoned. When in 1999 I
visited the owner of one of these vineyards, he told me
that it would take several years before they could revive
the vineyard and produce grapes for wine again. In the
meantime, he hoped he could obtain capital from Japan
for investment and labour costs to care for the vines and
prepare them to restart producing grapes.

These great vineyards had indeed fallen apart. Even
if they once produced wonderful wine, I wondered, who
would invest in them if they were not going to make
a profit for several years? Then I was led inside the
winery, where there were several large metallic tanks
full of wine from years before. Naturally, I asked for
a taste. It was delicious red wine with an exceptional
aroma. An idea came to me: if this wine were sold,
it could bring funds to the vintner. When I asked a
Japanese colleague in UNMIK for help, he was able
to connect the vineyard owner with a Japanese trading
company. Seventeen years later, the vintner is producing
and exporting great wine like the wine I am holding, to
acclaim from international wine lovers like me.

Throughout Kosovo there are countless people like
this genial vintner who have regained self-sufficiency
with the support of Governments, the United Nations,
international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and, of course, individuals. It is the same
thing for the Government of Kosovo. Since UNMIK's
establishment 17 years ago, Kosovo has gained a
Constitution, a Government and a parliament.

According to the International Monetary Fund,
Kosovo achieved an enviable real economic growth
of 4 per cent last year, with similar projections for the
next five years. To be sure, Kosovo still faces many
challenges. Progress it the talks between Kosovo
and Serbia is slow, and the number of returnees to
Kosovo remains small. However, the dialogue in
Brussels between Kosovo and Serbia continues.
Domestic political divisions on drawing the border
with Montenegro are largely a matter for Kosovo's self-
reliant democracy, although it is important to listen
closely to the views of the minority.

That leads me to a larger point. Kosovo is not without
problems, but its various problems should in general be
solved by the judgment of the people of Kosovo and the
people of the region. Why the United Nations? Let us
seriously consider the possible withdrawal of UNMIK.
On that matter, we should consider focusing our
limited peacekeeping resources on other areas in the
world where more serious clashes are evident. Having
just returned from a Council visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, that is especially clear to me.

A Security Council briefing every three months
no longer seems necessary. To be honest, it gives me
great pleasure to talk about my memories of Kosovo
once every three months, but the efficient and effective
functioning of the Council should take priority. Put in
a very simple way, we have to consider how we use our
time. Indeed, Council members have expressed keen
interest in improving the Council's working methods.
I therefore join New Zealand and the United Kingdom
in their call for a reconsideration of the Council's
working methods concerning the allocation of its time
and energy. Even if a report is undertaken every three
months, the Council has the flexibility to decide whether
or not to receive a briefing on each occasion. It should
be sufficient that the Council retains the flexibility to
meet on the matter as needed, and UNMIK is a prime
example. I look forward to discussing that matter further
in the context of revising presidential note S/2010/507,
although that really is just a matter of practice.

In concluding, I would like to emphasize our
continued support and appreciation for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin.
We look forward to his next report and look forward
to celebrating the success of his work over a glass of
Kosovo wine.

