Ms. Malcorra: I am glad to be here today to
provide the Council with a detailed overview of our
efforts to work with troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Government of the Sudan to
accelerate the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

The report before the Council (S/2008/781)
provides a full picture the status of our deployment
efforts, the challenges which we have been able to
overcome since the last time I briefed the Council and
obstacles that we must overcome in order to meet our
full objectives. As Council members received the
report only yesterday, I will take this opportunity to
provide a summary of the main highlights and to
update our efforts since the report was finalized.

As indicated in the report, I am pleased to inform
Council members that, with a little less than two weeks
to go, we are moving towards our target of achieving
60 per cent deployment of the mission's uniformed
personnel by the end of the year. Achievement of this
goal comes as a result of our efforts to accelerate the
movement of equipment into Darfur, enhance
engineering capabilities and improve cooperation with
the Government of the Sudan. While we still have a
long way to go to achieve our ultimate goal of full
deployment of UNAMID, I would like to take a
moment to acknowledge the troop- and police-
contributing countries that have worked so hard with
us to reach this initial target, as well as colleagues in
UNAMID who have applied themselves, tirelessly, to
meeting this challenging goal.

As detailed in the Secretary-General's report, the
Department of Safety and Security and UNAMID put
in place special measures to improve the rate at which
contingent owned equipment reaches its final
08-66225
destination. Improved road conditions since the end of
the rainy season, strengthened land transport capacity,
rail transport and additional air capacity have helped in
ensuring that the backlog at El Obeid is clear.

The mission is also working to enhance its
engineering capacity, including through the expedited
employment of military engineers, partnership with the
United Nations Office for Project Services and the
recruitment of local contractors. As a result,
engineering work for the Nyala supercamp is scheduled
to be completed by the end of 2008 and the El Fasher
and El Geneina supercamps are scheduled to be
completed by the end of January 2009.

That will be a major improvement in the
mission's ability to accept and accommodate
personnel. In addition, even with its limited resources,
the mission has significantly increased reserves of
essential supplies, including rations and water, to
ensure that we are prepared to operate in a security
Phase IV environment.

Improvements in the movement of equipment and
the enhancement of our engineering work have been
complemented by good levels of cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan with respect to deployment. I
travelled to Khartoum on 16 November for the second
meeting of the Tripartite Committee, during which I
was reassured by Government officials that every effort
would be made to facilitate the deployment of
UNAMID. Progress was a noted on all topics raised in
our first Tripartite Committee meeting on 7 October,
and we agreed that continued cooperation of this kind
will be essential to the deployment of UNAMID. We
will meet again in early 2009 in Addis Ababa to follow
up further.

We are moving equipment more quickly,
preparing to receive troops more efficiently and
working with the Government on deployment matters
more effectively.

These are all positive developments, but I must
stress that we are making these gains in a volatile
security environment. I mentioned earlier that ongoing
insecurity has made it necessary for the Secretary-
General to designate Darfur as a phase four security
zone. The practical implication of this designation is
that we must work to ensure that our mission is able to
function, even if the situation deteriorates, and we must
also of course take all measures to ensure the safety of
our personnel. One concrete result of this phase four
situation is that we are forced to delay the deployment
of approximately two hundred unarmed United Nations
police officers to Darfur, until we are able to ensure
that provisions have been put in place for their overall
security. Under normal circumstances, these police
officers could deploy and they are ready in their
capitals to do so. But, given the security situation in
Darfur today, they will not be able to do their work
until the minimum number of armed formed police
units (FPUs) is in place, since the armed units provide
direct operational support to United Nations police,
including by securing their working environment. This
is only one of the many challenges we face, but I am
drawing it to your attention, because if we fall short of
the 60 per cent target by approximately one per cent, it
will because deployment of these United Nations
police officers has been temporarily delayed until we
have a combination of an improved security situation
and more formal police units on the ground.

With our year's end deadline only days away, we
are already working hard to achieve the best possible
deployment results for the rest of 2009. As the Council
is aware, we have set ourselves a deadline of achieving
80 per cent deployment by the end of March, and the
challenges we face in reaching this goal are well
known to all. We will build on our efforts to further
strengthen the specific measures we have put in place
to move equipment and prepare sites more effectively.
We will also, of course, be completely transparent with
the Council about our progress. In this regard, I would
like to state that the readiness of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs) to deploy military and formed police units will
be a particularly important factor in our collective
efforts to finally bring UNAMID to its authorized
strength.

Given that the timelines required to organize and
implement these strategic movements are quite fixed
and irreducible, it is critical for us that TCCs and PCCs
undertake the range of pre-deployment preparations as
rapidly as possible. Two days ago, we met with TCC
and FCC representatives to stress this point. This is no
small task and we are placing a significant burden on
troop- and police-contributing countries. The
equipment and capabilities required to work in Darfur
are considerable and the environment is highly
demanding. They must therefore be meticulous in their
preparations to ensure that the units they deploy are
6
ready to face the enormous challenges associated with
deploying into Darfur.

Our top priority continues to be the full
deployment of UNAMID and the pursuit of peace in
Darfur. We look forward to continued cooperation from
the Government in this regard, and I will need the
sustained support of this Council and the continued
collaboration of troop- and police-contributing and
partner countries as we work together to achieve this
goal.

