Mr. Strommen (Norway): Let me start by
thanking our colleague - and my neighbour at the
Council table - Ambassador Jorge Navarrete of
Mexico for his contribution to the work of the Council
and to wish him well in his new and important
assignments.

Following the horrific terrorist attacks on 11
September - only four months ago - the Security
Council reacted quickly and decisively in the face of
one of the greatest threats to international peace and
security in the twenty-first century.

The landmark resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373
(2001), followed by the ministerial-level declaration
adopted in resolution 1377 (2001), have laid a solid
foundation for a leading role for the United Nations in
the fight against international terrorism.

This week the Council adopted resolution 1390
(2002), which again clearly confirms that the terrorist
threat posed by groups like Al-Qaeda is not limited to
any one single country; it is a truly global problem
which must be tackled by truly global cooperation.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, under
Ambassador Greenstock's competent leadership, has
already proved itself to be a very important instrument
in this regard. Sir Jeremy's active efforts at
transparency have created the climate of trust needed
for the Committee to be able to monitor Member
States' implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the
most efficient manner possible.

We fully support the Chairman's approach and the
focus he has outlined for the Committee's handling of
national reports. We welcome the reports submitted and
encourage those States that have not yet reported to do
so as soon as possible. Our aim is to cooperate; to
support Member States in strengthening national
legislation and implementation; and to share best
practices. We will be proactive and even-handed. In our
efforts, we will, of course, not lose sight of the human
rights perspective.

Many States will need technical and financial
assistance in order to fulfil their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). Norway is considering how
best we can meet requests for assistance. We have
already offered legislative and administrative expertise
to be included in the Committee directory.

The initial focus in the fight against terrorism has
been on Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We now see a new
beginning in Afghanistan, giving us hope that this
country will never again be used as a base for terrorists
and their supporters. However, we cannot afford to take
this for granted. An international presence in support of
the political process will be needed for a long time to
come, to steer Afghanistan firmly on the road to
democracy and reconstruction. This point was
emphasized during the recent meeting of the
Afghanistan Support Group in Kabul under Norwegian
chairmanship.

The work of the Committee is, of course, of a
global, long-term nature and will remain relevant after
the perpetrators of the 11 September attacks have been
brought to justice. Norway will continue to play its part
in our common fight to prevent terrorist acts from
threatening peace and security as well as innocent
civilians anywhere in the world. There can be no
justification whatsoever for terrorism. Moreover, as the
Secretary-General reminded us this morning, this fight
will be most effective when conducted in parallel with
enhanced and better coordinated efforts to address the
other global challenges facing the United Nations,
including those in the areas of social democratic
developments and the protection of human rights.

