The President: I thank Mr. Annabi for his response
to various issues raised during our debate this morning
and later this afternoon. I believe that we can agree on
the following course of action.

First, we can agree on a statement to the press to be
made following our debate, and I will identify the
elements right now. Secondly, we can agree to extend the
time limit for the periodic reports from 45 to 60 days. As
Mr. Annabi has said, the next report on Sierra Leone
would therefore be available on 7 May.

Perhaps I can at this point identify the elements for
the press statement. As many representatives have
mentioned, during his presentation Ambassador
Greenstock identified four elements, and subsequently
Ambassador Soderberg in her statement identified two
elements, which can be included in the press statement.

We will say, then, that members of the Security
Council endorse, in general, the conclusions of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2000/186). The second point
is that the Council members place great weight on the
early implementation of all aspects of the Lorne Peace
Agreement and commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Oluyemi
Adeniji, and of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) to this end. The third element would
be that Council members express their disappointment at
the slow progress being made in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in
particular.

The fourth element would that the Council members
call upon all signatories to the Lome Agreement, and in
particular upon Chairman Sankoh and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), to reaffirm and demonstrate their
concrete commitment to the Lome peace process by
allowing the extension of State authority throughout
 

Sierra Leone, in full cooperation with UNAMSIL and with
the United Nations team as a whole, and by instructing the
RUF membership to disarm and to surrender all weapons,
including their heavy weapons, mines and anti-aircraft
equipment.

The fifth element would be that Council members urge
Member State strictly to enforce the travel ban imposed by
the Council and to remind concerned Sierra Leone leaders
of their obligation to obtain exemptions before travelling
abroad, without exception. The final element would be that
Council members welcome the upcoming donor conference
in London on 27 March and urge Members to participate
and contribute generously to the peace process and
development efforts in Sierra Leone.

These are the elements that can be incorporated in the
statement to the press after the conclusion of our meeting.
I hope that this is acceptable to all.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 4.35 pm.
