Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I welcome Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs Jawad Ludin and thank
him for his presentation. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Herve' Ladsous for his briefing. I wish to
extend our gratitude and appreciation to Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his leadership as
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for his participation today.
I take this opportunity to wish him all the best in his
new assignment. I welcome Mr. Jan Kubis and wish
him well in fulfilling his important responsibilities.

We meet today to discuss the Secretary-General's
latest report on the activities of UNAMA
(S/2011/772*), but also to exchange views on the
results of the conferences held in Istanbul and in Bonn.
We welcome the information in the report on the
developments in the transition process in the field of
security. We appreciate the fact that areas already
under control of the Afghan forces remained relatively
stable.

It is encouraging to see that UNAMA and the
United Nations agencies have continued to further
important actions in areas such as humanitarian
assistance, development and human rights. We
welcome the three priorities of the work of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, as outlined by Mr. Ladsous.
Brazil hopes that the international community will
continue to lend its full support to Afghanistan beyond
2014, helping it move towards greater stability and
socio-economic development. It is important that the
commitments expressed during the Bonn Conference
be swiftly translated into tangible actions.

We welcome the fact that the first priority of the
United Nations in Afghanistan will be to link security
and development. Brazil has encouraged a more

integrated approach between security and development
in our efforts to consolidate peace. Such an approach
will certainly benefit peace consolidation in
Afghanistan. The international community should step
up actions in the fields of agriculture, job creation,
health, education, infrastructure and public
administration, in line with the priorities indicated by
the Afghan stakeholders.

We are also of the view that the transition should
be coupled with tangible progress in the reconciliation
process. A political solution is indispensable to achieve
durable peace. We hope that an inclusive dialogue
among all stakeholders, led by the Afghans themselves,
will lead to a united Afghanistan capable of facing the
threat of terrorism.

Brazil also commends the initiatives aimed at
enhancing the coordination of international economic
assistance. We welcome the initiative of holding a
ministerial conference in Japan in 2012 to discuss
strategies to further sustainable development in
Afghanistan.

The United Nations has a crucial role in
Afghanistan. Brazil expects the United Nations to be a
central actor during the transition period and
afterwards, especially with regard to civilian aspects of
international assistance to the country.

Countries in the region should also increasingly
be engaged in the strategies to stabilize Afghanistan.
Economic ties are particularly relevant. We commend
the results of the Istanbul Conference, an important
step in fostering greater confidence and cooperation
among countries in the region.

To conclude, let me express our hope that the
international community will continue to assist
Afghanistan to lay the foundation for a better and
prosperous future. Brazil pledges once again its full
support to that process.

