Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I guess it is
not news to the members of the Security Council that up
to 3 million land-mines litter my country today. Their
effects on peace-keepers and other members of
international organizations engaged in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and especially on our people - indeed, on
the whole country - have been devastating and is
ongoing.

From 1 January 1996 to 15 June 1996 alone, 16
persons were killed by land-mines, 8 of those being

 

children. In the same period, 98 persons were seriously
wounded, 34 of them children. So we see that even though
the military conflict has stopped, the tools of military
conflict continue to do their barbaric work of killing,
maiming and crippling. And as has been said in this
Chamber many times today, the overwhelming majority of
land-mine victims have been, are and will continue to be
children and civilians.

In only two Bosnian cities, Tuzla and Zenica, 55 per
cent and 45 per cent, respectively, of all war-time amputees
were maimed by mines. The cost of rehabilitation for these
persons and all others maimed is tremendous and competes
with resources for other purposes from the international
donor community. But these are not the only reasons why
we are so grateful to you, Mr. President, and to all
members of the Security Council for putting the discussion
on demining in the context of peace-keeping on the agenda
at this formal meeting, thus giving us the opportunity to
express our views on this issue.

At the outset, I have to say that we agree that the
protection of peace-keepers deserves the special attention of
the Security Council, which authorizes peace-keeping
operations and bears responsibility for their participants. We
hope that the Security Council recognizes in this context the
absolute interdependence of the protection of the peace-
keepers and the protection of the domestic civilian
population. For, in a way, while on the ground, the peace-
keepers become part of the local communities in the areas
where they are deployed.

The successful detection, marking and clearing of
mines and other unexploded ordnance protects both peace-
keepers and the local population. Likewise, their existence,
non-detection and non-lifting jeopardize both equally. Here
the interests of both are absolutely inseparable. For this
reason, if I, as a representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
focus my discussion on the issue of mines as a threat to the
population and to aspects of the social life in my country,
I kindly ask you not to interpret it as neglecting peace-
keepers.

Mines, as everyone knows, do not only kill, maim and
cripple. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, they are a blatant
reminder of intolerance, ethnic chauvinism and the war
aims which tore apart the fabric of Bosnian society, which
today we are trying to stitch back together. In Bosnia today,
land-mines have completed their military purpose. They are
now doing what the perpetrators of division, "ethnic
cleansing" and genocide tried to do: divide, separate and
continue to breed fear and mistrust.

The mine problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina has,
first, contributed to the lack of progress in the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their homes; secondly,
helped to prevent freedom of movement in the country;
thirdly, posed an obstacle to economic recovery; fourthly,
kept a psychological burden of siege on the Bosnian
people so that they are unable to experience normal
living, knowing that the threat of land-mines in most
areas remains real; and, fifthly, contributed to increasing
the burden of medical costs mandated by the treatment
and rehabilitation of affected persons. But now we hope
it is time for the comprehensive and intensified action in
demining to begin re-establishing and laying the
groundwork for strengthening peace and inspiring new
reconciliation.

My Government thanks the Governments of all the
countries actively involved in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and all the organizations, including the Office of the High
Representative, the World Bank, the European Union and
the Implementation Force (IFOR) in their efforts at
demining and in the establishment of the United Nations
Mine Action Centre.

Unfortunately, the Mine Action Centre has been
unable to do its duty quickly because of the chronic
problem faced by my country today: the lack of pledged
resources and the need for competing resources for
countless other vital programmes needed to cement the
peace in Bosnia. There are also serious technical issues
which need to be worked out. My Government, first and
foremost, supports and expects the demining project to be
carried out primarily by Bosnian people and by Bosnian
companies; they should be trained, equipped and
supported in all other ways to do the job. Other
alternatives can only be considered a temporary quick fix
for a very large and time- consuming problem.

The reason for this is clear. I would like to put the
mine problem in Bosnia into perspective. According to
the Mine Action Centre, it would take 1,000 mine clearers
33 years to cover all the mine-contaminated areas in
Bosnia and Croatia. In Bosnia and Herzegovina today,
there are still 20,000 unmarked mine fields. We are under
no illusions as to the time much of the international
conununity is willing to invest in clearing Bosnia and
Herzegovina of mines. Because it is our country and a
long-term project, it should be handled by those with the
greatest interests - the Bosnians themselves.

But the real threat of mines remains. All of this
reinforces our strong support for the Convention on

 

Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons and for many General Assembly
resolutions. We especially support the efforts of many
Member States and international organizations for a total
ban on the manufacture, transfer and use of anti-personnel
mmes.

But we also stress the importance of remembering that
the issue is not only that of the manufacture, transfer and
use of anti-personnel mines, but also the marking, removal
and destruction of existing mines. This is why we join
those who have called for much greater investment in
financial, scientific and human resources in order to
improve the technology for the detection and the destruction
of mines, instead of increasing their destructive effects. In
this context, I cannot resist expressing my deepest gratitude
and appreciation for the Norwegian Government's decision
to send to the territory of the former Yugoslavia a newly
invented, highly efficient and safe mine-clearing device, as
the Norwegian representative announced in his statement
this afternoon.

Bosnia encourages the linkage of international
humanitarian, financial and/or military assistance with the
cooperation of needy countries, with the goals and desires
of the many countries which have spoken today and with
the Convention on Conventional Weapons. We also believe
that those countries and Governments which are mine
exporters and which violate United Nations resolutions,
existing conventions and future decisions on mines should
be discouraged from doing so with the threat of more
serious consequences. In this regard, I fully share the view
expressed here by the representative of Pakistan.

My Government not only has no reservations, but
salutes and fully supports the latest initiative of the
President of the United States of America to ban the usage,
stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel land-
mines. We find the recently announced seven-point action
programme on anti-personnel mines presented by the
German Foreign Minister to be an extraordinary
contribution to the decisive course towards the goal for
which the majority of humanity strives: the elimination of
the dangers and irreparable damages that mines cause both
to peace-keepers and to civilians.

We cannot but express our gratitude for the material
and other contributions that the United States of America,
Germany, Japan, Canada and other countries have made
towards the elimination of the dangers of mines, as well as
for the assistance offered to my Government in detecting,
marking and clearing mines, which are cowardly weapons
that only reveal the most evil intentions of their users.

