Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, should like to

welcome Deputy Prime Minister Covie to this meeting.
I should like also to thank Special Representative
Steiner for his briefing and to commend him and his
staff for their tireless efforts to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and to realize the
benchmarks, not least as regards the rule of law,
minority rights and the return of internally displaced
persons. I will make some brief comments on these
issues.

We welcome the protocols signed on 8 July in
Belgrade between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Serbian Ministry of Justice regarding the return of 40
Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors to the province.
This is, in our View, a positive step in building the rule
of law in Kosovo, as well as in strengthening practical
and concrete cooperation between Pristina and
Belgrade. Furthermore, this could contribute positively
to building trust among Kosovo Serbs in the efforts of
the international community.

Norway welcomes the first significant organized
return of Serb internally displaced persons, which is
expected to commence in the Pec and Klina
municipalities. Despite the overall bleak picture as
regards the actual return of internally displaced persons
and refugees to Kosovo, it is encouraging that, in the
first six months of 2002, more people have returned
than have left. We fully support Special Representative
Steiner's strong focus on this issue.

We would like to emphasize the importance of
coordination between the organizations involved in
facilitating returns. The current funding crisis of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the threat that this poses to the
continued operation of the UNHCR in Kosovo
underlines this point.

We would like to encourage UNMIK, UNHCR,
the Kosovo Coordination Centre and authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina to do their utmost to coordinate
return-related efforts. The international community
should for its part ensure that UNHCR has the
necessary funding required for this very important
work.

We regret the occurrence of several very
unfortunate incidents that took place in Kosovo during
the past several weeks. On 14 July, approximately 80
Kosovo Albanians attempted to prevent some 100
Kosovo Serbs - including Bishop Artemije - from
holding a religious ceremony in the destroyed
Orthodox monastery in Zociste. This was followed by
two arson attempts against the remnants of the
monastery.

Another setback, in our View, was the display of
"hate posters" recently seen in Pristina, Pec and
Mitrovica. The posters depicted a Serb soldier cutting
the throat of an Albanian boy, with the text "Do not
allow criminals to come back to Kosovo". Such posters
are clearly well-organized acts of political propaganda
aimed at undermining reconciliation among the
communities and the normalization of inter-ethnic
relations in Kosovo.

We expect responsible political leaders in Kosovo
to take a strong, principled stand against acts of
intolerance, discrimination and criminal behaviour.

Finally, Norway welcomes the holding of local
elections in southern Serbia and hopes that these will
be a positive contribution to regional stability. Besides
strengthening the stability of the southern
municipalities of Serbia, these elections can add to the
stability of the whole region if the results are respected
by all parties.

