Mr. Zebari (Iraq): In accordance with Security
Council resolution 1723 (2006), the mandate for the
Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I) is due for review.
On behalf of the Government of Iraq, I would like to
present an update to the Security Council on the
present situation and ongoing developments in our
country.

In May this year, Iraq observed the first
anniversary of the formation of the constitutionally
elected Government that is accountable to the 275 men
and women of the Council of Representatives, the first
democratically elected legislative body in Iraq's
history. The formation of the National Unity
Government that is broadly representative of, and
governs by the consent of, Iraq's diverse society,
marked the completion of the political process as set
forth in Security Council resolution 1546 (2004) and
consolidated Iraq's commitment to the process of
democratization.

The past 12 months have been a critical test of
the courage and commitment of the Government and
the people of Iraq as we broker a difficult, and often
painful, transition towards a stable and peaceful
democracy. Despite remarkable progress, a complex
political, security and economic environment continues
to present formidable challenges to the elected leaders
tasked with the normalization of our country.

There is no more definitive example of this threat
than today's bombings, which destroyed the remnant of
the holy Al-Askaria shrine in Samarra. This shrine,
sacred to both Shia and Sunni and revered by all Iraqis
regardless of religion, was of no military value
whatsoever. Its destruction in today's attack - the
second on that shrine in 16 months - was meant
symbolically as a message from the terrorists that they
are seeking to destroy the fabric of Iraqi society - to
destroy inter-religious harmony as well as to destroy
the tradition of tolerance and fraternity within each of
Iraq's various religious traditions. We Iraqis, standing
united as a Government and as a people, utterly reject
these obvious attempts to divide us in the hope of
sowing the seeds of sectarian and civil war.
Notwithstanding this senseless violence, my
Government has made tremendous strides towards the
day when security will be provided by a self-sufficient

Iraqi national security force. That is our ultimate
objective, and it is what we are actively engaged in
achieving. While Iraqis will always be grateful for their
liberation from an absolute despot, no Iraqi
Government official - indeed, no Iraqi citizen -
wants the presence of foreign troops on Iraqi soil one
day longer than is vitally necessary. But today, and for
the foreseeable future at least, the presence of MNF-I
troops is vitally necessary, not only for Iraq but also to
safeguard regional security and stability.

The situation in our country is difficult and
challenging at the moment. While we are eagerly
strengthening our nascent democracy and rebuilding
our State institutions, the Iraqi people continue to be
targeted by a well funded and organized campaign to
destroy democracy in our part of the world. As Iraqis
have increasingly demonstrated their determination to
go forward in rebuilding their country, this campaign
has become increasingly Vicious. Aside from today's
heinous attack, in recent weeks, for example, terrorists
have destroyed bridges, seeking to sever the physical
ties that link Iraqis together. Although many of the
perpetrators of violence are indiscriminate in terms of
their victims, their continued wilful targeting of
political, civil, educational, economic and, as we saw
today, religious institutions is no less than an attack on
the modern and historic culture of Iraq.

While the scale of their atrocities is appalling and
captures media attention, the ability of these terrorists
to influence actual events on the ground is limited. For
instance, they continue to target police and army
recruits, as is often reported in the media; yet, the
numbers of recruits continue to rise through a growing
stream of volunteers. Thus, the terrorists have failed to
achieve their strategic goal of preventing large
numbers of volunteers in the rebuilding of the country.

We have succeeded in recruiting nearly 350,000
men into the armed and security services in Iraq. We
are making progress in training and equipping those
troops, looking forward to the day when they will be
able to secure the peace of the nation without the
presence of foreign troops. Yet, this process takes time.
It takes time for an esprit de corps to develop, and it
takes time for trust and confidence to be built, up and
down the ranks. We are building these institutions,
doing so under far less than ideal circumstances.
Thus, the role of the Multinational Force
continues to be vitally important, in at least two ways.

First, the Multinational Force provides additional
strength of arms whenever the need exceeds the
capacity of Iraq's armed and security forces. An
example of this phenomenon can now be seen in
Operation Fardh al-Qanun, or Baghdad security plan,
which aims to re-establish the rule of law in Baghdad
and to stabilize the rest of the country. This is a
difficult and dangerous task, made all the more
difficult by the ruthlessness of an enemy unbound by
any moral or ethical restrictions. Carrying out this task
also has a heavy price, for both Iraqi and multinational
forces. Secondly, the Multinational Force is
undertaking the training of the Iraqi Armed Forces. Let
me say here that the Iraqi people are deeply grateful for
their continued efforts and their sacrifice.

The Iraqi Government is responsible for security
and for increasing the capacity and capabilities of
security forces, including recruitment, training and
equipment, as outlined in the letter from Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki to the Security Council dated
11 November 2006 (S/2006/888, annex). We recognize
the need to accelerate the build-up of an Iraqi force
that is self-sustaining, holds public confidence and is
loyal to an Iraqi national agenda. The Government of
Iraq is the sole authority to control Iraqi streets, and we
are strengthening our stance against all illegal militias
and corruption within our national security, army and
police.

Iraqi security forces continue to assume greater
responsibility for providing security to the people, as
their size, experience and capacity increase. In
September of last year, the Iraqi Government assumed
operational command and control of ground, naval and
air force commands. Today, security responsibility for
seven governorates has been transferred to the Iraqi
authorities, and my Government aspires to increase the
number of provinces and governorates under its control
with a View towards the day when it has full authority
over all 18 governorates.

We look forward to the day when Iraqi forces are
able to assume full responsibility for the maintenance
of security and stability in Iraq, thus allowing the
Multinational Force to complete its mandate and end
its presence in the country. Until that day, Iraq
continues to need the support of the Multinational
Force to assist it in providing a secure environment for
the Iraqi people.

Iraq's armed forces, in conjunction with the
Multinational Force, are making encouraging progress
in their drive to restore law and order to the capital.
The number of sectarian-motivated murders - a
phenomenon new to Iraq - has greatly reduced since
last winter, before operations began.

Preliminary reports indicate that some of those
who had been internally displaced from their homes in
Baghdad are beginning slowly to return. The
worrisome occurrence of militias attempting to
ethnically cleanse neighbourhoods within the capital is
beginning to be reversed. Apart from the statistics, we
see evidence of normalization - businesses reopening,
increased traffic and more everyday signs of life on the
streets. While it is perhaps too early to declare success,
those are not small developments. It is of Vital
importance that those operations continue as we look
forward to the day when normalcy can be restored to
the capital, home to one-quarter of Iraq's population.

Of course, it is essential that we ensure that those
who have so terrorized Baghdad's population should
not find refuge in the surrounding areas. In this respect,
too, there is progress to report. Tribal chiefs and
ordinary citizens in Anbar and Diyala provinces - the
most restive of Iraq's provinces and, for too long, a
haven for Al-Qaida terrorists - have shown signs of
taking arms and standing up against those terrorists.
These citizens are now cooperating closely with the
Iraqi forces and the multinational forces.

While we are determined to defeat the forces of
those whose only agenda is to destroy the political
process in Iraq, my Government is mindful that
strategies in addition to the military option must be
employed to restore peace and stability.

National reconciliation is also a top priority with
which we are contending. As a cornerstone of this
reconciliation process, we are working on a draft law
to reverse overly aggressive de-Baathification. Past
practices, commencing in 2003, failed to differentiate
between criminals and non-criminals, and failed to
distinguish between those who were ideological
members of the party versus those who had joined it
simply to be able to support their families - a
common practice in autocratic and authoritarian
regimes. Those failures will be remedied through
legislation.

In addition, and as part of national dialogue and
reconciliation, we are now in the process of reviewing
and revising the constitution, with an eye to completing
that process this month. Simultaneously, we are
working on completing a hydrocarbon law and a law
on the distribution of Iraq's assets in a way that fairly
insures development throughout the country.

Many have criticized us for taking time to
complete what would be, even in a developed
democracy operating under ideal circumstances, an
ambitious legislative agenda. This process has taken
time for two reasons. First, we are convinced that
setting these laws on a firm foundation is more
important than adhering to some artificial deadline.
Secondly, we are not operating exclusively on the
principle of majority rule. We do not wish to establish
these fundamental and long-serving State institutions
on the principle of "50 per cent plus one". We are
trying to reach as comprehensive a national consensus
as possible so that all groups willing to participate in
the political process will feel invested in these
institutions.

I would also like to report on our Government's
activities in the regional and international arenas,
activities which have been quite successful. Conscious
of the important role our neighbours can play in
helping us stabilize our country, we have worked
proactively to bring their representatives together with
other important players in the region. Thus, on
10 March, we held in Baghdad an expanded meeting of
senior experts representing our neighbours, the
permanent members of the Security Council and key
international and regional organizations, including, of
course, the United Nations. That meeting prepared the
ground for the expanded international ministerial
conference of Iraq's neighbouring countries, plus
Egypt and Bahrain, as well as the permanent members
of the United Nations Security Council and of the
Group of Eight, on 4 May in Sharm el-Sheikh. At that
meeting ministers enacted the concrete
recommendation made by their experts earlier in
Baghdad.

As a consequence, three technical committees
have been set up dealing with problems besetting Iraq
and affecting our neighbours, namely, security,
temporarily displaced persons and energy supplies.
Meetings of these technical committees are being
prepared, and we have asked the United Nations to
assist in their work.

Also, on 3 May, the International Compact with
Iraq was launched in the Egyptian city of Sharm
el-Sheikh. The launch was attended by over 60
countries and international organizations, and many
were represented at the ministerial level. The Compact
is a framework developed to help the Iraqi Government
achieve its national vision of a unified, democratic,
federal, peaceful and prosperous Iraq through a
programme of mutual commitments - time-bound
commitments by the Iraqi Government to achieve key
milestones in security and political and governmental
reform and economic reconstruction, and commitments
by the international community to provide necessary
assistance in the medium term.

In respect to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), we note that its mandate
was set by resolution 1546 (2004) and focused on
discrete activities centred around Iraq's political
process. This process has been essentially completed.
UNAMI rules going forward must evolve better to fit
current and future needs, as exemplified by the
implementation of the International Compact. We are
mindful, however, that circumstances are sufficiently
changed, and the relationship between UNAMI and the
Government of Iraq must change to reflect that reality.

Our vision of UNAMI is one in which its rule
must be responsive to Iraq's needs as expressed by the
Government of Iraq. We also expect UNAMI to expand
its role to include a greater presence and to facilitate
expanding the work of United Nations agencies, such
as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Health
Organization, the Food and Agricultural Organization
and other such agencies.

I would be remiss if I did not take this
opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. Ashraf Qazi
for his years of dedicated service to Iraq and to the
United Nations. During his tenure in Baghdad, he
earned the respect of Iraq's political class and the
gratitude of the people of Iraq. He will be missed, but
we wish him all the best in his future endeavours.

Let me conclude by formally noting my
Government's request for the continuation of the
arrangements relating to the Development Fund for
Iraq and the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board for Iraq, for reasons contained in my letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 8 June 2007.

