Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We also wish to recognize and welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger and to express our gratitude to Special Representative of the Secretary General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, and His Excellency Ambassador Costa Filho for their briefings. While gradually improving, the situation in Guinea-Bissau still presents some challenges, which, if not properly addressed, may very well lead to a regression in the gains we have seen in the country over the past few years. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines congratulates former President Jose Mario Vaz for completing a full term in office and Guinea-Bissau for the conclusion of relatively peaceful presidential elections. Commendations are also due to members of the international community, including the group of five international partners, in particular the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and civil society organizations, which provided valuable support during the electoral process. As noted by Special Representative Sori-Coulibaly, the result was contested. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines conveys its support for the internal legal process currently ongoing in Guinea-Bissau in relation to the election dispute and calls on the relevant parties to respect the process and act accordingly. We further encourage Guinea-Bissau to work, as a matter of urgency, towards the critical reforms and strategic foci outlined in the ECOWAS road map, the Conakry Agreement and the Stability Pact. We urge the political actors in Guinea-Bissau to keep their focus on the noble tasks involved in leading the country towards progress and stability, which have been entrusted to them by their constituents. Parliament members will be required to put aside differences and work more closely with each other through a non-partisan approach in order to realize reforms in the country. In addition to those reforms, it would be remiss of me not to mention the socioeconomic improvements required in the country. The current situation in West Africa has shown that underdeveloped communities plagued by lack of economic opportunities and poor availability of social services are those most likely to be targeted by criminal and radical elements. We have observed in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/105) that transnational organized crime, mainly drug trafficking, exists in Guinea-Bissau. We welcome the strategic national action plan on drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, developed by the country with the assistance of United Nations agencies, particularly the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We also call on the international community to continue its support for Guinea-Bissau as the country continues to work on peacebuilding and sustainable development. We further call on the Peacebuilding Commission to continue to serve as a platform to mobilize such support. Finally, we wish to thank the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) for its commendable service in Guinea-Bissau during the period under review. As the Office approaches the mandated timeline for its closure, as stipulated in resolution 2458 (2019), it has made tremendous strides towards the three-phase drawdown. We welcome the $4 million mobilized by the Peacebuilding Fund to facilitate the United Nations transition and the seamless transfer of UNIOGBIS's residual mandated tasks to other United Nations agencies and partners. We were also particularly encouraged by the outreach efforts undertaken by UNIOGBIS to bring greater attention of the drawdown to States and entities in the region, which we also see as having an important role in filling the void that will be left by UNIOGBIS.
