Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation would like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for holding
this important debate and it is good to see Lord Ahmad
presiding over this debate. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the Archbishop of Canterbury and to
Ms. Mossarat Qadeem, who is from my country, for
their insightful briefings.

The notion and instrument of mediation are as old
as humankind. Much as wars and conquests have filled
the annals of human history, humankind has also sought
to find ways to reconcile divergent interests and seek
common ground to resolve disputes and conflicts. More
recently, our collective faith in the power of dialogue
has been reinforced by the successful mediation efforts
in Colombia and between Greece and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Yet large parts of the world, in desperate need of
peace and conciliation, are denuded of this. We in fact
live in times that are more uncertain than ever. Tensions
and turbulence have re-emerged with greater intensity
in various parts of the world. The world seems to be
afflicted by greater turmoil and persisting conflicts,
instead of living up to the principles of peace and

justice of the Charter of the United Nations.
In the face of these challenges we need to evolve
a comprehensive approach to addressing volatile
situations before they erupt; preventing disputes from
escalating into conflict and to containing and resolving
conflicts when they occur, or indeed when they fester.
The Secretary-General's call for a surge in diplomacy
for peace is both urgent and important, for it costs far
more to pick up the pieces after a conflict than it does
to prevent one.

The Security Council, with its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a critical role in that prevention-centric agenda. It
must operationalize the full repository of measures set
out in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
as the centrepiece of the global peace and security
architecture. That is all the more relevant given that,
in recent years, there has been growing criticism of the
Council's tendency to resort to enforcement measures
under Chapter VII. While Chapter VII is the ultimate
instrument for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, its latent efficacy can be greatly enhanced
through a timely and judicious application of Chapter
VI. That complementarity between Chapters VI and
VII must be clearly upheld.

The Security Council should authorize the
Secretary-General to make more frequent use of his
good offices and other possibilities for mediation and
conciliation. We are happy to note that the Secretary-
General is working to expand the pool of high-level
envoys and senior mediators, with special emphasis on
women. As much as the establishment of the Secretary-
General's High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is a
welcome step in the right direction, so is gender parity
in the composition of the Board.

While the Council could refer disputes to the
International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion,
if not a legal decision or adjudication, it should also
utilize its mandatory enforcement authority under
Chapter VII of the Charter to refer a dispute to the
Court. The determination of the Court would thereafter
be binding on the parties, irrespective of whether or not
they had accepted the jurisdiction of the Court.

While the United Nations has had some success
in mediating political settlements, that record - as
we all know - is checkered at best. The Jammu and
Kashmir dispute remains among the oldest issues on
the agenda of the Council. It was also the subject of one
of the earliest applications of Chapter VI of the Charter.
Through its various resolutions, the Security Council
has provided that
"the final disposition of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir will be made in accordance with the will of
the people expressed through the democratic method
of a free and impartial plebiscite conducted under the
auspices of the United Nations" (resolution 122 (1957),
secondpreambular paragraph).

The Security Council also instituted several
mechanisms, including the United Nations Commission
on India and Pakistan, the deployment of the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
and the appointment of representatives of the United
Nations, who consulted the parties and submitted
reports on how to resolve the dispute in accordance with
provisions of relevant Security Council resolutions.

Sadly, those resolutions remain thus far unenforced
and unimplemented. The international community
cannot succeed in its efforts to strengthen conflict
prevention and promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes if the Security Council's own resolutions are
held in abeyance by some. Both the Council's credibility
as well as the objective of durable peace in my region
are at stake. We must not fail those two important tests.

The United Nations, in the words of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold, is a venture in
progress towards an international community living in
peace under the laws ofjustice. That is still a distant
objective, but a worthy one. An essential prerequisite
towards it is the growing currency of the pacific
settlement of disputes. Few ideals are more worthy or
important for our future.

