Mr. Sun (Cambodia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) - namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.

At the outset, we should like to pay tribute to Sir
Jeremy Greenstock and his team for their excellent
efforts in guiding the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) since its establishment in 2001. We
commend their commitment to ensuring the effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). Despite their many heavy responsibilities, they
have remained focused on carrying out the work
programme of the CTC aimed at fulfilling its mandate.

We appreciate the many initiatives that the CTC
has undertaken to engage various international,
regional and subregional organizations in the global
effort to combat terrorism. In this regard, ASEAN
welcomed the convening of the special CTC meeting
on 6 March 2003. ASEAN's participation in the
meeting complemented its own efforts at the regional
level. It also provided an opportunity to further
enhance regional and international counter-terrorism
networks, and to exchange information, as well as best
practices.

ASEAN welcomes the CTC's seventh work
programme, which will further advance its work. We
are encouraged by the CTC's plan to organize a
meeting with technical agencies and organizations
relating to the control of the use of or access to nuclear,
chemical, biological and other deadly materials so as to
evaluate ways to enhance the effectiveness of global
action against terrorism in this area.

ASEAN commends the CTC for its efforts in
providing valuable information on best practices,
model laws and assistance programmes through the
Directory of Counter-Terrorism Information and
Sources of Assistance. ASEAN takes note of the
creation of a regional action section on the CTC's web
site. That will be an effective tool for sharing
information among various organizations.

ASEAN's commitment to counter-terrorism has
been reflected at the highest level. Our leaders adopted
a Declaration on Terrorism during the Eighth ASEAN
Summit, held in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, from 4 to 5
November 2002. The Declaration expressed, inter alia,
the determination of ASEAN to build on previously
agreed measures, and to intensify efforts to prevent,
counter and suppress terrorist activities in the region.
Most recently, at the working level, an ASEAN
Regional Forum intersessional meeting on counter-
terrorism and transnational crime was successfully held
in Karambunai, Malaysia, from 21 to 22 March 2003.

In line with our Work Programme to implement
the ASEAN Plan of Action to Combat Transnational
Crime, ASEAN has also carried out various training
programmes and projects in countering terrorism this
year. In addition, ASEAN focal points on counter-
terrorism have also been established. These include
courses on psychological operations for law
enforcement authorities and on intelligence procuring.
We are also planning to organize courses on bomb and
explosive detection, post-blast investigation, airport
security and passport and document security and
inspection.

ASEAN believes that the international fight
against terrorism will become counter-productive
unless its focus and momentum is consistently
maintained. For its part, ASEAN will continue its
tradition of close cooperation with the CTC in its
efforts to sustain the process. In this connection, we
would like to welcome the incoming Chairman, Mr.
Inocencio Arias of Spain. We have full confidence in
his leadership and trust that he will steer the
Committee towards new achievements and successes.

