Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Thank
you, Ambassador Haq, for your briefing on the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2010/522).
Let me also thank you for your dedicated leadership
and your commitment to solidifying peace in Timor-
Leste.

My Government welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on UNMIT's important work. The
United Nations and the international community as a
whole played a critical role in Timor-Leste's
independence. Sustained international support will be
critical to ensuring this young country's success. The
interim report provides an important opportunity to
think about Timor-Leste's needs and begin long-term
planning for future United Nations engagement there.

Today let me focus on five key points. First, the
United States is encouraged that Timor-Leste's security
situation remains stable. We are further encouraged
that this stability has continued despite a slight
reduction in UNMIT's force size. We continue to
support the roles of the United Nations and the
development partners in assisting the Government of
Timor-Leste as it further solidifies peace and security
throughout the country. As Timor-Leste continues on
the path from conflict to stability we are heartened to
see that it can look at long-term challenges and plan for
a peaceful, prosperous future.

Secondly, the transfer of primary policing
responsibilities from UNMIT to the Timorese national
police is critical to further cementing the country's
stability. Building local capacity is the key to
peacekeeping mission success and we commend
UNMIT, the National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and bilateral donors for their hard work in this
area.

For peacekeeping missions to succeed, their
mandates must match their capabilities, and we
strongly support UNMIT's efforts to ensure that its
police component has the appropriate specialized skills
to emphasize skills-building and institutional
development. But the excessive use of force and lack
of accountability continue to be of concern for the
PNTL. We urge the PNTL with UNMIT's support, to
establish mechanisms to address these challenges.

We recognize the improved professionalism of
the Timorese police and military, and we note Timor-
Leste's progress in developing a national security
policy. The United States is pleased to help facilitate
that process through our multi-stakeholder national
security workshops, hosted by the Asia-Pacific Center
for Security Studies in Honolulu.

The United States is also pleased to note that, in
order to help facilitate the full resumption of national
policing, we will be increasing our bilateral assistance
to further strengthen the PNTL over the coming years,
including in the areas of community policing, criminal
investigations and border and maritime policing.
Developing competent and professional security
institutions, police and military will be critical to
Timor-Leste's long-term success. It is critical that the
Government of Timor-Leste develop clear lines of
authority and areas of responsibility for its military and
police.

Thirdly, we are pleased by the progress that has
been made towards implementing the recommendations
of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship. We are also encouraged by the launch of
the Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste.
These advances are critical to ensuring that the
Timorese have faith in the justice sector, in continuing
this act of dialogue and in furthering the national
reconciliation progress.

But the commutations of the sentences of those
convicted in the February 2008 attacks against the

President and Prime Minister contribute to our
continuing concern about the danger of creating a
culture of impunity. We urge the Government of Timor-
Leste to address impunity and to hold individuals
accountable for their actions.

We also note the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Commission; an environment of
transparency and accountability is essential to
sustainable development. The United States looks
forward to working with the Government of Timor-
Leste through our Millennium Challenge Corporation's
new threshold programme.

Fourthly, let me congratulate UNMIT on the
absence of reported cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse during the reporting period. We were also
pleased to note UNMIT's work with the PNTL to
create and implement a training course on
investigations of gender-based violence. We commend
UNMIT for giving high priority to the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as for
its emphasis on training its personnel.

Finally, we are pleased to note that planning has
begun for the transition process for UNMIT's
departure. We have seen significant progress over the
last reporting period, but UNMIT continues to play a
vital role. UNMIT must continue to stress local
capacity-building, and the Government of Timor-Leste
must continue to strengthen institutions for peace and
stability, so that they can take firm root throughout the
country. We encourage UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste to continue their efforts and to create a
gradual, methodical and thoughtful transition plan.

In closing, let me again thank the peacekeepers of
UNMIT, as well as their Timorese partners on the
ground and their international supporters, for the
continued dedication to peace and security in Timor-
Leste. The Timorese have made great strides towards
peace and stability and we hope and trust that they will
continue to do so with the presence and commitment of
strong international partners.

