Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
It is a pleasure for Egypt to see you, Sir, representative of
the friendly State of Portugal, presiding over and guiding
this Security Council meeting today. I should also like to
thank your predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya,
for having so skilfully guided the work of the Council last
month.

The Council is meeting today to consider the illegal
and provocative decision taken by the Israeli Government
on 21 June to expand the limits of the municipality of
Jerusalem to include a number of Israeli settlements in the
occupied West Bank. The objective is to impose a new
fait accompli on the ground that would prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations and alter the legal
status of Jerusalem, while isolating it from the rest of the
occupied territories in the West Bank.

 

This decision is part of the plan that the present Israeli
Government is trying to implement in order to obstruct the
peace to which the previous Israeli Government had
committed itself. The question of Jerusalem is the most
sensitive question in the Arab-Israeli conflict. Indeed,
Jerusalem enjoys a unique status from a political point of
View. Furthermore, Jerusalem represents a spiritual and
historical heritage for adherents of the three divine
religions. That city is, in fact, a source of deep religious
sentiment in the Arab and Islamic world. Therefore, any
unilateral measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
that are designed to alter the status of Jerusalem before
there is agreement on the final status of the city are all null
and void, and we reject them in both form and substance.
Not only do such measures run counter to international
legitimacy and relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, but they strip real peace of any
content and are designed to undermine efforts to achieve
peace. It is sufficient to recall that the Israeli decision aims
at annexing settlements on the Israeli borders. This in itself
runs counter to contractual obligations undertaken by Israel
with the Palestinian Authority designed to defer the
outcome of the fate of these illegal settlements at least until
the final settlement has been reached.

This illegal decision demonstrates, at least, the
unwillingness of the present Israeli Government to establish
peace with its neighbours, and its persistence in ignoring
that its pressure in the occupied territories constitutes
nothing more than a physical presence as an occupying
Power. This presence confers no rights on Israel. On the
contrary, it imposes obligations under international and
bilateral conventions now in effect, which must be
complied with until the final agreement puts an end to the
occupation.

The international community, represented by the
United Nations and all of its bodies, with the Security
Council at the forefront, have firmly confronted the illegal
measures undertaken in the past by successive Israeli
Governments to annex East Jerusalem. In this context, I
should like to emphasize several important realities that
should not be forgotten when considering this question.

First, the city of East Jerusalem is an integral part of
the rest of the Palestinian territories, the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. This entire territory was occupied by Israel by
force during the June 1967 war. The provisions of the
United Nations Charter affirm the necessity of rejecting the
principle of the acquisition of territory by force, as was
emphasized in resolution 242 (1967). Consequently, all of
the territories which were militarily occupied, including

 

Jerusalem, must be liberated. Secondly, the United
Nations has reaffirmed in numerous binding resolutions
that the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, are territories to which the provisions of the
1907 Hague Convention apply, and they are also legally
subject to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. I
should like in particular to emphasize article 47 of that
Convention, which prohibits the occupying Power from
annexing any territory that it occupies, and article 49,
which prohibits the transfer of the civilian population of
the occupying Power to the occupied territory.

To demonstrate how Israel is flagrantly in
contravention of those conventions it is sufficient to point
out that there were no Israeli citizens in East Jerusalem
before the 1967 occupation, yet now there is already an
Israeli majority.

Numerous resolutions of the General Assembly, the
most recent of which was adopted at the tenth emergency
special session, emphasize that the Fourth Geneva
Convention is fully applicable to the occupied Palestinian
territories. In consequence of the seriousness of the Israeli
violations, the Security Council must reaffirm the
applicability of that Convention to those territories,
including Jerusalem. Furthermore, under article 1 of the
Geneva Convention, the States parties to the Convention
have a collective responsibility to guarantee respect for all
of its provisions and their application in all cases. There
can be no doubt that the recent Israeli decision requires
States parties to take concerted action to ensure the
applicability of the Convention.

Thirdly, the Security Council has already adopted
numerous resolutions on Jerusalem. Unfortunately, I must
state today that Israel has trampled them all underfoot. I
should like to refer in particular to resolutions 252 (1968),
271 (1969) and 476 (1980), all of which demand that
Israel respect its commitments as the occupying Power.

The most relevant one to our deliberation today is
resolution 478 (1980) which provides in paragraph 3 that,
inter alia:

"all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which
have altered or purport to alter the character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem...are null and
void and must be rescinded".

It is therefore imperative that the Security Council
act to guarantee respect by Israel of all its resolutions, as

 

it does with regard to other States, in order to maintain the
credibility of principles and criteria laid down by the
Council in various cases and with respect to other States,
without any discrimination. Furthermore, the Council must
not be perceived to be adopting double standards.

Fourthly, one of the major provisions of the Interim
Agreement, signed in Washington in September 1995,
should be respected. I am referring to article 31 of that
agreement which states:

(spoke in English)

"Neither side shall initiate or take any step that will
change the status of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
pending the outcome of the permanent status
negotiations"

(spoke in Arabic)

Those provisions must be applied, despite the
systematic refusal of the Israeli Government to accept the
commitments of previous Governments, whether under the
Oslo agreements or more recent agreements determining
relations between them and the framework for agreement
between Israel and the Palestinian party. The principle of
respecting and implementing international contractual
agreements must be upheld; otherwise no conventions or
commitments have any value. In this context, I should like
to repeat the comments of the Permanent Observer of
Palestine: the violations are the acts that are being
committed, not the responses to those acts.

The entire world knows that Israel is continuing its
actions and has long-term plans for the annexation and total
assimilation of the city of Jerusalem. Israel is continuing to
take successive measures designed to change the status and
character of Jerusalem, and has been doing so since the
occupation in 1967.

Today these attempts are being repeated in its decision
to place settlements on the West Bank under Jerusalem's
municipal authority. That decision shows that the Israeli
Government once again is rejecting all of its contractual
commitments and all of the norms of international legality.
Instead of deciding to implement the second stage of the
withdrawal from the West Bank, this Government has
surprised us by taking an illegal decision on Jerusalem.
This is reminiscent of the situation that existed before the
Madrid Conference - a state of affairs that could launch
the region into a new cycle of violence and counter-
violence.

 

Egypt, which has faith in a just and lasting peace,
has opened the way to the achievement of peace in the
Middle East. Today we are deeply concerned because
peace in the Middle East is in a constant state of jeopardy
owing to the unilateral measures and steps taken by
Israel, which flout the will of the international community
and of all peace-loving States. States interested in peace
in the Middle East, and in particular the two co-sponsors
of the peace process, the United States and the Russian
Federation, must shoulder their responsibilities to push the
Israeli Government to reverse this serious decision and to
stop all of its desperate attempts to place obstacles on the
path to peace - attempts that will have adverse and
destructive effects on the region and on international
peace and security.

What is needed today is the scrupulous and
courageous implementation of all the international and
bilateral commitments that have been entered into.

Finally, the international community, represented by
the Security Council, must today more than ever reaffirm
its position of principle, given the illegal nature of the
Israeli measures concerning Jerusalem and the non-
recognition of the effects of such decisions. The
international community must also urge Israel to honour
its commitments under the Geneva Convention and under
the bilateral agreements it has signed with the Palestinian
side. Israel cannot shirk the provisions of these
conventions.
 

