Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): 1 thank Pakistan for
facilitating this important debate at a time when
terrorism is taking a terrible toll on the nations of
the world. I am particularly conscious of the terrorist
violence in our own region, and join other speakers in
condemning the recent violence that caused widespread
death and destruction in Pakistan.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We hope that this meeting will have a lasting impact
on strengthening United Nations counter-terrorism
initiatives and further invigorate the Security Council's
commitment to strengthening international cooperation
in combating terrorism.

Given the ramifications of modern terrorism, the
United Nations must remain the most appropriate entity
to spearhead the global campaign against terrorism,
which targets mostly civilians, with women and
children being the main victims. The world has watched
helplessly, far too frequently, images of the shredded
bodies of innocents scattered around pockmarked
buildings. The United Nations must grapple firmly
with this hydra-headed evil and develop appropriate
multifaceted and lasting strategies. Our goal must be
to end or dramatically lessen the misery and human
suffering wrought by this scourge. We must not let our
efforts be diluted by exhaustion as we seek to create
a safer world for all. We wholeheartedly support the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Sri Lanka ended a terrorist conflict three and a
half years ago. We determined early on that no terrorist
group could survive for long without critical support
from international linkages and networks. We were
assisted substantively through complex, multifaceted
and comprehensive coordination with the international
community, and we will remain grateful to all our friends
who came to our assistance. While our security forces
confronted the terrorists militarily, after many efforts
to engage them in negotiations, a carefully developed
international strategy, which included financial
measures that denied access to funds collected overseas;
law-enforcement coordination, which included the
seizure and destruction of illegally acquired weapons;
and robust prosecutions and intelligence-sharing,
which assisted in securing the arrest and punishment
of fundraisers and arms procurers, contributed to
achieving our goal. Our efforts continue as the evil
minds of terrorist sympathizers devise new strategies
to pursue their goals.

The Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Secretary-General, other agencies of the United
Nations and the Member States themselves, through
the adoption of 13 anti-terrorism conventions and
other action plans, have made it abundantly clear that
terrorism, the terrorizing of civilians for political gain,
is totally abhorrent to the international community.
Sri Lanka continues to chair the Ad Hoc Committee
on terrorism, which seeks to conclude a comprehensive
convention on terrorism. We have also taken the view
that unless the underlying conditions conducive to
terrorism are addressed, the problem will persist. We
are glad that the Security Council has emphasized
the need to address the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism and to counter the forces that fuel
extremism.

Sri Lanka also continues to improve its own
capacity to fight terrorism by providing training for
law-enforcement and judicial officers in the areas of
intelligence- and information-sharing, investigation
skills, the gathering and analysing of financial
intelligence, and so on. We collaborated with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in
the hosting of a regional workshop for police officers,
prosecutors and counter-terrorism focal points in South
Asia, held in Colombo in 2010. The Galle dialogue,
hosted by Sri Lanka, focuses increasingly on the threat
of piracy.

It is well established that international linkages
and international networks help terrorists and
their front organizations to profit from human and
arms trafficking - a widespread phenomenon at
present - money-laundering, credit-card fraud,
weapons smuggling and cybercrime. Having been a
victim of terrorism for almost three decades, Sri Lanka
learned early on the value of confronting all those
aspects in order to address our terrorist problem. In
that undertaking, we were particularly assisted by our
international partners. Sri Lanka works closely with
the countries of the region, in particular Australia, in
addressing the problem of human smuggling.

Sri Lanka wishes to underline that the root causes
of terrorism are complex and that terrorism cannot be
associated with any ethnicity or religion. Countering
terrorism should not be viewed primarily in a military
context. Sri Lanka's decision to engage the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam terrorists militarily in 2006
followed their persistent refusal to engage in peace
negotiations and their ready embrace of unmitigated
violence targeting civilians.

Since the end of the terrorist conflict in Sri
Lanka, the country has prioritized rehabilitation,
reconstruction, reintegration and reconciliation to
achieve a sustainable peace. Through vast development
efforts, Sri Lanka has adopted measures encompassing
the political, economic and social spheres to ensure
that terrorism will never again find a foothold in our
land. Democratic processes have been re-established,
and local government elections have been held in
former conflict-affected areas after a lapse of three
decades. Sri Lanka embarked upon a domestic
process - the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission process - to ensure that there will be
no recurrence of internal conflict and to identify any
infractions of the law committed during the military
operations.

The reconciliation process, which is very complex,
has been approached from different angles. The
Government has adopted an extremely conciliatory
attitude towards former combatants. Consistent with our
culture, forgiveness was the theme. More than 11,000
former combatants, including over 560 child soldiers,
have been rehabilitated and allowed to return to their
homes and communities. That was less than three years
since the end of the conflict. The Tamil community,
scattered around the world, is an important factor
in the reconciliation and reconstruction effort. Any
concerns on the part of the minorities will be a priority
as Sri Lanka seeks reconciliation. A political process,
through a parliamentary select committee involving
the elected representatives of political parties, has also
been initiated.

It is our hope that the international community will
maintain vigilance and not create opportunities, even
inadvertently, for terrorists and their sympathizers to
achieve through international mechanisms what they
were unable to achieve through bullets, suicide bombs
and shattered lives. The encouragement of one group, in
whatever form, will send a clear message to the others
to adjust their tactics.

It is important that we soon conclude our
negotiations on the comprehensive convention on
terrorism. We note the discussions that have been
taking place since the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 51/210, of 1996, and hope that these will be
brought to a successful conclusion urgently.

