Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I would like to sincerely
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also want to thank all the briefers
today for their insightful remarks on silencing the
guns in Africa. My delegation welcomes resolution
2457 (2019), adopted this morning, as a useful road
map to be implemented alongside Aspiration 4 of
Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU), on building
a peaceful and secure Africa. I have also noted with
appreciation that virtually all the speakers before me
have expressed support for Africa's quest to silence
the guns on the continent. The strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union will
continue to be crucial not only in stopping the guns but
also in eliminating wars and conflicts. It will also go
a long way to preventing human rights violations and
humanitarian disasters, as well as to addressing climate
change and other common challenges.

To some extent, the continued impact of the
illicit circulation and trafficking of small arms and
light weapons, as well as of governance and global
economic dynamics, relatively high unemployment
rates, particularly for the young, the marginalization
of various segments of society, competition for
political power, and cases of the mismanagement and
exploitation of natural resources, have all played their
part in ensuring that the guns are not fully silent in
Africa. But despite a picture that is far from rosy, we
have also seen many positive steps. There have been
major achievements in the area of mediation and support
for peace processes across the continent, particularly at
the subregional level in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa
and the Great Lakes region.

Kenya has been at the forefront in supporting and
promoting the objectives and activities of the AU Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020. We have signed and ratified the AU's
and other regional instruments pertaining to peace
and security, the facilitation of peace processes and
efforts to achieve stability in our region. We have also
taken measures to stop the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. We are currently in the process of
implementing the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
its various protocols and regional mechanisms. In that
regard, Kenya's national focal point on small arms and
light weapons continues to foster enhanced regional and
international cooperation in countering the problem of
illicit small arms and light weapons, particularly by
promoting good practices in marking, record-keeping
and tracing small arms and light weapons. As a result,
more than 98 per cent of firearms in Kenya are properly
marked and can be accounted for.

If we are to succeed in implementing the AU Master
Roadmap, there are three points that must be met and that
my delegation would like to emphasize. First, we have
to allocate more resources to address the root causes of
conflict, including by strengthening national governance

institutions responsible for conflict prevention and the
promotion of socioeconomic development.

Secondly, we must enhance national and
international cooperation at every level in implementing
the instruments available, as well as other measures.
It will be crucial to ensure the universality of our
collective efforts and proper outreach so that no
one is left behind, because weakness in one State or
region eventually weakens the entire system. This
calls for proper weapon and ammunition management,
effective legislative and regulatory frameworks
and, more importantly, effective data collection,
information-sharing, monitoring and evaluation. At the
local level, the full participation of young people and
women, civil society and other partnerships against
gun violence is crucial to addressing the problem of the
proliferation and use ofillegal weapons, with a View to
bringing such activities closer to the people as part ofa
general visibility and communications campaign.

Last but not least is the importance of capacity-
building, so thatAfrican States can fully implement their
commitments to ratifying international instruments, a
crucial aspect of this issue. Our development partners
must ensure that the trade in conventional weapons is
properly regulated from the source countries in order
to curb unregulated flows of arms into conflict zones
inside Africa. At the same time, adequate support is
needed to help build resilient national institutions that
can regulate such flows.

