Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
One year after the unanimous adoption of resolution
1483 (2003), this will be the last joint quarterly report
by the United States and the United Kingdom on its
implementation.

On 30 June, the Coalition Provisional Authority
and the framework of occupation recognized and
established under resolution 1483 (2003) will come to
an end. The Iraqi Governing Council will cease to exist
by that date, and an interim Government of Iraq will
assume the responsibility and authority for governing a
sovereign Iraq. Its responsibilities will include the
critical task of preparing for elections for a transitional
National Assembly, to be held, if possible, by the end
of 2004 and in any event no later than 31 January
2005.

Those are important steps on the path of the Iraqi
people to democratic self-governance. Nonetheless
there remains a great deal of difficult work ahead. To
those who will challenge and test the new interim
Government, we must make clear that our commitment
remains strong to see Iraq through a successful
political transition to a democratic constitutional
Government. The indiscriminate targeting of the Iraqi
people and members of the international community by
criminal elements, including foreign terrorists, will not
erode our resolve.

Before I move on to the details of my report on
the implementation of resolution 1483 (2003), I think it
appropriate to address the abuse of Iraqi detainees at
Abu Ghraib. We have seen the pictures. They depict
shameful acts that stain the honour and the reputation
of the United States. Our Government and the people
of the United States stand with the rest of the world in
shock and disgust. President Bush has strongly
condemned and apologized for those abuses and has
made clear that all those responsible will be held fully
accountable. The United States is taking steps to ensure
that actions like this are not repeated. Our military has
instituted a comprehensive review of policies and
procedures throughout the prisons in Iraq, and several
investigations are under way.

Our system of justice is moving swiftly to
address these abuses. To date, the United States has
charged seven military personnel with criminal
offences and has relieved two officers of command.
The first criminal trial was held today. A number of
investigations remain open and are proceeding. All
allegations of mistreatment are being thoroughly
investigated. Transparent and fair judicial processes
will determine guilt, and those convicted will be
punished.

United States forces in Iraq are required to
operate in accordance with the Geneva Conventions,
and this is an obligation we take very seriously.
Immediate steps have been taken to reinforce existing
military policies to ensure that United States forces
understand, are fully trained in and adhere to these
standards. The United States is committed to providing
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
access to detainees held by the United States in Iraq,
and we have worked with the ICRC since the
beginning of the occupation. United States military
authorities have investigated matters brought to their
attention by the ICRC, and they will continue to work
with the ICRC in the future.

As President Bush has said, free countries
confront such abuses openly and directly. The
overwhelming majority of United States service
members conduct themselves in strict accordance with
the international law of armed conflict, and they
represent the United States honourably. But democracy
demands that those who abuse authority be brought to
justice.

On 16 April, the United States provided a
comprehensive report to the Security Council, pursuant
to resolution 1511 (2003) and on behalf of the
multinational force, regarding efforts and progress in
the provision of security and stability. The
multinational force, including the Iraqi armed forces
and the Iraqi Civil Defence Corps under its command,
remains dedicated to its tasks: stability operations,
reconstruction efforts, civil affairs training and the
important job of training Iraqi security forces.

The security situation in the months since our
report under resolution 1511 (2003) has been
particularly difficult. The multinational force is on the
offensive against former regime elements and foreign
terrorists in Fallujah and Ramadi. Multinational force
troops are capturing those who have perpetrated attacks
and those who are plotting future acts of violence. The
multinational force has been involved in responding to
the deplorable string of kidnappings and is also taking
action to stop the lawlessness instigated by Muqtada
Al-Sadr and his Mahdi militia in Baghdad and southern
Iraq. These groups cannot be allowed to deprive Iraqis
of their hopes for the future. We expect that violent
elements will make a concerted effort to disrupt the
transition and to destabilize Iraq as we approach 30
June.

As we reported to the Security Council on
security structures in some detail just one month ago, I
will not describe each of the elements of the Iraqi
security forces again today. More than 210,000 Iraqi
citizens are serving in various components of the Iraqi
security forces now contributing to the security and
stability of Iraq. While the number of Iraqi security
forces has steadily increased, numbers alone do not tell
the full story. The response of the various Iraqi security
forces in April was uneven, and we are focused on
improving the quality and leadership of those forces.
With our assistance, Iraqis have made important
progress in building the national security institutions
that will be essential for an Iraqi Government to
provide law and order. A Ministry of Defence, a
Ministry of Interior and a Ministerial Committee on
National Security have been established. Building an
effective Iraqi civilian chain of command to lead Iraqi
security forces will remain a key priority and an
essential element of our multinational partnership.

At the same time, there is equal need for effective
judicial and correctional systems. Faced with the
violent elements I have just described, continued
multinational force operations after 30 June will be
necessary to ensure Iraq's security and progress in its
political transition. We recognize the need for a close
partnership with the Iraqi people and Iraqi forces, as
expressed in the Transitional Administrative Law, and
we will build on such a relationship. Coordination and
consultative arrangements will be established between
the multinational force and the sovereign interim
Government of Iraq. The fight against terror and for
Iraq's security and stability will be a shared fight.

Finally, we must expand international security
forces to support the return of United Nations
international personnel to Iraq. We are working to
establish a unit within the multinational force under
unified command to provide dedicated security for
United Nations personnel and facilities in Iraq. The
ability of the United Nations to continue its vital role
in assisting Iraqis to prepare for elections depends on
its security. We urge the international community to
participate in this important task.

Let me now speak a bit about advancing Iraqi
efforts to restore and establish national and local
institutions for representative government. Just after
our last report, in February, the Governing Council
approved the Transitional Administrative Law, which
will serve as the legal basis for the Iraqi interim and
transitional Governments until a permanent
constitution is ratified. Among its key provisions, the
Transitional Administrative Law provides for equal
rights for all Iraqis, without regard to gender, sect,
opinion, belief, nationality, religion or origin. It
confirms Iraq as a single State with federal structures,
affirms civilian control of Iraq's security services and
affirms the independence of the judiciary.

The Transitional Administrative Law also
codifies that national elections for the transitional
National Assembly shall be held no later than 31
January 2005, but if possible by the end of December
of this year, and that the drafting of a permanent
constitution shall be completed no later than 15 August
2005, with the transition to a constitutionally elected
Iraqi Government taking place by 31 December 2005 . I
note in this context that the elected transitional
Government will have the right and the authority to
modify provisions of the Transitional Administrative
Law if it so chooses.

In March, the Iraqi Governing Council invited the
United Nations to provide assistance and advice to the
Iraqi people in the formation of the interim Iraqi
Government. The Coalition Provisional Authority fully
supported the Governing Council's invitation. In
response, the Secretary-General dispatched his Special
Adviser, Ambassador Brahimi, to Iraq in early April. In
Ambassador Brahimi's subsequent report to this
Council on 27 April, he outlined a proposal for the
interim Government to include a president, two deputy
presidents, a prime minister, a council of ministers who
would report to the prime minister, and an advisory
body. He also noted the linkage between security and
the political process in that security remains essential
for the process to be completed, while the political
process itself would make a "powerful contribution" to
security.

Ambassador Brahimi returned to Iraq at the
beginning of this month to continue wide-ranging
consultations with the Iraqi people, with the objective
of identifying an interim Government for the period
through elections that will have the respect and support
of the Iraqi people. Those consultations are ongoing.

The interim Government will be the governing
authority of a sovereign Iraq on 30 June. Many Iraqis
have expressed their desire to have limits on the
authorities of this interim Government, reflecting their
view that some issues are best left to an elected Iraqi
Government for decision. We note that it is for Iraqis to
decide what those limits might be in the context of the
consultative process led by Ambassador Brahimi.

Of course, a key milestone in Iraq's political
transition will be the establishment of a Government
chosen by democratic elections. There is substantial
progress being made with regard to the electoral
process. The United Nations electoral assistance team
headed by Carina Pirelli has a productive working
relationship with Iraqi and CPA officials. They are
working with the Iraqis on developing the three main
pillars of the electoral system: an independent election
commission, an agreement on electoral modalities and
a political parties law.

Miss Pirelli recently reported that preparations
for the establishment of an independent election
commission are in good shape. A nationwide
nomination process, endorsed by the Governing
Council and open to all Iraqis to select the
commissioners, is now under way in all 18
governorates. The plan is to select seven
commissioners through a careful review process. As its
name suggests, the commission will be independent
and non-partisan. Although progress is excellent, we
continue to face a very tight time line. The United
Nations leading involvement in helping Iraqis to
prepare for elections has been and will remain vital to
Iraq's political transition.

Let me now turn to the oil for food programme.
Iraq continues to receive goods purchased under the
programme, and the coordination centre established as
the Coalition Provisional Authority took responsibility
for remaining programme contracts following the end
of the programme continues to oversee the shipment of
food and other humanitarian supplies remaining in the
oil for food pipeline. In the three northern governorates
of Dahuk, Arbil and As-Sulaymaniyah, the Office of
Project Coordination has provided technical expertise
and disbursed funds to continue over 100 priority
projects in power, agriculture, health, education and
construction.

Capacity-building and technical support
programmes have been initiated over the past several
months in relevant Iraqi ministries to improve Iraqi
capabilities to procure essential items and monitor
incoming oil for food shipments. This will help ensure
that the Iraqis will be able to manage remaining oil for
food contracts and projects when the coordination
centre and the Office of Project Coordination are
phased out with the 30 June transfer of authority to a
sovereign Iraq.

Last, I note that the Iraqi Board of Supreme Audit
has collected, centralized and safeguarded oil for food
documents in preparation for its own investigation of
the programme and has signalled its readiness to assist
the United Nations and other investigations into
alleged abuses.

On disarmament, the Iraq Survey Group (ISG)
continues its work to search for and eliminate Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction, prohibited missile
delivery systems and related infrastructure. It remains
premature to draw final conclusions. The ISG has
much work to do, including following up on continuing
and frequent reports of hidden weapons caches. The
ISG has already noted numerous violations of United
Nations sanctions in activities that Saddam Hussein's
regime should have reported to the United Nations
under the requirements of Security Council resolutions,
but did not. The ISG has uncovered illicit Iraqi
procurement efforts aimed at obtaining dual-use
material in contravention of United Nations sanctions
and has noted extensive efforts, continuing into 2003,
to deceive United Nations inspectors. The ISG has also
identified Iraqi research programmes with potential
applications in a variety of weapons of mass
destruction programmes. Finally, the ISG is working to
determine Saddam's strategic intentions with respect to
weapons of mass destruction and the United Nations
inspection regime.

In conclusion, I wish to say a final word. In due
course over the next several weeks, this Council will
consider and act on a draft resolution that reflects
upcoming milestones in Iraq's political transition. We
are at a critical juncture in Iraq's history. 30 June will
mark a vital step towards realizing the goal of an
independent, democratic and stable Iraq at peace with
itself and its neighbours. Now is the time for the
Security Council and the international community to
come together in support of Iraq and its people.

