Ms. Meitzad (Israel): As we sit here today
debating, my country is being attacked. In fact, while
the Security Council has been deliberating on the
situation in the Middle East, we received word of yet
another terror attack in Jerusalem. A bus was blown
up in downtown Jerusalem, injuring dozens of people,
some of them critically. Shockingly enough, the only
Council members to even mention the attack in their
remarks were Ukraine, Uruguay and the United States.
We expect the Council to condemn the attack.

Also, just this morning, the Israel Defence Forces

revealed that it had discovered a tunnel from Gaza that
reaches into Israeli territory. That terror tunnel, which
is hundreds of feet below ground, is equipped with
electrical systems and lined with concrete. We have
warned time and again that Hamas has been diverting
the cement that has been sent in for the reconstruction
of homes and schools to rearm and prepare for
the next round of conflict. Today we have another
piece of concrete proof. This fact was also almost
completely ignored.

The tunnel has one purpose and one purpose only:
to carry out terror attacks against innocent Israelis. A
bus bombing in Jerusalem and terror tunnels out of Gaza
have come to light, but in this Chamber it is business
as usual. Once again, many in this Chamber focus
solely on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict but ignore
terror against Israel. Some delegations even chose to
undermine the credibility of this important platform by
presenting false accusations, distorted information and
one-sided statements. To those States, and especially
those who sit in the Council, like Malaysia and
Venezuela, or to Saudi Arabia and others who wish to
position themselves as relevant players, I would like to
say the following.

You can either continue to falsely blame Israel for
all that is wrong in the Middle East in order to serve
your narrow, domestic political needs, or you can end
the zero-sum-game approach and take a constructive
approach instead. It is no surprise when countries
like Venezuela and Malaysia, with long histories
of suppressing freedom of speech and freedom of
expression at home, distort the reality here at the United
Nations. They do not let the facts get into the way of the
one-sided story.

I would also like to say that I find it odd that
Saudi Arabia, a country that has been accused of
indiscriminate bombing and war crimes in Yemen, has
the audacity to make reckless allegations against others.

Iran and Lebanon once again chose to falsely
criticize Israel. Need I remind you, Mr. President,
that Iran is the number-one sponsor of terror in the
region, whether it be with the Houthis in Yemen or
Hizbullah, which is starving people in Madaya, or
its recent outrageous plan offering to make payments
to Palestinian terrorists? Wherever there is terror or
instability in the region, Iran is at the helm. That is
the very same Iran that was recently condemned by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) for its
support of terror.

Turning to Lebanon, a country that has a terror
organization, Hizbullah, as an integral part of its
Government, the Lebanese Government recently
become the sole champion and protector of Hizbullah,
while outside Lebanon that terror group is being
condemned for its destabilizing role in the region by
the United Nations, the Arab League and the OIC. And
yet Lebanon has no shame in criticizing Israel.

To my Palestinian colleagues, I would like to
say that there is no other way forward than by direct
negotiations. A mere two weeks ago, Prime Minister
Netanyahu repeated his call for direct negotiations.
He said,

"I am inviting President Abbas again. I have cleared
my schedule this week. Any day he can come, I will
be here. My door is always open to those who want
to pursue peace with Israel."

We call upon the Palestinians to accept our call
for negotiations and fully condemn the incitement and
terror against Israelis. We call on them to publicly
renounce terror and join us on the path to peace
and reconciliation.

