Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
informative briefings and reports (see S/2011/316 and S/2011/317). Brazil commends their efforts towards
fulfilling the remaining judicial functions of those
institutions in a timely manner. We also believe that the
recent arrest of Ratko Mladie brings fresh air to the
prospect of judicial accountability, which is
encouraging to the victims of atrocities in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia.

I would like briefly to address two issues present
in both reports: the completion strategy and the
measures adopted so far, and staff retention. The
reports of both Tribunals inform us of the challenges
that those institutions have faced over the years and
about important achievements in the administration of
justice. We are glad to note that the use of technology
in a document-intensive context has allowed for a more
efficient use of resources and personnel. All initiatives
to expedite the proceedings, while fully respecting the
rights of the accused, should be praised. The fulfilment
of the completion strategies deserves the Security
Council's attention and should receive the full support
of the international community as a whole.

Brazil is concerned by the issue of staff retention,
as described in the reports. We agree that the Council
should be attentive to the day-to-day routine of the
Tribunals. The impact of the lack of adequate
personnel on the work of the Tribunals should be dealt
with as a priority matter by the relevant United Nations
bodies.

One of the main challenges of relying on ad hoc
rather than permanent Tribunals becomes clear at a
moment like this, when the institution has fulfilled
most of its core functions, but important tasks - such
as the trials of fugitives, supervision of the execution
of sentences, witness protection and the preservation of
documentation - remain. Thus, it is even more
important that adequate attention be given to the
remaining tasks of the international Tribunals.

Brazil has actively participated in the
establishment of the Residual Mechanism. We believe
that such a Mechanism adds an element of certainty in
the administration of justice that needs to be
emphasized.

We agree that the Tribunals alone cannot bring
peace and reconciliation to the region through judicial
decisions. It takes time for true peace and
reconciliation to lay their roots. The journey to peace
and reconciliation does not necessarily need to wait for
the results of the work of Tribunals such as the ICTR
and the ICTY, but will never be complete without it.
Brazil reiterates its understanding that the Tribunals
had and will have an important impact on peace and
reconciliation in the Balkans and the Great Lakes
region by promoting the rule of law and judicial
accountability and by helping those countries to
achieve a more equal and just future.

In that context, bringing the Tribunals closer to
the communities most seriously affected by
international crimes is crucial to ensuring the legacy of
such institutions. That is particularly relevant in the
lives of younger generations. Brazil strongly believes
that students, teachers and civil society as a whole
must promote the relevance of judicial accountability
as a necessary element of lasting peace.
