Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to join colleagues in
congratulating and pledging support to you in your role
as President and also to congratulate Equatorial Guinea
on its recent presidency.

The Dominican Republic wishes to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, Mr. Lajcak,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his informative
briefing on the activities of the organization. We
congratulate the presidency of Slovakia and avail
ourselves of this opportunity to express our support to
the OSCE and our appreciation for its tireless efforts
to promote security, stability and good governance
throughout the region. We note with satisfaction that
its priorities are consistent with the work done at the
United Nations and by the Council itself, in other words,
the prevention, mediation and mitigation of conflicts,
as well as a focus on those affected, in order to bring
about a safer future and effective multilateralism.

We acknowledge the fact that its agenda represents
both a challenge and an opportunity to follow up on
the political dialogue in the region, in keeping with
the commitments undertaken and in the framework
of the quest for a sustainable solution. We took
note with interest of the OSCE's readiness to stress
the implementation of the agreements and related
responsibilities. In that context, it is an ongoing concern
of the Council to follow up on ongoing conflicts in
Europe, as promoting the parties' commitment to the
implementation of the agreements reached will have
repercussions on the living conditions of the civilian
population, which usually is the most affected.

The Dominican Republic recognizes the
importance for the region of making progress in the
situation in eastern Ukraine and agrees with the OSCE
as to the need to stress the importance of respecting
and implementing the Minsk agreements. We thank it
for its availability to work on proposals that will help
to promote and restore peace and security to the region.

In that respect, we reiterate our support for the
territorial integrity of Ukraine and for the Special
Monitoring Mission of the OSCE, which remains
the barometer for the international community on
the ground.

We welcome the ongoing efforts of the OSCE to
resolve the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Georgia
and Transnistria. We believe that sustained attention
to protracted conflicts must be maintained, as they
are the epicentre for the international community in
the areas of peace, stability and international security.
Our delegation believes that in keeping with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, joint work
with regional organizations can ensure a more effective
response in preventing, responding to and mitigating
conflicts. However, because of the prevailing lack of
confidence and because political interests often result
in losing sight of the human face of conflict, we must
ensure the success of organizations such as the OSCE in
resolving vital security situations. In this respect, it is
crucial to have the support and legitimate commitment
of the parties involved.

We welcome the practice of ensuring the greater
participation of women in the various areas of public
and political life, in conflict prevention, in crisis
management and in peacebuilding, as well as the key
role played by youth in the strengthening of security
and cooperation. In that vein, we would stress the
importance of the OSCE's various multidimensional
initiatives carried out jointly with and for young
people, and of giving priority to the bolstering of
inclusive youth policies. We deem it vital to continue to
hold the conferences on youth and security organized
by the OSCE, as they acknowledge the importance of
young people and their positive role in the promotion of
a culture of peace and in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, in accordance with resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018).

On the eve of International Women's Day, we
would like to pay tribute to all the women of the world,
especially all those who have left, and continue to leave,
their mark on their communities and their countries in
the quest for a world that is more equitable, inclusive
and participatory.

