Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I want to thank the Polish
presidency for holding this open debate on this highly
important topic. The multitude of speakers today is
testimony to that importance.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I will add
some remarks from our national point of view.

Upholding international law and adhering to and
faithfully implementing its rules and principles are
practices that play an indispensable role in lasting
peace and security worldwide and to which we are
deeply attached. Negligence and rejection of the rule
of law weaken State institutions and undermine their
independence, impartiality and effectiveness. Croatia
places great emphasis on peace, justice and strong
institutions as an inseparable part of all three United
Nations pillars. That is as important for peace as it is for
development, economic prosperity and human rights.

We believe that all disputes should be resolved
through peaceful means and in conformity with
international law. In addressing crises across the globe,
our focus should be on early warning, prevention and
diplomacy. While a consistent approach to conflicts by
the United Nations, and in particular by the Security
Council, is essential for the Organization's credibility,
copied-and-pasted, one-size-fits-all approaches are not
the most effective way to proceed. In understanding
the situation and risks on the ground, we must above
all draw on the knowledge and experience of local
populations, neighbouring countries and regional
organizations. Respect for the legal traditions of every
Member State is an essential part of that.

Croatia believes that when addressing conflicts and
crises it is important to have a global, comprehensive
approach based on solidarity and a coordinated
international effort under strong United Nations
leadership. Such an approach would include political,
humanitarian, socioeconomic, stabilization and security
elements, and reconstruction goes hand in hand with an
efficient judiciary and a culture of accountability.

Croatia recognizes the critical importance
of the rule of law in post-conflict peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and conflict prevention activities, and
fully supports greater coherence and mobilization of
the United Nations system-wide expertise on that issue.
We continue to promote the centrality of the rule of
law in the daily efforts of conflict-affected countries
to ensure sustainable peace and development. As
a victim of aggression in the first half of the 1990s,
Croatia has gained an in-depth understanding and
first-hand knowledge of peacebuilding and post-war
recovery in all its aspects. We stand ready to share that
valuable experience.

Croatia strongly supports the full and unequivocal
implementation of all applicable rules of international
humanitarian law and criminal law, as well as all
efforts aimed at ending the culture of impunity, which
includes, among others elements, the full investigation
and punishment of all atrocities. Accountability for
crimes is extraordinarily pertinent to our times.

Croatia greatly values the contributions of
international courts and tribunals in advancing the
rule of law at the international and national levels. In
that context, we particularly stress the importance of
scrupulous interpretation and rigorous application of
existing international humanitarian law in the processes
in front of those bodies, as well as strict observance of
due process guarantees. Only justice that is sufficiently
expeditious and competent beyond any doubt can
bring relief to the victims, rigorously confront the
perpetrators with their deeds and ensure responsibility.

As a State party to the Rome Statute, Croatia strongly
supports the work of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and invites all stakeholders to be accountable
for their commitments to the ICC. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, we advocate strengthening its
links with the Security Council. We also acknowledge
the importance of the principle of the responsibility to
protect. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, as it is evident
that there is a real need for strategic coordination and
leadership for our global counter-terrorism efforts.

In conclusion, the United Nations plays a central
role in cases of flagrant violations of international law,
including the judicial settlement of disputes through the
International Court of Justice. In our view, with regard
to strengthening respect for international obligations,
which are critical for the maintenance of peace and
security, it is crucial to have unity among all members
of the Security Council. Organizing Arria Formula
meetings of the Council with relevant persons or global
non-governmental organizations and open debates
on specific topics, such as today's, can contribute to
that goal.

