Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate. Let me begin by
congratulating the Kingdom of Morocco on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for December.
We commend the able manner in which India
discharged its responsibilities as Council President
for the previous month. We are are also grateful to the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Jamal Benomar, for his briefing. We commend his
work. We welcome the participation of Ambassador
Jamal Abdullah Al-Sallal in this meeting.

By avoiding a potentially devastating civil war,
Yemen has shown the world that dialogue and political
will can lead to the peaceful resolution of complicated
issues. The Secretary-General's good offices played an
important role in this regard. We share the optimism
he expressed during his recent visit to Sana'a that
Yemen will overcome all its problems and hurdles as
it prepares for the 2014 presidential and parliamentary
elections. Progress, however, does not obviate the need
to keep the challenges in sight.

Pakistan enjoys deep historical, cultural and
religious ties with the people of Yemen. The peace,
stability and prosperity of Yemen are dear to us.
We hope that the full implementation of the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative for the transfer of power
in Yemen will lead to a normalization of conditions in
the country. The continued support of the international
community for this endeavour is crucial. This does
not mean, however, that the international community
should micromanage Yemeni affairs. Respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Yemen should remain paramount to the Council's
deliberations on the issue.

We note with satisfaction that the preparatory
committee of the National Dialogue Conference has
completed its work. We hope that it would now lead to
the convening of an inclusive national dialogue process
and a timely conclusion of the transition process. We
also welcome the formation of the Supreme Commission
for Election and Referendum.

It is heartening to note that the Government of
Yemen remains committed to fighting terrorism. We
fully support the efforts of President Mansour in that
regard and stand ready to provide any assistance that
may be required. Pakistan strongly condemns terrorist
attacks in Yemen. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
victims of those heinous crimes. We remain concerned
by the sporadic violence that keeps cropping up.

We strongly condemn the murder of a Saudi
diplomat and his Yemeni bodyguard, and offer our
sincere condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as
well as to Yemen. Such dastardly acts should strengthen
our resolve to combat terrorism and extremism in all
their manifestations.

We welcome the report that more than 80,000
internally displaced people have returned home in
the past few months, the first significant decline in
displacement since May of last year, when fighting
between Government troops and militants erupted in
the south of Yemen. That follows the re-establishment
of Government authority in the southern province of
Abyan and an improvement in security.

Statistics relating to the extent of the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen, however, remain worrisome. With
83 per cent of children under five malnourished,
44.5 per cent of the Yemeni population food-insecure
and 50 per cent of Yemenis without access to clean
water, as well as with frequent outbreaks of disease, the
population awaits the concrete dividends of transition.

Gaps in humanitarian response can undermine
political transition and mar the long-term prospects
for peace and development. It is disconcerting to
note that the United Nations humanitarian appeal for
Yemen has been funded only at around 50 per cent. The
international community must rise to the occasion and
must do everything possible in that regard.

We once again reiterate Pakistan's unflinching
support to the process of transition in Yemen and to the
Government and people of Yemen as they go through
this trying phase in their history. We are confident that
the resilient people of Yemen will be able to surmount
those obstacles and emerge stronger.

