Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie for their briefings.

Today's meeting is an historic step forward in
the international community's efforts to consider
the situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and its broader implications. It also sends a
vital message to the people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea that the international community is
aware of their suffering and stands in solidarity with
them. By meeting on the topic, the Council recognizes
that the dangerous threat to international peace and
security posed by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea regime is not limited to its weapons programmes
and proliferation activities, but that the threat also
flows from its atrocious treatment of its people and
its determination to use every means possible to resist
action that it perceives as a challenge to its authority.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is,
in effect, a totalitarian State that uses violence and
repression against its own citizens to maintain itself
and its threatening military apparatus in power. The
regime's atrocities against its own people have created
an inherently unstable State. The regime's system of
repression enables its proliferation policies and the
deprivations that it imposes on its people fund those
policies. Some have asserted that the Council has no
business considering this issue. Australia strongly
disagrees. History shows that human rights violations
of the type and scale that we are seeing in North Korea
have reverberations well beyond the country in which
they are committed. They amount to a rejection of the
international norms that underpin stable societies, and
they undermine peaceful relations between States.
As we have seen time and again, serious violations of
human rights serve as a warning sign of instability and
conflict, especially in the absence of accountability for
such violations.

With the publication of the seminal report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (S/20l4/276, annex), the international community now has a
comprehensive, evidence-based assessment of the
systematic, widespread and gross human rights
violations being committed by the North Korean
regime. The report is deeply disturbing and compels a
response. The commission's findings on the extent ofthe
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's indoctrination
programme highlight a deliberate strategy to control
the population in order to secure the regime's hold on
power. The programme seeks to instil national hatred,
which includes incitement to discrimination, hostility,
violence and propaganda for war.

The Commission's report lays bare the depraved
nature of the tools of control of the regime of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including the
denial of access to basic human needs: food, water,
heating, shelter and work. The massive humanitarian
catastrophe that has resulted from the scale of the reign
of terror in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has affected all of its neighbours and has threatened
regional stability.

There is a lethal restriction on the freedom of
expression. One witness told the commission that no
one would dare object to the harsh living conditions in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, because
"protest is equivalent to death" (A/HRC/25/CRP.I, para. 225). Instead, the citizens of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea are forced to denounce
conduct that is perceived by the regime as a threat to
it. Family members must report on each other. The
regime's vast surveillance apparatus ensures harsh
punishment - even summary execution - for those
who do not comply.

The country's extreme militarization has come at
a devastating cost. The North Korean people have paid
for the world's fourth largest standing army - and the
development of nuclear weapons and an increasingly
sophisticated ballistic missile system to deliver
them - with mass starvation and deprivation. The
commission estimates that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea devotes up to 25 per cent of its
gross national product to defence expenditures. Yet the
commission also finds that malnutrition and starvation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea could have
been avoided through even a marginal redistribution of
State military spending.

The commission also found an entrenched pattern
of discrimination based on the uniquely harsh songbun
class system, which is systematically applied so as to
maintain control against perceived threats, both external
and internal. Likewise, the extreme restrictions on the
freedom of movement within North Korea and across
its borders are designed to maximize State control.
Punishments for violations are severe, often vicious
and inhumane. Women, who are subjected to horrific
discrimination, resort to international traffickers to
escape. The torture that they are subjected to if they
return cannot be regarded as a solely domestic concern.

One of the cruelest policies of the regime is the
system of arbitrary detention and political prison camps.
An estimated 80,000 to 120,000 people have been
imprisoned without trial in four political prison camps,
and the commission found that the majority, including
children, had no prospect of ever being released.
Summary executions and other cruel extrajudicial
punishments are meted out for violations of camp rules.
Torture is routine. As the commission notes,

"The limited information that seeps out from the
secret camps creates a spectre of fear among the
general population..., creating a powerful deterrent
against any future challenges to the political
system" (ibid., para. 730).

The commission found that the information it
received established that crimes against humanity have
been committed in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, pursuant to policies established at the highest
level of the State. We strongly support the commission's
conclusion that the international community must accept
its responsibility to protect the people of North Korea
from crimes against humanity because the Government
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
manifestly failed to do so. The gravity, scale and nature
of these human rights violations distinguishes North
Korea as a State that, in the Commission's words, has
no parallel in the contemporary world. The need for an
international response could not be more obvious.
This view is clearly shared by the majority of
the States Members of the United Nations, which last
Thursday adopted resolution 69/188 in the General
Assembly, which submitted the commission's report to
the Council for consideration and action. This is broad
recognition by the United Nations membership that the
Council has a responsibility on this issue, including to
ensure accountability for the crimes being committed.
Those crimes are integral components of the political
system of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We must assume that crimes against humanity will
continue if there is no international response.

A core element of the commission's mandate was
to ensure accountability for human rights violations,
in particular where such violations amounted to crimes
against humanity. The commission asked the Council to
refer the situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to the International Criminal Court. The
General Assembly has called on the Council to consider
this recommendation. Australia believes that the crimes
against humanity documented in the commission's
report warrant the attention of the International Criminal
Court. In the absence of any move by the North Korean
regime to ensure accountability, the Council should
seriously consider this recommendation.

The North Korean regime does have the power
to change its behaviour. Most of the commission's
recommendations are directed towards the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea itself. The country's recent
indications of a purported willingness to increase its
cooperation with the international community on human
rights were welcome, but those offers have since been
withdrawn, and there has been no sign of any internal
reform. Instead, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has responded to the General Assembly's call for
it to engage on human rights issues by denouncing that
call and indicating it would engage in further hostile
acts. When the Democratic People's Republic responds
to human rights criticisms with threats to use nuclear
weapons, it only strengthens the link between the
country's human rights policies and their implications
for international peace and security.

Recent cyberattacks against international
companies have been attributed to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which is another example
of the extraterritorial reach of its crimes, along with
abductions of foreign nationals, and demonstrates the
extent to which it is prepared to defy international norms
and aggressively seek to destabilize other countries and
international commerce.

The international community's message to the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea regime is direct.
It must change course. It can take steps immediately
to put an end to all systematic, widespread and gross
human rights violations being perpetrated in the
country, which only further weaken the North Korean
people and the stability of the State itself. It can commit
to cooperating with the international community by
extending full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, including by granting him
full, free and unimpeded access to the country and by
providing unfettered access to humanitarian agencies.

There are options for the Democratic People's
Republic regime - humane options - and we will
continue to press its leadership to embrace them.
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie alluded to
some of them a moment ago. In the meantime, we
are realistic about the brutal prospects for the North
Korean people and what needs to be done to provide
them with a measure of protection. We continue to
look to those countries that have the most influence
on North Korea, including those in the North Asia
region and other partners, to continue to press the case
for fundamental change to the State apparatus of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We know, of
course, this will not be easy.

To conclude, the Security Council must also live
up to its responsibilities in the absence of action by the
regime, particularly in relation to accountability for
crimes against humanity. Given the scale of the human
rights violations and their link to international peace
and security, it is essential that the Council remain
seized of the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The Council must regularly assess
the situation and give serious consideration to further
action it might take, in the interests of the North Korean
people themselves and in support of peace and security
in their region and globally.

