Mr. Yaacobi (Israel): At the outset, I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
We are certain that your wealth of experience will be of
invaluable assistance as you guide the proceedings of this
Council. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Karel Kovanda, on skilfully conducting the Council's
affairs.

Permit me to say that, even though I disagree with
much of what has been said here, I should first like to set
the record straight, on the basis of the facts. Unfortunately,
the issue has been taken out of context and blown out of
proportion.

The recent decision to expropriate, not to confiscate,
land for construction in Jerusalem - not for settlements as
was said here - is based on our long-standing policy to
ensure that development in Jerusalem keeps pace with the
changes that are a natural feature of any living city.

Construction and development for all residents have
always been regular features of Jerusalem life, and will
continue to be in the future. We do not accept the
proposition that the natural and continued development of
Jerusalem, or any other city, can or should be arrested. It is
inconceivable that the people of Jerusalem - Jews and
Arabs alike - should be deprived of sufficient schools,
roads, housing, workplaces, and so on. Several weeks ago,
the Israel Lands Authority published its intention to
expropriate 53 hectares of barren land in the Jerusalem
municipal area. This is for the purpose of development,
including housing for Arab residents. In addition, appeals
proceedings regarding 185 hectares in the Jerusalem area,
expropriated two years ago, were recently completed.

This is barren land - land that is not being used for
housing, agriculture, or any other purpose. Of the total
238 hectares, the majority, namely 63 per cent, are under
Jewish ownership, 27.3 per cent are under Arab
ownership, and 9.7 per cent are lands for which
ownership has not been registered.

More specifically, the breakdown is as follows: in
the Har Homa area, 185 hectares are at issue: 139
hectares are under Jewish ownership, 41 hectares are
under Arab ownership and there are five hectares for
which ownership has not been registered.

With regard to the other areas - the Ramot and
Malha-Bet Zaffaffa areas - the Lands Authority has only
published its intention to expropriate. The owners have 20
days to present objections to the Authority; should the
objections be overruled, the owners have the right to
appeal to the Supreme Court. If the expropriation is
upheld, the owners will be compensated by the State.

In the Ramot area, 33.5 hectares are at issue, 9
hectares under Jewish ownership, 23 hectares under Arab
ownership and 1.5 hectares to which ownership has not
been registered.

In the Malha-Bet Zaffaffa area, 20 hectares are at
issue, 2.5 hectares under Jewish ownership, 1 hectare
under Arab ownership, and 16.5 hectares to which
ownership has not been registered. The land to be
expropriated has also been designated for the construction
of 400 housing units for Arab residents. The needs of a
growing, dynamic city will continue to guide us in the
future as well.

In the light of statements made earlier in this
Chamber, I wish to make some brief remarks on the
meaning of Jerusalem to us. Unfortunately, I have heard
here some very deceptive statements about the history of
our State and the history of United Nations resolutions,
including the resolution of 29 November 1947 calling for
a Jewish State, the State of Israel, and an Arab State to
be established in Palestine, a resolution Israel accepted
while the Arabs rejected it and started an overall war to
violate the United Nations resolutions.

No one is more sensitive to the meaning of
Jerusalem than the Jewish people. Ever since King David
established it as our capital 3000 years ago Jerusalem has
been the essence of our nationhood. Jerusalem was never
ever the capital of any other people. The Caliphs ruled it
for centuries, but they never made it their capital, nor did

 

the Mamelukes and the Ottomans. When the sites of many
of today's great capitals were only fields of passage for
nomads and herds, Jerusalem was already our capital. Even
then, it was the object of pilgrimage for our people three
times a year. Our kings ruled from its palaces, our priests
served God in its Temple, our prophets preached justice in
its streets. Even then, before many of the nations on this
Earth were born, Jerusalem was the national, political,
cultural, religious and spiritual centre of the Jewish people.

The Jewish presence in the city began 3000 years ago
and has lasted, unbroken, to this very day. Even under
foreign domination and persecution we maintained a
significant and vital presence in Jerusalem. Thus, since the
second half of the nineteenth century Jews have constituted
the majority of the city's inhabitants.

For Jews living in exile for 2000 years the centrality
of Jerusalem sustained us as a people and gave us the hope
to carry on through the darkest days. The words "Next year
in Jerusalem" were always on the lips and in the hearts of
Jews. It is the prayer of every child born to the Jewish
people in every age and in every place - in New York,
Moscow, Buenos Aires, London, Paris, Rome, Prague,
Rabat, Cairo and Jerusalem.

We are sensitive to the importance of Jerusalem to
Christians and Moslems, and we are proud that since 1967,
for the first time, Jerusalem is open to pilgrims and
worshippers of all religions and that each faith freely
administers its own holy sites.

The centrality of Jerusalem in the soul of the Jewish
people is the essence of our nationhood. We have expressed
this in many ways. Our psalmists have praised it in songs
of ascent and mourned its destruction in songs of
lamentation. A hundred years ago the Jewish people found
inspiration in a new song, but one with an ancient theme.
I shall quote just a few lines of this song:

"Then our hope is not yet lost,
The hope of 2000 years:

To be a free people in our land,
The land of Zion and Jerusalem."

This old-new song is the national anthem of the State of
Israel, "Hatikva", "The Hope."
Speaking in Washington, DC, last Sunday, Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin said:

"The policy of all the Governments of Israel
was and is: Jerusalem is united under Israel's
sovereignty, the capital of Israel and the heart of the
Jewish people for ever."

And he has emphasized on repeated occasions:

"We have always promised and ensured freedom of
worship for all religions and free access to all holy
places."

There is no contradiction between this policy and
bilateral agreements Israel has signed, including the
Declaration of Principles with the PLO.

In the Declaration of Principles Israel and the PLO
agreed that issues relating to the permanent status will be
negotiated by the parties themselves at a later stage, and
we are committed to this agreement. Moreover, there is
no contradiction between the peace process and continued
development in Jerusalem for the benefit of all its
residents, both Jewish and Arab, and if one looks at the
Declaration of Principles one will find no reference to any
prohibition of development activity in Jerusalem.

If the leadership of the PLO feels otherwise, then the
matter should be appropriately addressed in the
framework of the bilateral negotiations. Indeed, Israel and
the PLO agreed that differences and disputes arising out
of the application or the interpretation of the agreements
should be settled between the parties themselves
according to an agreed process. This is detailed in article
15 of the Declaration of Principles as well as in article 17
of the Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area.

Accordingly, we believe that any attempts to address
this issue outside the agreed-upon framework stands in
contradiction to the letter and spirit of the agreements
signed by Israel and the PLO and to the principles of the
peace process. We therefore call upon the members of the
Security Council not to take any action on this matter.

Continued progress towards peace should be the
main concern of all parties. We all must travel the road
to peace with determination. Let all give it the highest
priority, especially because the road is so difficult and the
obstacles are so many.

The Middle East has come a long way in the past
years: the agreements between Israel and the PLO, the
implementation of the first stage despite the continuous
terrorism waged by the enemies of peace and by others,
 

the Israel-Jordan peace treaty, the establishment of working
relations between Israel and other countries of the Middle
East and North Africa, the basis for regional economic
cooperation that has been laid by the Casablanca
Conference and the multilateral negotiations.

Now we have to continue building on this foundation,
to do our utmost so that a comprehensive peace may be
achieved. This is our conviction, our commitment and our
hope.

