Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and I congratulate
him on assuming his role as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) for this year. We are confident that
Serbia's effective and strong relations, especially with
States concerned by conflicts within the purview of
the OSCE, will enable him through his chairmanship
to develop communications among the parties and to
create condition conducive to resolving those conflicts
in a comprehensive and cooperative manner.

The OSCE, which enjoys a unique membership,
is able to play a vital and fundamental role, especially
concerning conflicts in the context of European and
Central Asian States. Through its efforts aimed at
resolving conflicts, be they intra-State or regional in
nature, the OSCE has since its establishment sought
to find solutions and to remedy a number of conflicts
which, without the joint efforts of that Organization and
other members of the international community, would
have intensified and continued much longer.

Based on the purposes and objectives of the OSCE,
Jordan supports all forms of cooperation between that
organization and the United Nations in keeping with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
in fulfilment of the Charter objectives, especially those
aimed at making today's turbulent world more secure,

stable and peaceful and welcoming of all persons,
without discrimination or exclusion.

Jordan also supports the role of the OSCE in
maintaining diplomatic channels between parties
to conflict as a forum enabling communication
among the parties. In this context, we look forward
to further progress in efforts to resolve the ongoing
conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia through
the good offices of the OSCE, given its leading role
in dealing with that conflict through the Minsk Group,
by finding a peaceful solution for it that respects the
unity and sovereignty of the internationally recognized
Azerbaijani territories and ends the suffering of the
refugees resulting from that conflict. It should be
based on the various relevant resolutions issued by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the OSCE.

We also commend of the positive role of the OSCE
in the Ukrainian crisis since it began, especially in
facilitating communication and dialogue between
the stakeholders and its efforts to provide tangible
measures on the ground to de-escalate the situation and
pave the way to a peaceful and sustainable resolution to
that conflict.

Promoting human rights, the rule of law and
democracy in post-conflict countries is fundamental
in building sustainable piece in those communities. We
cannot therefore overlook the role of the OSCE in those
fields in addition to numerous efforts and initiatives in
dealing with conflicts and ending tensions, especially
in the Southern Caucasus and Afghanistan, and as
far afield as the Balkans, where we hope that, under
the current chairmanship of the OSCE, there will be
improved good-neighbourly relations.

As Council members know well, the topic of
security, in the broadest sense, is at the top of the
priorities and concerns of the OSCE, specifically when
carrying out its periodic discussions. Among the most
prominent common security threats facing all of us today
are those resulting from terrorism and terrorist entities
which threaten international peace and security. In this
context, Jordan calls for intensified joint cooperation
with relevant organizations, including the OSCE, in a
unified international effort to combat terrorism through
a comprehensive and effective approach to tackle this
scourge and save our world from it.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that
Jordan, as an active Member of the United Nations
and a Mediterranean partner in the OSCE, will spare
no effort in promoting cooperation between these
two Organizations and supporting them in all fields,
especially human rights, disarmament, the environment
and dealing with the consequences of natural disasters.

