Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this open debate to assess the
operation of the multinational protection force in Albania.
The Republic of Korea commends and congratulates
the troop- contributing countries, led by Italy, for the
successful conclusion of their mandate. We also commend
the various international organizations operating in Albania
for the timely and effective delivery of desperately needed
humanitarian assistance to the Albanian people in their time
of national crisis. Our appreciation also goes to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for its
indispensable assistance to the electoral process in Albania.

The achievements of the multinational protection force
go beyond the provision of a security framework for
humanitarian operations. The presence of the force provided
a clear symbol of the commitment of the international
community to a peaceful resolution of the crisis, and thus
inspired the Albanian people with the courage and the hope
to rise up from chaos and rebuild their nation. The climate
of security that its presence created proved conducive to the
holding of fair and free elections. Beyond Albania, the
multinational protection force has also contributed to the
maintenance of stability in the wider Balkan region by
containing a possible spillover of instability into
neighbouring countries. The fact that massive,
destabilizing refugee outflows did not pour into
neighbouring countries may well be due to the timely
deployment and the efficient operations of the force and
to the confidence it restored among the Albanian people
in their future.

The multinational operation in Albania highlights
how a timely intervention by the international community
can contain and stabilize a situation, and prevent it from
deteriorating into a massive humanitarian disaster. The
excellent coordination between the multinational
protection force, the Albanian Government and the
various international organizations operating on the
ground was crucial to the success of this complex
operation.

The operation in Albania was a unique multinational
intervention in the sense that the situation in the country,
as grave as it was, was one of internal unrest sparked by
financial crisis, not the usual kind of armed conflict
between opposing sides which the Security Council most
often deals with. We believe that the Albanian operation
has set a significant precedent for potential future
interventions by the international community in cases
where a State is gripped by a complex crisis with serious
humanitarian implications and political repercussions for
its neighbours.

For the long-term stability and reconstruction of the
country, it is important to address the underlying causes
of the instability. Rebuilding the country's democratic
institutions on the basis of the recent parliamentary
elections is a Vital first step in that direction. This hard-
won stability will become irreversible if it can be backed
by economic rehabilitation and development.

Now that the multinational protection force has
successfully completed its mission, it must be emphasized
that the future of Albania lies in the hands of the
Government and the people of Albania themselves. The
international community can meaningfully help only when
the Albanian Government and people are willing to help
themselves. We take some encouragement from Prime
Minister Nano's recent statement that

"the best times for every Albanian, and for the
nation, lie in the future, not in the past."

 

Korea offers its best wishes to the Albanian people
and Government as they embark upon the vital task of
rebuilding national unity and democratic institutions and
reinvigorating social and economic development.

