Mr. Mkapa: Thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to address the Council on the Southern
Sudan referendum process.

We just returned from Khartoum, where the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission declared the
final result of the Southern Sudan referendum on self-
determination. Almost 99 per cent of voters opted for
the South's secession.

The referendum was a major milestone on the
road to lasting peace in the Sudan charted by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, signed by the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement in 2005. The two parties wrote to
the Secretary-General in July last year, asking that the
United Nations provide the main monitoring mission
for the referendum in Southern Sudan. In September,
the Secretary-General established our three-member
Panel to monitor and assess the referendum process for
both Southern Sudan and the Abyei Area.

We were privileged to be asked to carry out that
task at a historic juncture in the history of the Sudan.
We undertook five visits to the country and we
established a support office, with field offices across
the country. The Panel concludes that the referendum's
outcome reflects the will of the people of Southern
Sudan and that the referendum process was free, fair
and credible. We congratulate the people of the Sudan
for their commitment, dignity and patience, which
ensured that the process was peaceful and on schedule.

The last time the Panel briefed the Council (see S/PV.6468), voting had just ended and the aggregation
of results in the North, South and out-of-country voting
locations had started. The Panel and its staff monitored
the counting and transmission of sensitive material
throughout the country, and also out-of-country. The
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and Bureau
announced preliminary results in accordance with the
publicized timeline. The Supreme Court confirmed that
it had not received any appeals challenging the result.

The Panel assessed the referendum process based
on criteria stipulated in the Southern Sudan
Referendum Act. Those include an appropriate
environment and security conditions for the free
exercise of the right to self-determination; freedom of
11-22913
expression; the presence and participation of domestic
and international observers; freedom of assembly and
movement and voter education about the process.

The Panel is of the view that the referendum
process was conducted in a highly transparent manner.
Civil society organizations participated extensively.
Public statements by senior Government officials in the
North and South were increasingly encouraging and
freely transmitted through the media.

There were some problems. Lack of progress on
post-referendum arrangements meant that voters made
their decision in a situation of political uncertainty, and
voter education programmes were sometimes lacking.
A number of security incidents, not directly related to
the referendum, took place during the registration and
voting periods. There were a few instances of
intimidation of registrants, journalists and political and
human rights activists. However, those were isolated
incidents. In the view of the Panel, none of them
materially affected the credibility of the process.

The Panel commends the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, its Bureau and all
referendum staff for overcoming numerous challenges
to administer the referendum successfully. We also
commend the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the
United Nations Integrated Referendum and Electoral
Division and other international electoral advisers,
national and international observer groups and donors
for their assistance in achieving that goal.

The Panel recognizes and commends the decisive
role of President Omer Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Salva Kiir Mayardit. They demonstrated
courage and political commitment to ensure that a key
milestone in the peace process was reached.

The parties' work is not over. We call on the
parties to the Peace Agreement to utilize the
momentum created by the successful completion of the
referendum to reach a lasting agreement on post-
referendum arrangements, so that the peoples of
Northern and Southern Sudan can live together side by
side in cooperation, security and dignity. The Panel
also stresses the continuing importance of the
protection of all Sudanese citizens, both Northerners
and Southerners.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement stipulated
that the Abyei Area referendum should be held
simultaneously with the Southern Sudan referendum.
11-22913

The Panel regrets that this did not take place. The
Abyei Area referendum commission has yet to be
established, and no agreement has been reached on
who would be eligible to vote. Deadly clashes took
place in the Area, further complicating the situation.
The Panel urges the two parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement to seek a speedy and lasting solution
on Abyei. We call on the people of the Area to display
patience and tolerance until an equitable solution is
found.

The referendum is not an end in itself. If
implemented, this would herald a new political
dispensation for the North and the South. For that
reason, we urge the international community to
continue its political engagement, redouble its efforts
to assist the Sudan in the coming months and assist the
new entities that emerge in the post-interim period. It is
only with that kind of active engagement that this
dispensation can be a sustainable one.

