Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European Countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union also welcomes the report of
the Panel of Experts, and we recognize the work
accomplished by the Panel so far and note with interest
the conclusions and recommendations put forward in
its report.

The European Union supports the decision by the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Panel of
Experts for a period of three months. It is important
that this time be given to allow the Panel, inter alia, to
gather additional information on aspects not fully
covered in the report of 12 April, such as the role of
certain regional actors, to fully analyse existing data
and to gather comments from parties and actors cited in
the report. We welcome the commitment by the
Security Council to consider both the current report
and the expected addendum when the Panel reports
back in August with an update on the situation. It is our
hope that the follow-up will contribute to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has seen encouraging developments already.

Though further investigations and consultations
are warranted, the European Union wants to put on
record today its concern at the general findings in the
report. They indicate that widespread illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth has occurred in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and that there is a link between exploitation and
the continuation of the conflict. That is, in short,
unacceptable.

The European Union urges Governments and
rebel groups to investigate the information contained in
the report, to take action to prevent any illegal
exploitation and to refrain from exploitation
contributing to the continuation of the conflict. We also
call on other actors, individuals and private companies
alike to act responsibly and cease any involvement in
illegal exploitation. For its part, the European Union
has taken note of the information in the report relating
specifically to alleged activities by European
companies, and member States are following up on that
information.

Today's meeting is crucial as a forum for parties
to elaborate their positions in response to the report by
the Panel of Experts. The European Union particularly
appreciates the presence here today of the Ministers of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda, and I welcome the
announcements made this morning by the Ministers of
Uganda and Burundi on investigations to be carried out
regarding the activities of their nationals. We take their
active involvement as a sign of commitment on the part
of their Governments to engage in a constructive
dialogue on the issues addressed by the Panel. Such
political dialogue, both among the parties directly
concerned and between them and the Security Council,
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole, should be pursued to enable measures
effectively putting an end to illegal exploitation and to
exploitation which sustains the conflict.

Establishing a legal framework for a sustainable
management of natural resources is crucial for any
long-term development policy. As the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the neighbouring countries
gradually emerge from the devastating conflict that has
engulfed the region, the opportunities to invest in
rehabilitation, reconstruction and socio-economic
development will grow. The European Union remains
ready to respond to these needs, including by assisting
the countries of the region to establish a sustainable
framework for resource management.

The European Union reaffirms its position that
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can be achieved only through a negotiated peace
settlement that is fair to all parties; through respect for
the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for democratic
principles and human rights in all States of the region;
and by taking account of the security interests of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbouring countries. We reiterate our strong support
for the Lusaka Agreement as the consensual basis for
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region.

In this context, the European Union welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General of 17 April reflecting
that some progress has been made in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and
confirming in particular that phase II of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been launched. The
European Union also welcomes the plans for a Security
Council mission to the region later this month and
hopes that this active commitment by the Security
Council can assist the parties in taking the right
decisions towards peace.

Studying the interface between economic
interests and armed conflicts is vital in order to get a
full understanding on a global scale of today's threats
to international peace and security. The European
Union welcomes the increasing attention given by the
Security Council to this aspect in the context of a
number of conflicts currently on its agenda.

Finally, I want to add my voice to those that have
expressed today their sorrow and outrage at the murder
of the six workers of the International Committee of
the Red Cross in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Our sympathies go to their families and
relatives.

