Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev
and Mr. Liberty for their briefings today, which capture
both the distance that Liberia has travelled since the
civil war and its possibilities for the future.

At the outset, I would also like to commend the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for its
efforts in support of the people of Liberia as they
moved from the ashes of war to rebuild their country.
It is worth taking a moment to appreciate the fact that
the United Nations Mission in Liberia is a mission
that has successfully delivered on its mandate. It did
so by building trust with the Government and the
people of Liberia. UNMIL's well-planned transition
phase is indicative of the Mission's professionalism
and will ensure that the United Nations continues to
support the country going forward. I commend Special
Representative Zarif for his leadership and good
offices. We also pay tribute to the peacekeepers and
civilian personnel who lost their lives while promoting
peace, stability and development in Liberia.

I must admit that it is quite special for me to
participate in this, the very last Security Council
meeting on UNMIL, having served as the only Swedish
diplomat in Monrovia during the transition period in
2004 and 2005. At the time, UNMIL was new and had
just started to bring hope of an end to the violence. At the
same time, I know that Ambassador Skoog would have
liked to be present to add his personal impressions to
his briefing as Chair ofthe Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. However, as the Council is
aware, he is in Sweden making the final preparations
for the Council's visit over the weekend. I hope that
the Council will allow me to convey the Ambassador's
impressions and thoughts from his recent trip instead.

First, the transition from UNMIL to the United
Nations country team illustrates how far Liberia
has come. The security situation in the country is
stable. The elections put the Liberian constitutional
framework to the test. The use oflegal means to address
grievances after the elections underscores the progress
that has been made in the rule of law over the past
13 years. The elections also demonstrated Liberians'
strong desire to maintain peace and actively engage in
strengthening democracy in the country. During his
time in Liberia, Ambassador Skoog was particularly
impressed and heartened by Liberia's young people
and their commitment to peace and the democratic
process. They are a vital resource for the country that
the new Government must harness and nurture. The
next generation of Liberians has high expectations and
will hold the Government to account.

The election process, however, also reminded us of
the complexity and fragility of the situation. As I said
in the briefing, many of the root causes of the conflict
remain. Tackling those issues is a prerequisite for an
inclusive and equitable society. Continued reforms and
the enactment of pending legislation on, for example,
land rights, local Government and domestic violence
will be of paramount importance in that regard.

As we have said many times before, there can be no
peace without development and no development without
peace, or without respect for human rights Taken
together, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace resolutions form a powerful
framework for building peaceful, prosperous, inclusive
and sustainable societies. The Sustainable Development
Goals represent the indispensable building blocks
for the resilience that is needed to support peaceful
democratic transition and reduce the risk of violent
conflict. Liberia's rich natural resources mean that
the Government has the opportunity to promote the
revitalized economy that the country so desperately
needs. However, to harness that potential and to build
trust, the country's natural resources must be managed
in an open and transparent way, assuring long-term
gains for all of the people of Liberia.

During his visit, Ambassador Skoog was honoured
to participate in the Liberia Moment Conference. The
Conference, which was also attended by the Deputy
Secretary-General, the President of Liberia, United
Nations leadership and youth representatives, among
others, marked the starting point for an in-depth
consultation process by the Government on the design
of its new national development plan. It also marked
a farewell to UNMIL. Following his meeting with
the President, Ambassador Skoog noted that the new
Government was both committed and engaged, and
already taking the lead in identifying the country's
challenges and formulating priorities for the future.
The President's pro-poor agenda and commitment to
anti-corruption are promising. We are looking forward
to seeing how those commitments will be translated
into action that can deliver tangible improvement in
the lives of Liberians, not least in the rural areas. It
will be imperative to ensure that the new Government
takes forward residual tasks in the peacebuilding plan
and the statement of mutual commitments as part of
the new national development plan. Ambassador Skoog
reiterated that point throughout his visit.

Lastly, as we celebrate the successes, we must
remain conscious of the challenges ahead. There is a
real risk that the Government will not be able to meet the
high expectations for clear and quick results in people's
lives. The President underlined to Ambassador Skoog
the continued need for partnerships and support. It is
therefore essential to ensure that international attention
on Liberia does not wane. There will continue to be a
need for a strong and coherent United Nations presence
in the country going forward, with the capacity to
support the Government in preventing conflict and
addressing its root causes. Ensuring political capacity
and sustaining the good offices that have been so
crucial in Liberia will continue to be important, as will
support to the Resident Coordinator's Office. As we
saw during the elections, the Economic Community of
West African States will also have an important role to
play in support of the country.

The international community must also ensure
continued and predictable resources for sustaining
peace. The planned multipartner trust fund, managed
by the Resident Coordinator in cooperation with
the Government, could be an excellent vehicle for
coordinated and predictable support, in combination
with the catalytic support of the Peacebuilding Fund.

The transition will not end when the peacekeepers
leave, and Liberia should not fear being left to face
the challenges of the future alone. We, the partners
of Liberia, are committed to sustaining peace in
Liberia. As Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we will continue to play
our part.
