Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
Equatorial Guinea welcomes Their Excellencies
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Jordan
and the State of Palestine and wishes them a pleasant
stay in New York. We also thank the team represented
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for the valuable briefing.

The prolonged lack of a lasting political solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and, consequently, the
ongoing deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as the insecurity with
which the Israelis live, remain a source of deep concern
to Equatorial Guinea.

It is now almost 70 years since this question was first
introduced at the United Nations in 1947. Most of those
who were living at that time are clearly dead and many
of those who were born during that period are now old.
Both sides have lost many loved ones and significant
basic infrastructure. Added to that are the millions of
Palestinians who have been forced to flee their homes
and properties to depend on humanitarian assistance in
various parts of the Middle East and the world. This
suffering, which has scarred the civilian population in
the course of this long-running conflict, should sound
alarm bells and means that we have run out of time to
continue with the business-as-usual adoption of endless
resolutions without any improvement whatsoever on
the ground.

On 23 December 2016, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2334 (2016) urging Israel to refrain
from any measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, the character or the status of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem.

In that connection, and in order to preserve the
viability of the two-State solution, Equatorial Guinea, a
friend of both Israel and Palestine, regrets the fact that
today the Israeli Government is continuing to pursue
its settlement policy, which is a flagrant violation of
international law. Given that, and given past history,
there is a good case to be made for the fact that in
today's world we should be able to peacefully resolve
many of the problems faced by our countries if all
parties wish to do so.

The members ofthe Security Council must maintain
a united front and demand that both parties implement
the provisions of all relevant resolutions, which are
one of the most important instruments for resolving
conflicts. We cannot overlook Israeli concerns over
the ongoing security threats coming from Gaza. The
ongoing instability in that Palestinian enclave could
lead it to become one of the preferred destinations of
insurgents who wish to entrench terrorism in the region.

We therefore reiterate our call for the Palestinian
Authority in Gaza to retake its place as the best-placed
entity to deal with security and socioeconomic issues,
which weigh so heavily on the minds of the civilian
population there, including women and innocent
children. Thus there is a growing need for the support
of the international community for the mediation
efforts of Egypt and the United Nations to accelerate
the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and
here the restoration of the Palestinian Authority to its
rightful place is vital.

Our delegation very much welcomes last month's
agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which will see the latter body receive $568 million
as a reimbursement for fuel taxes collected by Israel.
Nonetheless, it is key to resolve this question once and
for all. Here we agree with Mr. Mladenov in that both
parties must continue cooperating constructively and
abide by the provisions of the Protocol on Economic
Relations between the Government of the State of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

We wish to pay tribute to the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which, despite
its precarious financial situation, is working tirelessly
to improve humanitarian conditions for the millions
of Palestinian refugees, reducing the pressure on host
countries. The vital work of UNRWA must enjoy the
full support of the international community in terms of
financing to render it more effective.
Finally, on the Palestinian question in general,
Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its commitment to
support any initiative that takes into account existing
instruments of international law, such as the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly and
other internationally recognized agreements. As far as
we are concerned, the most pressing issue is to find
a solution that will bring about negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians and that is supported by
the international community. Such a solution would
necessary involve two States, with East Jerusalem as
the capital, living in peace and with security guarantees
for both and other States of the region,

In that respect, we cherish the hope that the
Government that results from the current electoral
process in Israel will work for a peaceful solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which began
when the United Nations had barely marked its
second anniversary.

