The President (Spoke in French): At the outset of
the meeting, I should like to acknowledge the presence
at the Council table of His Excellency Mr. Karel de
Gucht, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, and of
His Excellency Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France. On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to them.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2008/601 and Add.1)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Javier Solana,
High Representative of the European Union.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative of the European Union, and invite him
to take a seat at the Council table.
2
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents 8/2008/601 and Addendum 1, which
contain the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad.

I now give the floor to Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative of the European Union.


