Mr. Maboundou (Congo) (spoke in French): I
would like first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption to the presidency of the Council, and
to thank you for having organized this debate on an
issue of great relevance to the Central African
subregion, the rest of Africa and other regions of the
world affected by conflicts and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.

In 2008, it was estimated that there were already
870 million firearms in circulation around the world,
causing on average 740,000 deaths per year. Even in
3
areas free from conflict, they continue to sow death
and devastation. Small arms and light weapons are
easily absorbed into illegal trafficking networks. They
are widely used in armed conflicts and foster cross-
border crime.

For over three decades now, illegal trafficking in
small arms and light weapons has fed conflicts and
their corresponding phenomenon, cross-border crime,
in Central Africa. The subregion has been particularly
hard hit by the many armed conflicts that have
damaged the stability of States and destroyed their
socio-economic fabric. Many such States are in post-
conflict situations, while others are undertaking
reconstruction and the revival of their development
processes.

The persistent tensions in the subregion provide
fertile soil for the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which, alongside organized crime, severely
destabilizes our States and poses a serious threat to the
peace and security of the subregion and to overall
international peace and security.

Furthermore, the process of economic integration
on which our development strategies depend has been
hindered and could even be held up entirely. Indeed,
the illicit circulation and proliferation of small arms
and light weapons are a destabilizing factor. They
promote armed violence and prolong armed conflicts.
They also promote the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, illicit drug trafficking, the recruitment of
child soldiers, sexual violence and other human rights
violations, such as illicit trafficking in children.

The unremitting armed violence and insecurity
resulting from this harmful traffic have weakened the
economies of most States in Central Africa, which must
also face the challenge of implementing programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants. The recurrence of armed violence
arising from the proliferation of light weapons in
border areas, roadblocks and acts of piracy displace
entire populations, making them more vulnerable and
their situation more precarious. The current situation in
the northern part of my country is a vivid illustration of
this point.

Here, my delegation would like to reiterate its
appeal for assistance for our brothers from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who have fled the
hostilities there and taken refuge in the Republic of the
Congo. We would also like to take this opportunity to
echo the United Nations appeal for funds to relieve the
suffering of the victims of armed attacks in Equateur
province.

The States of the subregion have committed
themselves to combating this scourge in the framework
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. Given what is at
stake, they have resolved to coordinate their efforts on
a regular basis within the framework of ECCAS, in
which they have created a Peace and Security
Department, and of the Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa.

These efforts have led to the adoption of several
decisions and recommendations. I would highlight in
particular the Subregional Conference on the
Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms in
Central Africa, which was held in October 1999 in
N'djamena, Chad, and the meeting held in Brazzaville
in May 2003 that led to the adoption of the Programme
of Priority Activities for the implementation of the
2001 United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

It is clear that effective control of the scourge of
illicit small arms is crucial. It is through the
strengthening of subregional, regional and international
cooperation that our States will be able to meet the
challenge of the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. This cooperation will have to focus on
exchanges of information and experience among
States, on the one hand, and between States and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
on the other. This will be particularly true in terms of
assistance being provided for the drawing up of
registers of arms, lists of illegal arms brokers, and the
provision of equipment and materials for border
surveillance and weapons detection.

In this respect, a workshop/seminar on the fight
against the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons was held on 10 March in Brazzaville by the
Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons in
the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and
Bordering States. Through this workshop, the Congo
obtained an electronic device to trace weapons.

Conflict prevention must also be addressed on a
priority basis in order to ensure that non-State actors
are unable to acquire such weapons, the destructive
10-2813]
effects of which have proved to be comparable to those
of weapons of mass destruction. To that end, we must
emphasize rigorous management of arms stockpiles,
the destruction of collected illicit weapons and surplus
munitions, and disarmament education by involving all
national actors, in particular civil society. Furthermore,
the submission and regular consideration, in the
context of the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, of national
reports on the implementation of the Brazzaville
Programme of Priority Activities and the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is an encouraging exercise
that will allow us to take stock of the progress that has
been made in the fight against the scourge of arms in
Central Africa.

The forthcoming ministerial meeting of the
Standing Advisory Committee, to be held in April in
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, will
focus exclusively on the consideration of the
preliminary draft of a legally binding instrument on the
control of small arms and light weapons in Central
Africa, which has been drawn up at the request of the
Economic Community of Central African States. As a
result, my delegation hopes that the Kinshasa meeting
will equip Central Africa with an ideal framework for
action to better combat the scourge of the illicit traffic
in small arms and light weapons.

