Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
very important debate.

(spoke in English)

I should also like to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Amos and Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovie for their interesting presentations.
Let me add that we have always felt it particularly
important that the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights be associated with this debate. Austria
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and the Human Security Network.

Members of the Council and others present will
not be surprised that this is the first debate for which
my country has decided to return to this table since our
term as member of the Council came to an end. This is
an issue to which we have been particularly attached,
including during our presidency in November 2009,
which saw the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009).
Austria remains strongly committed to this issue and

ll-33lll
will continue to work with interested Member States
and the Secretariat to enhance the United Nations
protection capacities.

I would also like to say that we welcomed the
initiative under the presidency of Brazil to address all
three protection clusters on the Council's agenda in one
set of consultations. Recent years have seen substantial
improvements in the United Nations ability to prevent
and react to serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Comprehensive
consultations, such as those held in February, can
enhance the coordination between the existing
protection frameworks and mechanisms.

The events in Libya and in Cote d'Ivoire over
recent months have shown how challenging the issue
of the protection of civilians remains. The Security
Council has a core responsibility in ensuring the
compliance of all parties to a conflict with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. With the adoption of resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya, as well as resolution 1975
(2011) on Cote d'Ivoire, the Security Council has sent
a strong signal that serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law cannot and will not
be tolerated by the Council.

As stated in resolution 1894 (2009), the Security
Council also has an important role to play in ending
impunity, as the representative of Canada has jus said.
We call on the Council to consistently use the tools at
its disposal, which include referring situations to the
International Criminal Court, as was recently done
with the situation in Libya; mandating commissions of
inquiry, as proposed in the Secretary-General's latest
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579); or imposing targeted sanctions. We
welcome the Secretary-General's announcement that he
will undertake a review of the United Nations
experiences in establishing commissions of inquiry in
order to identify how such mechanisms might be used
more consistently.

We also share the concern of the Secretary-
General over the threat posed to civilians by explosive
weapons, as outlined in his 2010 report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Deployed in
populated areas, these weapons cause unacceptable
suffering for women, children and men, even years
after their initial use. Austria urges all States to accede
to and strengthen relevant international instruments,
such as the Mine Ban Treaty, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, and Additional Protocols II and V to
the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
among the Organization's most effective tools to
protect civilians affected by armed conflict. We
therefore welcome the efforts made by the Secretariat
pursuant to resolution 1894 (2009) to improve the
implementation of protection mandates by
peacekeeping operations. The finalized strategic
framework for drafting comprehensive protection
strategies provides a solid basis for a coordinated and
coherent approach. In addition, the resource and
capability matrix can serve as a useful tool in the
planning of missions and help to ensure that protection
mandates are matched with adequate resources.
Appropriate predeployment and in-mission training is
key in order to increase the awareness and
responsiveness of peacekeepers to protection needs.

The events in Walikale in August 2010 and other
incidents of widespread sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict show that peacekeepers need to have the
capacity to interact closely and communicate
effectively with local communities and the host
Government in order to carry out their mandate and
prevent an escalation of violence. We would like to
reiterate the importance of taking gender sensitivities
into account and making full use of all components
available to mission, including civil affairs officers and
community liaison interpreters.

A consistent approach by the Council to the
protection of civilians includes an accurate assessment
of the achievements and remaining challenges in the
field. We therefore strongly support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that peacekeeping and other
relevant missions develop specific benchmarks against
which to measure and review progress. In this regard,
lessons learned from the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad could serve as a
very useful basis.

We also welcome the development by the
Secretariat of guidance for United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions on protection
of civilians reporting. We support the Secretary-
General's intention to develop indicators in relation to
the monitoring and reporting of achievements in
protecting civilians in armed conflict. This will be an
important tool for measuring progress and, as a
consequence, adjusting the Council's actions.

Finally, we would like to underline the
importance of the Secretary-General's recommendation
that pressing protection issues be consistently and
comprehensively dealt with by the Council, even in
cases where they are not formally on its agenda. I think
that the experience we have had with such innovative
formats as informal interactive debates can also help
the Council to deal with these challenges. Discussions
and briefings in the informal expert group on the
protection of civilians should be used in a continuous
manner to ensure that the Council's deliberations are
informed and comprehensive.

