Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to extend our thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Hercegovina, for his thorough briefing
before the Council on the latest developments in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Egypt expresses its full support to him in
carrying out his mandate.

Egypt welcomes the positive political developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past period,
particularly the European Union's approval of the
official application presented by Bosnian authorities
to join the European Union. That shows the Bosnian
Government's persistence in pressing ahead with
carrying out the requisite reforms with a view to
achieving integration with Euro-Atlantic institutions in
a manner that fosters the stability of the country and
contributes to the efforts to achieve the comprehensive
development aspired to by the Bosnian people.

At the same time, Egypt expresses its grave concern
about the deterioration in the overall political climate
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly in the wake
of the decision by the Republika Srpska to organize a
plebiscite to commemorate "Republika Srpska Day",
in contravention of two decisions by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

That was described by the High Representative
today in his report (S/2016/911, annex) as constituting a
grave violation by the Republika Srpska of its obligations
under the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Constitution of the
country. That came in addition to further intimations
by Republika Srpska officials about the possibility of
organizing further referendums, including one on the
status of the region.

The insistence by Bosnian Serb officials not to
respect the decisions of courts in general demonstrates
a failure to apply the rule of law and negatively affects
the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
was accompanied by a launch of nationalistic calls
from certain political parties in Republika Srpska for
the secession of the Serbian entity from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in addition to other calls to redemarcate
the internal borders of the federal Republic. That
constitutes a serious threat to the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia. That fallout will affect not
only Bosnia and Herzegovina but also the entire Balkan
region. Hence, we call upon all of the political leaders to
place the joint interests of the Bosnian people over the
narrow ethnic political interests of any particular ethnic
group, which would only thwart progress and stability.

We wish to state that if those challenges are not
addressed in a serious, comprehensive and consensual
framework, with the participation of all Bosnian
political parties, the political achievements made
since the signing of the Dayton Agreement will be
undermined. That Agreement remains the prevailing
reference point for the region and the main guarantee
of its stability. In that connection, Egypt would like
to highlight the need for all parties to respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, national Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the decisions
issued by the country's judiciary.

Once again, we emphasize our full backing for the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in confronting the dangers of terrorism. We are ready
to extend all forms of support to efforts to confront
extremists and aberrant ideologies, particularly efforts
aimed at fighting violent religious speech and at
rectifying flawed religious concepts.

In conclusion, Egypt reasserts the need to intensify
efforts aimed at implementing the 5+2 agenda in full,
as well as the need for the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to earnestly emphasize the concepts of
sociopolitical coexistence, and, concomitantly, to press
ahead with the cause of peace and action, which also
requires sincere international and regional backing for
those efforts.

