Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Allow me
to congratulate China on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and to ensure you, Sir, of our
support through the course of this month.

I also want to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing on her efforts, pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), to bring to justice those responsible for atrocity
crimes committed in Libya.

Seven years ago, in the face ofthe horrific atrocities
being committed by the Muammar Al-Qadhafi
regime, the Security Council unanimously referred the
situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court.
Today, much has changed in Libya, but it is still the
case that Libyans are not free from violence, conflict
or instability. Just last month, one of Libya's most vital
economic institutions, the National Oil Corporation,
was attacked by terrorists. In the past two months,
over 100 people have been killed in clashes in and
around Tripoli. Hundreds more have been wounded
and thousands displaced all due to the unacceptable
actions of spoilers to Libya's political process.

 

The United States has strongly condemned the recent
violence in Tripoli. The political process cannot proceed
under the threat of violence and the Tripoli ceasefire
must be respected. As we have said many times before
in briefings on the situation in Libya, the human rights
situation in that country is grave and the perpetrators
of violence must face justice. SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, the former head
of the notorious Libyan Internal Security Agency,
must be held to account for their crimes, including the
murder and persecution of hundreds of civilians and the
alleged torture of individuals perceived to have been
enemies of the Al-Qadhafi regime. We also reiterate
our calls for the relevant Libyan authorities to ensure
that Major Al-Werfalli is held accountable for alleged
unlawful killings.

We repeat our warning that those who tamper
with security in Tripoli or elsewhere in Libya will be
held accountable for their actions. As I said before the
Council in September (see S/PV.8341), a handful of
political spoilers should not be permitted to thwart the
process of achieving a more secure and stable Libya.
The continuation of that type of fighting puts people
across the country at risk of violence at the hands of
criminals and of terrorists.

The United States remains deeply concerned about
the vulnerability of migrants, refugees and asylum
seekers in Libya, who are preyed upon by human
smugglers and traffickers. Those responsible must
be brought to justice. We encourage the Government
of National Accord to continue efforts to hold such
individuals accountable, including any complicit
Government officials. We also welcome the Council's
action in June to designate for sanctions six individuals
involved in human trafficking and the smuggling of
migrants in Libya. The United States is pleased to
have implemented concurrent sanctions against those
individuals who threaten the peace, security and
stability of Libya. We further welcome the Council's
unanimous adoption in October of resolution 2437
(2018), which authorizes Member States to continue
to inspect and seize vessels involved in migrant
trafficking and smuggling off the coast of Libya. The
United States looks forward to continued collaboration
with the Libyan authorities, fellow Security Council
members and other allies to fight the scourge of human
trafficking and smuggling and Libya and around
the world. Let me repeat the words of Ambassador
Haley - there is no place in our world for such abuses
of human rights and human dignity.

In looking over the broad landscape of where
Libya is today, much work remains to be done to create
lasting and stable peace. It is appropriate in today's
setting to emphasize the crucial role that accountability
plays in achieving that goal. Terrorists, armed groups
and criminal gangs must not be allowed to act with
impunity. Those responsible for egregious abuses and
atrocities must be held accountable, not only to bring
victims a measure of justice, but also to signal to all
future abusers that such crimes will not be tolerated.

The United States is committed to pursuing
justice in Libya. We remain a steadfast partner of the
Government of National Accord, the Security Council
and our international partners in working toward that
goal and towards a more peaceful and prosperous Libya.

In closing, I reiterate the concerns of the United
States with regard to the activity of the Court with
respect to the situations in Afghanistan and the
West Bank and Gaza, including our objection to any
investigations or other activity of the Court concerning
United States or Israeli personnel.

