Mr. Serrano: Let me thank you, Mr. President,
for giving the floor to the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration.

I want to start by greeting the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, Sofia Borges, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ameerah Haq, and by expressing gratitude for their
insightful briefings on the situation in Timor-Leste - a
situation that, as we can also read in the excellent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/522) before us,
has continued to improve steadily in many ways.

During the reporting period, we saw yet another
milestone: the closure of the last transitional shelter for
internally displaced persons. With the humanitarian
phase brought to a close, the country is now able to
fully focus on consolidating peace and justice and on
eradicating poverty. It will find the European Union
not on the sidelines, but by its side. Timor-Leste can
count on our assistance in the future.

I will structure my remarks on current and future
challenges according to the four priority areas of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), the well-led Mission that is supporting
Timor-Leste. These are review and reform of the
security sector, strengthening the rule of law, economic
and social development, and promoting a culture of
democratic governance and dialogue.

First and foremost, on security, the importance of
a professional, impartial and accountable national
police service cannot be stressed enough. Although
there is still a premium on prudence, the handovers to
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) have so
far been encouraging, with crime rates roughly at the
same levels as before. UNMIT capacity-building of the
PNTL remains crucial if such progress is to take hold
over the long term. Of course, there is more to security
than policing. The important comprehensive security
sector reform involves not just security and defence
forces, but also border control, customs and the justice
sector.

That brings me to the second priority: the rule of
law. The increased budget allocation and the Justice
Sector Strategic Plan show the commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to this crucial sector. The
performance of the justice sector has improved and
accountability is on the rise. Nevertheless, impunity
remains an issue. Causes for concern are ongoing
human rights abuses by the security forces themselves
and the high number of reported incidents of gender-
based violence.

While clamping down on today's violations, we
should never lose sight of what happened yesterday.
Redressing past human rights abuses helps to
re-establish and reinforce the rule of law and should
therefore remain a priority. We welcome and encourage
the ongoing efforts to create an institution that would
take forward the recommendations of the Commission
for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, as well as
those of the Commission of Truth and Friendship. It is
our hope that the Timor-Leste Parliament will soon
resume and wrap up discussions on the relevant draft
laws.

Third, on socio-economic development, Timor-
Leste is recovering from the economic setbacks of the
past, with poverty having dropped by an estimated
9 per cent in the past three years. The careful
management of oil revenues and the new National
Strategic Development Plan could together serve to
jumpstart economic growth and poverty reduction. The
Government is to be commended for conducting such
wide-ranging consultations on the plan. We are looking
forward to receiving the final version, so that we can
align our assistance with it. These are the issues that
we believe the plan should prioritize: fostering
long-term rural development, reducing unemployment,
especially among young people, and improving social
services, especially health and education.

Fourthly, on governance, the Government of
Timor-Leste has made great strides. Public finance
management has been reformed, leaving the State more
transparent and more accountable. A Civil Service
Commission and an Anti-Corruption Commission were
put in place. The Anti-Corruption Commission must
now become truly operational. The establishment of an
independent technical secretariat, an independent
procurement commission and the Audit Court also
constitute important future steps.

In closing, the general election scheduled for
2012 will be an important milestone for Timor-Leste's
democracy. In our view, the presence of UNMIT in the
country should be maintained at an appropriate level
during the critical election year. In the meantime, we
believe the preparation of an operational strategy to
transform UNMIT from a peacekeeping into a
peacebuilding mission deserves special attention, with
the exact details to be worked out between, of course,
the Timor-Leste Government and the United Nations.
That is why we commend them for creating a joint
committee to execute the mission's transformation with
care. And that will entail taking into account the reality
on the ground, as well as potentially negative effects
on the local economy. We look forward to receiving
regular updates on the committee's work.

Beyond 2012, the international community's
commitment to Timor-Leste needs to be different, but
no less strong. The European Union will continue to be
guided by a proverb from Timor-Leste: "Solidariedade
nos bons e maus momentos", or in other words,
solidarity in the good and bad moments.
