Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting.

We thank Mr. Tanin for the commendable work done
by him and his team. We also thank Mr. Joao Miguel
Ferreira de Serpa Soares; Mr. Daeic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia; and Ambassador Citaku for being
with us today.

The Dominican Republic notes with concern the
continuing tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
In this situation, it is vital that the parties honour the
commitments made in the Brussels Agreement and
in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
urge them to be more flexible in their positions and
to work to resume negotiations for the normalization
of relations between the parties. We also urge that
those negotiations continue under the auspices of the
European Union, which, as facilitator, continues to play
a fundamental role in the process. We acknowledge the
crucial role played by the United Nations in support
of peace and the strengthening of institutions on the
ground, mainly through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We join the Secretary-General in calling on the
parties to refrain from engaging in inflammatory
rhetoric and provocative actions that could hinder the
continuation of dialogue. The Dominican Republic
encourages Kosovar and Serb leaders to take action
in favour of the ongoing process, since decisive
political will is required in order to accelerate the
negotiations. That includes refraining from taking
unilateral measures that could slow progress in the
implementation of commitments. In that context, we
believe that maintaining the increase in tariffs on
products from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina not
only obstructs trade but also harms peace talks.

We applaud the meeting held on 29 April in
Berlin, in the framework of the summit of Western
Balkan leaders, convened by Germany and France.
It is encouraging that, on that occasion, Pristina and
Belgrade agreed on their intention to move forward
with the implementation of existing agreements and to
participate constructively in the process of normalizing
relations in the current format. We take note of and
support the initiative to hold another meeting in Paris
in early July.

We stress the need to pursue efforts to incorporate
the various sectors of society into the current political
process. In that regard, we commend the initiatives
and events organized by UNMIK, in collaboration
with UN-Women and the European Union, to enable
and promote greater participation and women's
empowerment, in line with the women and peace and
security agenda. We also welcome activities to promote
the integration of young people into the dynamics of
confidence-building and the promotion of peace. In
that regard, we congratulate UNMIK and UNICEF on
the holding of the third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly
in April, in the framework of the Mission's strategy
on youth, peace and security. We would also like to
highlight the support of the United Nations team, the
Special Representative and all those working together
to involve young people in decision-making processes,
initiatives for inter-community dialogue and the
promotion of political and social reconciliation.

The Dominican Republic recognizes the positive
impact of achieving impartial justice in Kosovo, as it
effectively helps to build the people's trust in official
institutions. In that context, we believe it necessary
to pursue efforts to create mechanisms that guarantee
respect for and the full exercise of the rights of citizens.
That means that justice can provide timely and effective
responses to the victims of gender-based violence and
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.

With regard to the events of 28 May, in which two
UNMIK employees were detained during a police
operation, we hope that the facts will be clarified in a
timely manner and that the truth will be uncovered so
that relevant action may be taken.

We stress the importance of strengthening the
rule of law in Kosovo. We therefore welcome actions
and provisions that guarantee full respect for and the
protection of human rights. We take this opportunity
to acknowledge the work of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, through its monitoring and
operational pillars. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts made by the Mission to facilitate agreements
pertaining to freedom of movement and support for
the Specialist Prosecutor's Office and the Specialist
Chambers. We welcome the resumption of the search
for missing persons cases and condemn any attempt to
obstruct such tasks.

Lastly, we reiterate our support and appreciation
for the work conducted by UNMIK, the Kosovo Force,
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe to build sustainable peace
in Kosovo.

