Mr. Maurer: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for the opportunity to brief
the Security Council today.

This year marks an important milestone - 70 years
since States convened to adopt the historic 1949 Geneva
Conventions in the aftermath of the Second World
War. In doing so they made a critical declaration that
even in armed conflict, even between fierce enemies,
there must be limits on the suffering that we can inflict
upon each other. The Geneva Conventions symbolize
our enduring and common humanity. Rooted in ideas
that have existed in all civilizations, they limit the
devastating effects of warfare. Today the universally
ratified Geneva Conventions represent one of the
greatest achievements of inter-State cooperation. The
Conventions show us what is possible when States take
collective and individual action to uphold the law and
humanitarian principles.

International humanitarian law does not ask the
impossible. States were not carried away by lofty
ideals when they negotiated the treaties. They knew the
realities of war and set out inherently pragmatic rules
to protect and respect human life and dignity. Through
the four Geneva Conventions, protections are given for
wounded and sick soldiers on land and at sea, prisoners
of war and civilians. In addition, a major achievement
in 1949 was the inclusion of article 3, common to
all four Conventions, which provides protections in
conflicts involving non-State armed groups. Today
international humanitarian law remains a key tool
for States to deal with contemporary challenges of
conflict, including counter-terrorism operations in
armed conflict. International humanitarian law strikes
a balance between military necessity and humanity.

Every single day, international humanitarian law
is at work saving lives and protecting women, men
and children in conflicts around the world. We rightly
hear about the violations because the consequences
are tragic and visible, but we must also recognize the
protective power and positive impact of international
humanitarian law when it is respected.

The impact of international humanitarian law is
visible in the events that take place - when the wounded
and sick are evacuated to safety, when people detained
are treated with dignity, when the fate of missing
people is finally clarified and when humanitarian
assistance is delivered across lines. Its impact can also
be seen through acts of restraint - when horrors are
not inflicted, when civilian areas are spared from direct
shelling or when medical workers are able to freely
operate without threat or targeting.

When respected, international humanitarian
law reduces the risk of physical and social damage
to communities over the long term. In this era of
protracted conflict, people are living through war and
violence for years or even decades, and some semblance
of day-to-day life must continue. When international
humanitarian law is respected, the entire collapse
of towns and cities can be avoided, meaning fewer
people are displaced and schools, hospitals and markets
remain open.

While the Geneva Conventions are universally
ratified, it is clear by the obvious terrible suffering in
today's conflicts that they are not universally respected.
Too often, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) sees the impact on people when international
humanitarian law is violated - indiscriminate killing,
torture, rape, cities destroyed and psychological
trauma inflicted.

But continued violations of the law do not mean
the law is inadequate, but rather that efforts to ensure
respect are inadequate. We can and must do more. The
Council can do more. Experience tells us that, when
it comes to violations of international humanitarian
law, it is not only knowledge of the law that counts but
the translation of that knowledge into behaviour. The
challenge is to ensure that the law is not only integrated
into formal doctrine and military procedures, but that
it also becomes an ethical standard of behaviour among
forces and individuals - that fighters facing a choice to
act in violation of the law know to say, "This is wrong;
this is not who I am".

On this anniversary, we call on States to be
vigilant, to keep watch over their legal responsibilities
and continue to take practical steps for ambitious
interpretation and thorough implementation of the law.
States can do more by ratifying all treaties related to
international humanitarian law; strengthening military
doctrine, the rules of engagement and practice; ensuring
that military training socializes the rules and principles
of international humanitarian law; developing national
legislation that is compatible with international
obligations; and training parliamentarians and legal
professionals on international humanitarian law. We
must ensure that the words of the Geneva Conventions
do not remain dormant in legal texts but instead are
known, applied and championed.

As a living document, the way the law is
understood must reflect present day realities. There is
no doubt that the modern battlefield is a complex arena.
Urbanized warfare, an increasing number of armed
groups and partnered warfare are posing new and
difficult dilemmas. Rapidly developing technologies
are creating new front lines in cyberspace, as well as
new ways to fight, such as autonomous weapon systems
and remote technologies.

With these new challenges ahead, we need to
constantly reflect on the meaning and development of
international humanitarian law to meet the challenges
of warfare today and in the future. The ICRC is working
with States on the application of basic international
humanitarian law concepts in these emerging fields,
and we ask that they engage in constructive and open
dialogue with us on these important issues. The world
cannot afford to miss the opportunity to preserve
humanity on these new frontiers.

The Geneva Conventions are for all of us. They
represent the line of our common humanity and shield
us from our own barbarity. We cannot forget that. This
anniversary serves to encourage us by showing us that
respect for the law is both possible and desired by all. It
is also a call to do more, to do better and live up to our
responsibilities during times of conflict to respect life
and dignity.

