Ms. John: I would like to thank the United
States presidency for this opportunity to speak to the
Security Council today on behalf of the Community
Empowerment for Progress Organization. I also speak
on behalf of the South Sudan Civil Society Forum, a
coalition of over 200 groups working to promote peace,
freedom and respect for human dignity.

On 12 September, the people of South Sudan
welcomed the news that the Government and opposition
groups had signed the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. After close to five years of war, we desperately
cling to the hope that the commitment of the parties is
genuine and that they will implement the Agreement in
a timely manner.

We know that whatever peace the Agreement
brings about will be very fragile. On 14 September,
the ceasefire monitoring body announced that it would
conduct investigations into an alleged breach of the
agreement in the Yei area. On 15 September, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) announced
that a peacekeeper had been shot by a Government
soldier in the same area. Those are worrying signs. The
Security Council must continue to insist on respect for
the ceasefire.

Our peace is fragile because some opposition
groups declined to sign the Peace Agreement, and
others were not party to the negotiations. The Security
Council should call for the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) to support continued outreach
to, and engagement with, those groups, so that they
also join hands to support the Peace Agreement. Even
among the parties that did sign, there must be continued
efforts to build trust and confidence among them\ and
to ensure that they can effectively work together in the
same Government, towards a common goal.

This peace is fragile because there is complete
impunity within my country. Violations of human
rights and humanitarian law rarely result in criminal
prosecution. We believe that there must be some
effective and reliable deterrent to prevent rampant rape,
extrajudicial killings and obstruction of humanitarian
access, which have become all too normal in South
Sudan. We urge the Security Council to insist on the
immediate establishment of a hybrid court for South
Sudan and to support efforts to strengthen the national
criminal justice system.

Competition over resources and cattle raiding
regularly trigger local violence in South Sudan. The
divisions among ethnic communities have grown so
deep that it is sometimes difficult for us to coexist with
each other. My organization is supporting communities
to engage in dialogue and resolve differences without
violence. We urge the Security Council to call for
increased support to local peace initiatives and for
the timely establishment of the commission for truth,
reconciliation and healing that is provided for in the
Peace Agreement.

The South Sudanese people are concerned about
reports that Ugandan and Sudanese forces entered
the country over the past month. While Presidents
Museveni and Al-Bashir played a role in helping parties
reach the revitalized Agreement, we are concerned
that the presence of their forces could have negative
security implications, since they are not yet under a
United Nations mandate. The Council must urge South
Sudan's neighbours to respect the Security Council
arms embargo and insist that any forces entering under
the pretext ofthe Peace Agreement come only as part of
the Security Council-mandated peacekeeping mission.

We urge the Security Council to help ensure that
our peace does not fall apart. Peace requires that we
South Sudanese be honest with ourselves. We must be
free to openly deliberate and debate the governance
challenges we face, including corruption and impunity.
The Peace Agreement provides specific roles for civil
society and women and youth representatives in many
of the bodies it sets up. They will join bodies tasked
with planning security-sector reforms, monitoring the
ceasefire, ensuring reconstruction in conflict-affected
areas and providing reparations to those most affected
by violence. But, in a context where critical voices
are silent, where peace, human rights and political
activists - such as Dong Samuel Luak, Aggrey Idri,
Peter Biar Ajak, Bashir Ahmed and many others - are
disappeared or arbitrarily detained, no one will be free
to contribute effectively to those bodies or to speak up
when the Agreement is not being implemented. I ask
the Council to please continue its calls for respect for
the freedom of expression and for the release of those
who are arbitrarily detained.

South Sudanese women participated in the
negotiation of the revitalized Agreement, and one of
their major achievements is the increase of required
women's participation in Government from 25 per cent
to 35 per cent. That is something to celebrate, but it
is also a call to action: to ensure that it is effectively
implemented and that women are able to participate
equally in decision-making. The Security Council
should call for all parties to uphold their commitment to
women's full and meaningful participation in the Peace
Agreement. The implementation and monitoring of the
South Sudan national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000) can also contribute towards achieving that goal.

We urge the Security Council to pressure the parties
to the Agreement to honour the ceasefire and implement
it in a timely manner; ensure that humanitarian access
and the safety of humanitarian workers remain a top
priority; accelerate efforts to ensure transitional
justice in South Sudan; call on the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict to formally launch the implementation plan for
the signed joint communique of October 2014 on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence; remain
committed to the protection of civic space and the
freedom of expression; ensure that any involvement by
the Sudan and Uganda in South Sudan's internal security
is supported by the United Nations; call for UNMISS to
prioritize issues related to accountability in all support
to the military and security forces, including in reform
efforts; and call for support from the international
community in facilitating the reconciliation process
among the political elites in South Sudan.

Finally, we urge the Security Council to continue
engaging with civil society in country-specific
briefings, in particular concerning Syria, Burundi,
Yemen, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as in its future discussions on
South Sudan.

