The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to express profound shock
and sorrow at the assassination on Saturday, 4 November
1995, of the Prime Minister of Israel, His Excellency
Mr. Yitzhak Rabin.

Prime Minister Rabin has paid the ultimate price for
peace and will be greatly missed by his people and by the
international community.

I request the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations to convey to the Government and people of
Israel and to the bereaved family the Council's profound
condolences.

I now invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of the
late Prime Minister of Israel.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of October 1995. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Gambari for the great diplomatic skill and
unfailing courtesy with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a place at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the planned
convening of the continual round of Inter-Tajik talks
in Ashgabad. It commends the efforts of the
President of Turkmenistan in this regard.

"The Security Council calls upon the Tajik
parties to begin as a matter of urgency this round of
talks with the aim of concluding a general agreement
in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on
the fundamental principles for establishing peace and
national accord in Tajikistan signed by the President
of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the
Tajik opposition on 17 August 1995 (S/1995/720, annex).

"The Security Council expresses the hope that
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy will be able
to resume promptly his efforts with regard to the
preparation of the forthcoming round of talks. The
Council reaffirms its full support for the activities of
the Special Envoy.

"The Security Council urges the Tajik parties
to comply strictly with the obligations assumed
under the Agreement on a Temporary Cease-Fire
and the Cessation of Other Hostile Acts on the
Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country signed
in Teheran on 17 September 1994 (S/l994/1102, annex I). The Council expresses the hope that the
convening of the talks will contribute to a lessening
of tensions along the Tajik-Afghan border and inside
Tajikistan.
 

"The Security Council notes that the relevant
Afghan authorities have given their agreement to the
establishment of a liaison post of UNMOT in T aloqan
(northern Afghanistan). The Council welcomes this
development and agrees with the proposal to establish
such a post as suggested in paragraph 20 of the
Secretary-General's report of 16 September 1995
(S/1995/799) with the privileges and immunities
necessary for the security of the United Nations
personnel concerned and for their ability to carry out
the mandate.

"The Security Council also notes the
Secretary-General's observations regarding the
strengthening of UNMOT in paragraph 21 of his
report. The Council supports a corresponding
increase in the mission's strength."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/54.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.

