Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We voted in
favour of resolution 1994 (2011) today as the United
Kingdom welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) to maintain
stability within its area of operations. It continues to
play a valuable and effective role.

We must, however, find a lasting solution to the
situation. That will require the cooperation of both
parties. We therefore urge Syria and Israel to resume
peace negotiations aimed at achieving a comprehensive
peace agreement, in accordance with the Madrid
Conference terms of reference for peace.

The United Kingdom is gravely concerned by the
ongoing violence in Syria and the clear threat to
regional peace and stability that it presents. In
particular, in this context we deplore the loss of life
which occurred in UNDOF's area of operations on
15 May and 5 June. We hope that the circumstances
which led to these tragic events, including the role of
the Syrian Government, will be investigated
thoroughly. We urge both parties to show restraint and
to refrain from provocations so as to prevent an
escalation of tensions along the ceasefire line.

We are also concerned at the Secretary-General's
finding that anti-Government demonstrations in Syria
have spread to the area of limitation on the Syrian side.
We have repeatedly urged the Syrian Government to
halt the Violence, to respond constructively to the
legitimate demands of the Syrian people, and to
implement meaningful reforms. It has not done so.
Instead, it has met legitimate demands for reform with
brute force in which an estimated 1,400 people have
died in the past three months. This is completely
unacceptable.

We are also very concerned that the Syrian
Government continues to obstruct United Nations
attempts to help alleviate the crisis and bring assistance
to the Syrian people. President Al-Assad refuses to
accept phone calls from the Secretary-General; his
regime has barred access to humanitarian
organizations; and the Human Rights Council-
mandated fact-finding mission has been refused
permission to enter the country and carry out its work.
The Government's actions are causing increasing
numbers of Syrian refugees to flood over the borders
into Turkey and Lebanon.

The situation in Syria is not sustainable. If we
genuinely want to see an end to the Violence, this
11-39599
Council should send a clear message underlining our
collective concern. The United Kingdom will therefore
continue to press for a Security Council resolution on
the wider situation in Syria.

