Ms. Power (United States of America): This is
our twenty-fourth meeting to try to rein in Russia's
aggressive acts in Ukraine. Every single one of those
meetings has sent a straight-forward, unified message:
Russia, stop this conflict. Russia is not listening.

We said it when Russia flagrantly violated
international law by occupying Crimea. We said it
after the shocking downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7, which took the lives of innocent men, women,
children and infants from 11 countries. And we say
it today, as Russia's soldiers, tanks, air defence and
artillery support fight alongside separatists and open
a new front in a crisis manufactured in and fuelled by
Russia. But Russia is not listening.
Instead of listening, instead of heeding the
demands of the international community and the rules
of the international order, at every step Russia has come
before the Council to say everything except the truth.
It has manipulated. It has obfuscated. It has outright
lied. We have therefore learned to measure Russia by
its actions and not by its words.

In the last 48 hours, Russia's actions have spoken
volumes. On 26 August -just this past Tuesday - after
meeting with Ukrainian President Poroshenko in Minsk,
President Putin spoke of the need to "end bloodshed as
soon as possible". Yet the same day satellite imagery
showed Russian combat units south-east of Donetsk, in
eastern Ukraine. That same day in Luhansk, Ukraine
detained regular Russian army personnel from the 9th
Brigade. In response, Russia claimed that the soldiers
had wandered into Ukrainian territory by mistake.
That, supposedly, in a time of conflict along one of the
most carefully watched borders in the world.

The day after the Minsk talks, Russia fired Grad
rockets from inside Russia at Ukrainian positions in
Novoazovsk and then attacked with two columns of
Russian armoured vehicles and tanks. Russian armoured
vehicles and Uragan multiple rocket launchers are
positioned on the outskirts of that town as we speak.

Russia's force along the border is the largest it has
been since it began redeploying forces there in late May,
and includes significant numbers of combat aircraft and
helicopters. Russian unmanned aircraft routinely cross
into Ukrainian airspace.

Other Russian deployments into Ukrainian
territory include advanced artillery and air-defence
systems not found in the Ukrainian inventory. Those
artillery systems have shelled Ukrainian positions
outside Luhansk city in conjunction with the recent
separatist counteroffensive.

One of the separatist leaders that Russia has armed
and backed said openly that 3,000 or 4,000 Russian
soldiers hadjoined their cause. He was quick to clarify
that those soldiers were on vacation. But a Russian
soldier who chooses to fight in Ukraine on his summer
break is still a Russian soldier, and the armoured Russian
military vehicle he drives there is not his personal car.

Meanwhile, in Russia, family members of Russian
soldiers are holding funerals for their loved ones who
have been killed in the fighting in Ukraine. They are
demanding answers about how their loved ones were
killed. Journalists who try to cover the funerals are
being harassed and threatened by armed men. Yet still,
according to the Russian Government, the soldiers
were never there. They were never in Crimea either,
until Russia announced that those soldiers who were
never there had annexed Crimea.

The last 48 hours fit into a well-established
pattern for Russia. Each step has paved the way for
the one that followed. And yet, in spite of all of those
outrageous actions, Ukraine has repeatedly sought a
political solution to the crisis. It has repeatedly sought
a path to de-escalation. Despite the pattern, President
Poroshenko showed up in Minsk to meet with President
Putin. In contrast, President Putin was still unwilling
acknowledge the most basic facts, facts that we all
know, namely, that Russia has armed, equipped and now
joined illegal separatists fighting in Ukraine. Serious
negotiations are needed - urgently needed - but
Russia has to stop lying and has to stop fuelling the
conflict.

The mask is coming off. In its recent acts, we see
Russia's actions for what they are: a deliberate effort to
support and now fight alongside illegal separatists in
another sovereign country.

Russia has claimed that Ukraine is not interested
in a ceasefire. But let us be clear: Ukraine has every
interest in a ceasefire, as do we, as long as it a real
one. But Russian separatists not only have no interest
in observing a ceasefire, they cynically use the time to
rearm and wait for additional soldiers and supplies to
flow across the border from Russia.

In the face of those deeply alarming actions, the
most important question for us now is not what we
should say to Russia; rather, the most important question
is what we should do to make Russia listen. Throughout
the crisis, the United States has, in close coordination

with our European partners - the European Union and
the group of seven (G-7), exerted targeted, effective
pressure so that the message is heard, so that Russia
begins to de-escalate rather than escalate and so that
the reasonable peace plan put forward by President
Poroshenko is adopted and implemented. In the face of
Russia's continued aggression and blatant disregard for
the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act, we will continue to work closely with our G-7 and
European partners to ratchet up the consequences on
Russia.

I understand that there are real costs felt by citizens
of countries when their Governments take such actions.
It has costs for businesses that trade with Russia and
sell to Russian markets, from small-scale farmers to
big factories. Those costs are considerable, and nobody
should take them lightly.
But let us be clear: if unchecked, the damage that
Russia's blatant disregard for the international order
poses is much, much greater. Those rules and principles
have taken generations to build, with unparalleled
investment - countless lives have been lost in the
process of establishing and defending those principles,
and every single one of us has a stake in defending them.
A threat to the order - the international order - is a
threat to the peace and security of all of us. Those are
the rules that Russia is flouting when it illegally seizes
territory and when it arms, equips and fights alongside
illegal groups in neighbouring countries.

Ukraine is one of roughly a dozen countries that
share a border with Russia. Let me conclude with a
couple of questions. How can we tell those countries
that border Russia that their peace and sovereignty
is guaranteed, if we do not make our message heard
on Ukraine? Why should they believe that it will be
different, if tomorrow President Putin decides to start
supporting armed separatists and allowing soldiers
on vacation to fight in their countries? And, just as
important, what message are we sending to other
countries with similarly alarming ambitions around
the world, when we let Russia violate the rules without
sufficient consequences? In the face of that threat, the
cost of inaction is unacceptable.

