Mr. Feltman: Almost two years after
implementation day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), we are at a critical crossroads.
Today's meeting is an important opportunity to reflect
carefully on what has been achieved and the challenges
that lie ahead.

Since 16 January 2016, the International Atomic
Energy Agency has reported to the Council nine times
that Iran is continuing to adhere to its nuclear-related
commitments. Against this positive story of JCPOA
implementation, on 13 October the President of the
United States decided not to certify to Congress that
the suspension of its national sanctions pursuant to the
agreement is, in the words of President Trump's speech,

"appropriate and proportionate to the specific and
verifiable measures taken by Iran with respect to
terminating its illicit nuclear programme".

This decision has regrettably created considerable
uncertainty about the future of the JCPOA. The
Secretary-General is reassured that the United
States, during the recent seventh meeting of the
Joint Commission, together with other participants,
expressed its continued adherence to its commitments
and stressed the need to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the agreement in all its parts, in
good faith and in a constructive atmosphere.

The support of the Security Council for the
agreement is vital in order to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme, as well
as regional and international stability. The agreement
is in the interest of the global non-proliferation regime
and of regional and international peace and security.
It is also the best way to realize the aspirations of the
Iranian people through an opportunity for greater
economic engagement with the world.

The international community will be following
carefully what the participants to the agreement in the
Council will do in the coming months and years, and
will certainly calibrate its own actions accordingly.
For these reasons, the Secretary-General encourages
the United States to maintain its commitment to the
agreement and to consider the broader implications for
the region and beyond before taking any further steps.
Similarly, he encourages the Islamic Republic of Iran to
consider carefully the concerns raised by other J CPOA
participants. The Secretary-General also encourages
the international community to continue to support
the full implementation of this historic agreement and
welcomes the affirmative statements by numerous
other Member States in support of the plan.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the fourth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/ 1030) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). The report was submitted to
the Council on 8 December, pursuant to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) and the note by the President
of the Council issued on 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44).
As guided by the Security Council, the report of the
Secretary-General focuses on the implementation
of the provisions contained in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). I now turn to the main findings of the
fourth report.

First, the Secretary-General has again not received
any report regarding the supply, sale or transfer to
Iran of nuclear-related items undertaken contrary to
the provisions of the resolution. Meanwhile, Member
States are making greater use of the procurement
channel. Eight additional nuclear-related proposals
have been submitted to the Security Council for
approval, bringing the total number of proposals
submitted since implementation day to 24. These
proposals have been processed in accordance with the
timelines established by resolution 2231 (2015), with
due regard for information security and confidentiality.
I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge once
again the excellent cooperation we enjoy with the
European External Action Service, especially its
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission.

Secondly, regarding the implementation of ballistic
missile-related provisions, the report reflects official
information provided by Member States on the launch
of the Simorgh space launch vehicle in July by the
Islamic Republic of Iran and on several ballistic missile
launches by the Islamic Republic of Iran. In October
and November, the Secretariat was requested to travel
twice to Saudi Arabia to examine the debris of the
ballistic missiles launched at Yanbu' and Riyadh on
22 July and 4 November, respectively. Saudi authorities
assessed that Iran had a role in manufacturing these
missiles, which were used in the July and November
attacks. We take note of the information presented at
the recent press conference by Ambassador Haley on
14 December and Iranian statements in response.
At this time, the Secretariat is not yet in a position
to confirm whether those missiles were Iranian Qiam-I
missiles - a variant of the Scud missile - transferred
contrary to resolution 2231 (2015), as assessed by Saudi
authorities. However, the report contained preliminary
observations indicating that first, the two missiles
had similar features, which suggest a common origin;
secondly, the missiles contained features that are
consistent with missiles of the Scud family; thirdly, the
missiles also had features known to be consistent with
the Qiam-l missile; and fourthly, one of the missiles
bore casting similar to that of an Iranian entity on the
list maintained pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). The
Secretariat is still analysing the information available
and will report to the Council in due course.

The Secretariat recommended a joint meeting
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the Council in the 2231 format, to
be jointly briefed by the Panel of Experts on Yemen
and the Secretariat on their respective findings at
the appropriate time. It is important that the Security
Council be able to consider this issue holistically and
coherently on the basis of all the information available
to it.

Thirdly, in terms of restrictions on arms related
transfers, the Secretariat was requested to examine
the arms and related materials seized by the United
States in March 2016. The Secretariat also received
information on an unmanned surface vessel laden
with explosives, allegedly used against the Saudi-led
coalition, and had the opportunity to examine parts of
its guidance and detonation systems. The Secretariat
was also requested to examine two unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), reportedly recovered in Yemen after
implementation day.

The Secretariat is confident that close to 900 of the
assault rifles seized by the United States are identical
to those seized by France, also in March 2016, which
the Secretariat assessed as being of Iranian origin
and shipped from the Islamic Republic of Iran. The
Secretariat is also confident that half of the 200 rocket-
propelled grenade (RPG) launchers had characteristics
similar to Iranian-produced RPG launchers. We are still
analysing the remaining weapons found in the shipment
and will report back in due course.

The Secretariat could also observe that the guidance
and detonation systems of the unmanned surface vessel
included a computer terminal with a dual English-
Farsi keyboard and characteristics similar to those of
Iranian-produced terminals. It was also observed that
the detonation system included items identical to those
found on board the dhow Adris by the United States in
March 2016, and that the electrical cables within the
detonation mechanism and in the guidance system bore
markings indicating Iranian manufacture. An update
will be provided in due course.

The Secretariat observed that one of the UAVs,
which Saudi authorities determined as resembling the
Iranian-made Ababil-II, was similar to other drones
reportedly seized in Yemen, brought to our attention
by the United Arab Emirates. We look forward to the
opportunity to examine these other unmanned aerial
vehicles in order to independently ascertain their origin.

F ourthly, the report also highlights the participation
of the Defence Industries Organisation in another
foreign exhibition, the International Aviation and Space
Salon, held in the Russian Federation in July. The issue
was raised with the Russian Federation and we were
informed that an investigation into the issue found no
action inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).

The Secretary-General's report also provides
information on additional travels by Major General
Qasem Soleimani, noting that the Security Council
should call upon the Governments of relevant Member
States to take the steps necessary to ensure the proper
implementation of the travel ban and other provisions
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).

Before concluding, I would like to underline that
the Secretariat carefully considered the information
that the Islamic Republic of Iran conveyed in its letter
dated 28 August, which stated that the Countering
America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act, signed
into law on 2 August, violated the terms of paragraphs
3, 4 and 5 ofAnnex B ofresqution 2231 (2015). It is our
assessment that that information does not fall within
the scope of the report, unless guidance to the contrary
is provided to us by the Security Council.

In closing, I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy for his
successful tenure as Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) during this challenging year.
I would also like to take this opportunity to wish well
His Excellency Ambassador Karel Jan Gustaaf van
Oosterom of the Netherlands as he will assume the role
of Facilitator on 1 January 2018, and to assure him of
the Secretariat's full support.

