Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
Under-Secretary-General Fedotov and the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, Ambassador Djani, for
their briefings, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for her statement. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/ 703).

Today's meeting is being held at yet another critical
juncture for Afghanistan. Only 18 days are left before
the presidential elections are held. Those elections are
supposed to help consolidate our efforts to achieve
security and stability in the country. However, we
are once again faced with an increasing number of
terror attacks perpetrated by the Taliban. Civilians,
especially women and children, are the victims of that
alarming, vicious campaign. The weakening of the
security situation is likely to derail the election process
and put the country into yet another cycle of violence.
That approach cannot bring peace or stability to
Afghanistan. The future of Afghanistan should be based
on democracy and the rule of law, not on violence. The
international community must back the Afghan people
to ensure that elections are peaceful and successful.

Turkey strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. As a framework nation through
NATO's Resolute Support Mission, we continue to
support Afghanistan on defence, security and law
enforcement matters, including training and assistance
to the Afghan national security forces.
While we are only three weeks from the scheduled
elections, it is unclear how far we are from achieving
truly lasting peace in the country. At this critical
moment, we expect all parties to act responsibly and
seize the opportunity to bring the 40-year war to an end.
We are closely following the information coming from
Doha talks and recent announcements by President
Trump with regard to calling off the negotiations
between the United States and the Taliban.

Turkey welcomes all efforts aimed at reducing
violence and supporting peace and security in
Afghanistan. As we have repeated many times in the
Chamber, the Afghan people have made achievements
at important costs and those cannot be easily sacrificed.
Our efforts to empower vulnerable groups, in particular
women and girls, should not be wasted. Peace in
Afghanistan can be sustainable only through genuine
reconciliation among all segments of Afghan society.

Our efforts and cohesion in our messages will have
an immense impact on the way in which the next decade
will unfold. Therefore, it is important that we refrain
from drawing down the international community's
commitment to Afghanistan at an immature stage,
which would be incompatible with the situation
and requirements on the ground. We cannot afford
to leave Afghanistan until our joint achievements
are irreversible.

At a time of transformation, the importance of
regional cooperation and commitment becomes all the
more relevant. The momentum that has been achieved
through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process is worthy
of attention. At both the meeting of senior officials in
June and the Joint Regional Conference on Counter-
Terrorism and Counter-Narcotics in July, the need for
a cohesive regional approach to tackling transboundary
challenges was underlined. Increasing cooperation in
the heart of Asia will benefit Afghanistan. It will also
constitute a useful instrument for the region as a whole
to realize its full potential in economic development,
investments and trade. The Istanbul Process remains
the most comprehensive regional platform for dialogue.
In close consultation with the Afghan Government, we
are planning to hold a ministerial conference of the
Istanbul Process by the end of the year. We sincerely
hope that this mechanism can be used to contribute to
the existing peace efforts.

Negotiations for a resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) have come at a timely moment,
when change and transformation are dominating the
country's agenda. We believe that the comprehensive
role assumed by UNAMA in assisting the Afghan
people to achieve a bright future is of the utmost
importance. We once again acknowledge its role
in the organization of upcoming elections and the
strengthening of electoral reform efforts by providing
technical assistance and capacity-building. Turkey will
continue to support UNAMA's activities and efforts in
this regard. We hope that its mandate will be renewed
so as to enable the Mission to conduct its activities
without any hindrance.

The international community's continuing
support remains vital for a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan that can effectively serve the needs of
its people. We will maintain our solidarity with the
Afghan people, as well as our support through regional
and international forums.

