Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis
for his comprehensive briefing. His self-motivated
leadership and the effective role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) have
contributed to the stabilization ofAfghanistan. We fully
support the dedicated work ofthe Special Representative
and his staff. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
statement.

In less than one month, Afghans will decide
their future leadership through the electoral process
scheduled to take place on 5 April. The elections
will become an important milestone for Afghans, the
region and the international community as a whole.
We welcome the progress made in the process of
organizing the elections. We encourage all parties to
take ownership of the electoral process, supported by
the United Nations and other partners, and expect the
elections to be held in an inclusive, transparent and
peaceful atmosphere.

As we take note of the Government's efforts to
try to create a secure environment in which the people
of Afghanistan can live without fear of terrorism
and violence, following the transfer of security
responsibilities to Afghan security forces in June 2013,
we remain concerned, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2014/163), of the increased
security incidents in the country ahead of the presidential
elections. We condemn those cowardly acts of violence
mainly targeting international staff and innocent
civilians, especially the recent attack that took the lives
of four United Nations personnel and 17 Afghans. Our
condolences go to the families and Governments of the
victims. We appeal to the international community to
continue supporting and strengthening the capacities
of the Afghan forces to enable them to deal with the
security challenges the country faces. Support to the
Afghan security forces will become vital after the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force. We hope that modalities for further cooperation
between NATO and Afghanistan will be positively
defined in months ahead.

On the political process, Rwanda supports an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned national reconciliation
process, with a view to achieving sustainable peace and
stability in the country and in the region as a whole.
We express our strong support to the active role played
by the High Peace Council in promoting national
reconciliation efforts. We hope that the international
community will support and work with the Afghanistan
Government and people in their efforts to create an
enabling environment for the reconciliation process.
The extension of the UNAMA mandate today is again
another expression of the support and confidence of
the Council for Afghanistan's transitional political
process. UNAMA will continue to play a central role
in assisting Afghanistan as it moves forward in its
transition process.

On the pledges made to support Afghanistan, it
is important, as declared in Tokyo and in Chicago,
for the international community to remain engaged in
serious long-term partnerships with Afghanistan, by
supporting its efforts through the transitional phase
and beyond 2014. Even as progress is being reviewed
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework to
address key challenges, pledges and commitments of
assistance to Afghanistan must be honoured.

On drug trafficking and use, the opium production
in Afghanistan in 2013 increased by 36 per cent as
compared to the figures of 2012. It poses a serious
threat to the health and well-being of the population,
the economy of the region and the entire international
community. Opium plays a key role in financing
insurgency, hence causing instability in the country and
the region. All preventive measures put in place have
not yielded any tangible results. We strongly believe
that it is the responsibility of everyone, especially
the Afghan Government, regional countries and the
entire international community to prevent narcotics
trafficking and the resulting earnings that sponsor
insurgents and acts of terrorism.

In conclusion, Rwanda stresses its firm beliefthat a
sincere and inclusive Afghan-led political process will
lead to sustainable stability, peace and development.
Challenges will continue to exist, but the international
community must remain united by the side of the
Afghan Government in seeking a durable solution to
terrorism and extremism.

