Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We
recognize that the theme of this discussion is very
important as well as timely, particularly in conjunction
with this year's marking of the seventieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations. Indeed,
Indonesia's Constitution, which was developed by our
founding fathers also 70 years ago, reflects in many
ways the spirit that motivated the creation of this global
Organization. Let me quote some parts of the preamble
of the Indonesian Constitution.

"Whereas independence is the inalienable right
of all nations, therefore, all colonialism in the world
must be abolished as it is not in conformity with
humanity and justice".

Furthermore, our Constitution mandates our
nation to the implementation of "a world order based
on freedom, perpetual peace and social justice". Those
parts of our Constitution provide clear guidelines on
the conduct of our foreign policy. In adhering to the
implementation of its constitutional mandate, Indonesia
has been relentless.

In 1955, we organized the Asian-African Conference
in Bandung to mobilize solidarity and to support nations
under colonial Powers in achieving their independence.
The Conference, which constitutes an important
stepping stone in the establishment of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in 1961, was also intended
to promote global peace, security and prosperity based
on the principle of the sovereign equality of all nations.
The outcome of the Bandung Conference included a
10-point declaration on the promotion of world peace
and cooperation, the first point ofwhich states, "Respect
for fundamental human rights and for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations".

A number of independent States have emerged since
then, making up the majority of the United Nations
membership today. However, despite the Charter of
the United Nations and the United Nations system's
growing normative and operational frameworks in
peace, human rights and security, the greatest challenge
remains the maintenance of peace and security. The
United Nations, and the international community in
general, has unfortunately fallen short in ensuring
that the Palestinian people exercise their inalienable
rights and their right to independence from the foreign
occupying Power.

It cannot be denied that throughout its history the
Organization did not effectively tackle and did not
succeed in preventing many armed conflicts, genocides
and other international tragedies. As we understand,
the United Nations was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, to promote peace,
curb aggression, regulate diplomatic affairs, set an
international code of law, nurture collective social
development and foster prosperity. What is crucial is that
the United Nations continues to reinvent itself to adjust
to changing challenges and strategic environments,
through persistent reform. However, it needs to deliver
on the rightful expectations of the global citizenry. In
that context, some reforms have worked well, while
others have stalled. The Organization can certainly do
better, and in some areas, as in conflict resolution and
nuclear disarmament, it must fight for greater relevance.

Indonesia underscores the peaceful settlement of
disputes and giving higher priority to political dialogue,
mediation and diplomacy, while consistently upholding
human rights, the rule of law and the Charter of the
United Nations. We emphasize the peaceful resolution
of conflicts also because we have reaped direct benefits
from it in our once restive province of Aceh. We
continue to work diligently to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes regionally and internationally.
To that end, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has been tremendously important in our
region. We fully support a strong partnership between
the United Nations and ASEAN and between the United
Nations and other relevant regional and subregional
organizations.

On its part, Indonesia will continue to contribute
tirelessly to help enhance international peace and
security. In line with our constitutional obligation,
Indonesia has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping missions from as early as the 1950s. Many
Indonesian troops have served as Blue Helmets across
the different continents. There are currently 1,850
Indonesian peacekeepers deployed with nine United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Indonesia is aiming
to become among the top 10 contributing countries.
To achieve that goal by 2019, we have implemented
strategies under the so-called Road Map for Vision
4,000 Peacekeepers.

In the light of the current world challenges,
Indonesia plans to hold in April a commemoration ofthe
sixtieth anniversary of the Asian-African Conference,
to reaffirm the Bandung principles. It will include
an Asia-Africa summit to bring countries in the two
continents closer and to strengthen cooperation while
utilizing advantages derived from commonalities and
diversities to contribute to global peace and security,
the eradication of poverty and achieving sustainable
development.

The United Nations must become the true pivot of
the international effort to engender shared goodwill,
fraternity and peace. Throughout the history of its
existence, the Organization has made progress in some
areas while suffering setbacks in others. We must all
fully exercise our responsibilities to ensure that the
United Nations fulfils its promise. That will require
achieving significant progress in Security Council
reform without further delay. The Council must reflect
the realities of the twenty-first century. Indonesia
wishes to see a Council that can demonstrate clearly
that it is representative, democratic, transparent,
accountable and efficient and serves the interests and
is responsive to the concerns of the entire international
community, rather than a select few. While recognizing
some strong differences on reform, we believe that
there are also some quite workable proposals, such
as the French proposal to regulate the use of the veto
in situations of crimes against humanity. We believe
that, with greater political will and mutually respectful
dialogue, meaningful progress can be made.

In conclusion, Indonesia strongly believes that the
Organization is the best hope for multilateralism. The
purposes and principles set out in the Charter remain
valid. We must spare no effort to strengthen the United
Nations for a more fair, peaceful and prosperous world.

