Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): You
do us honour, Sir, by presiding over the Council today.
Your presence marks the special importance of today's
event. Thank you for being with us.

The European Union Presidency, through Spain,
made a statement earlier which the United Kingdom
fully endorses, but - like the representative of
Bulgaria and others - I want to add a word or two on
this historic day for East Timor and for the United
Nations.
We pay a first tribute to the people of East Timor
for their courage and determination and for all they
have achieved over the past three years. We share their
satisfaction as we celebrate the birth of the century's
first new independent nation with a democratically
elected Government.

The United Kingdom also recognizes the hugely
important role of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor, the International Force in East Timor and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), and it pays tribute in particular to
Sergio Vieira de Mello, whose leadership and
dedication have been pivotal to the development of
East Timor.

The Council has been right to pay tribute also to
many other members of the Secretariat and of the
peacekeeping operation on the ground. I am thinking
particularly of Ian Martin, whose work in the most
difficult days was very significant in helping East
Timor to turn the corner. I would also like to recognize
the lead role in security being played by Australia.

We all realize that the work in East Timor is not
yet finished. As the Secretary-General has noted in his
latest report (S/2002/432 and Add.1), there is a huge
amount of work that still has to be done to establish
East Timor as a stable, viable independent State. So,
we welcome the continued focus of the United Nations
on the country and the appointment of Kamalesh
Sharma as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. His qualities are well known to all of us, and
he will have the full support of the United Kingdom.

We also welcome the adoption of resolution 1410
(2002), establishing the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) to continue the
work of UNTAET over the next two years. We
recognize that the implementation of the UNMISET
mandate sets milestones which are an important
element of the work that we have to do. Although the
downsizing of the peacekeeping operation should take
place as rapidly as the situation on the ground allows, it
is important that we keep that timetable under review
and make sure that East Timor remains stable.

We should not forget that there will also be an
increasingly important role over the next few years for
the traditional development mechanisms. In this
respect, we welcome recent donor pledges of $440
million over the triennium 2002-2003 to 2004-2005,
which should be sufficient to meet external financing
requirements until oil and gas revenues start to come
on stream.
The production of an East Timor national
development plan is another positive step forward.
Ruthless prioritization will be needed if the plan is to
implemented effectively. Another high priority should
be the establishment of a legal framework conducive to
private sector investment and good governance, to
preventing the spread of corruption and to addressing
critical, social and economic issues, especially land
tenure.

I think that the Council can be proud of its role on
East Timor. The United Kingdom is pleased to have
played its own part, both in our business here in New
York and in our participation in the two Council
missions to East Timor. We wish President Gusmao and
the people of East Timor a stable and prosperous
future.

