Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation
welcomes the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola as
he participates in the Security Council's meeting. We
also would like to thank Ambassador Ryan, Chairman
of the sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993), for the important statement he
made earlier today. The report of the Monitoring
Mechanism on sanctions against UNITA is a well-
prepared study that sheds light on the network of
support for the activities of UNITA. We believe that the
report, coupled with the investigation of UNITA's
financial assets, is an important step in the right
direction in disclosing the sources fuelling the conflicts
in Africa.

We already had an opportunity to provide our
views on the report at the meetings of the Angola
sanctions Committee, so today I would like to
comment on some of the most important points of that
document.

My delegation informed the Committee about the
visit of the Mechanism, headed by Ambassador Juan
Larrain, to Kiev in September last year and expressed
the satisfaction of the Government of Ukraine with the
results of that visit. It is particularly encouraging that
the Chairman of the Mechanism shared our positive
assessments and also expressed his satisfaction with
the exhaustive information provided by the Ukrainian
authorities. As the members of the Mechanism stressed
during the meeting in Kiev, the current export control
system of Ukraine is an effective one and is consistent
with international standards in this area. This, in fact,
was confirmed in the report ofthe Mechanism.

I would especially like to express our satisfaction
with the transparent and effective methods of work
demonstrated by the Mechanism. Its representatives
were able to check with responsible governmental
bodies any relevant information and drew their
conclusions taking into account the responses received
from those concerned. My delegation strongly believes
that the same approach should be pursued by any
monitoring body to ensure a high level of cooperation
with the States concerned and to help them undertake
prompt and careful investigations and corrective
measures if necessary.

After the visit my Government prepared
additional information in response to the query of the
Monitoring Mechanism and formally notified the
Mechanism as to the results of that investigation.

After providing the additional information, as
well as documents on illegal activities of some arms
brokers, we are continuing to look into possible links
of Ukrainian legal and physical persons with those
disclosed by the Mechanism. As soon as we get any
substantial data, we will immediately provide the
relevant information to the Mechanism. Let me also
take this opportunity to provide assurances of the
willingness of the Government of Ukraine to undertake
most careful investigations into alleged violations of
sanctions against UNITA and to cooperate to this end
with the Monitoring Mechanism.

Referring to the provisions of the report regarding
the lack of familiarity of some Eastern European arms-
producing countries with the official documents of the
countries concerned, I would like to report that all
deliveries of weapons and dual-use goods can be
carried out in Ukraine only after the authenticity of
end-user certificates is verified and political approval
is received from the relevant export control body in the
cases of such deliveries to the regions of special
concern.

At the same time, we recognize the need to
strengthen the existing mechanisms in the arms-
importing countries and welcome the proposals to
improve them in order to deter and prevent forgeries.
Ukraine also sees a need to put in place systems to
allow for the speedy exchange of information and
verification of the validity of end-user certificates. The
recommendation of the Mechanism concerning
development of a register of brokers dealing with the
import and export of arms also deserves our support.

Considering that UNITA representatives and
senior officials abroad play a crucial role in assuring
the continued existence and advancement of UNITA's
political and military objectives and in maintaining its
financial networks and assets, we believe that this
matter should be followed up by the Mechanism with
particular attention. We agree that the relevant
requirements of Security Council resolution 1127
(1997) regarding travel restrictions on UNITA
representatives should be fully implemented,
notwithstanding the existence of any rights or
obligations under any other international agreements.

As far as the recommendations of the Mechanism
on diamonds are concerned, we consider them as useful
terms of reference. My delegation recognizes the need
for improvements in the field of diamond certification
and believes that national certification systems should
meet the internationally agreed minimum standards.
We note, however, that these issues are also being
debated in other forums, and we consider that the
relevant recommendations of the report should be
reviewed in light of the developments and decisions to
be taken within the Kimberly process. At the same
time, I wish to stress that preventing the access of
UNITA to world diamond markets must remain a
priority task.

My delegation is in favour of strengthening
control on aircraft operators to prevent them from
circumventing sanctions. And I would like to inform
the Council that Ukrainian authorities have already
adopted legislation regulating the leasing of aircraft for
the transport of weapons and military equipment. Apart
from that, the legislation provides for criminal and
administrative penalties for violations of the
established regime of export and transport of weapons.

The de-licensing of pilots could be considered as
an appropriate measure to ensure compliance with
Security Council sanctions. While the adoption of such
measures remains the sovereign prerogative of each
Member State, the Security Council has an important
role to play in encouraging States to take strong action
with respect to sanctions violations.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
support for the activities of the Monitoring Mechanism
in ensuring strict compliance with Security Council
measures against UNITA and its readiness to provide
any necessary assistance and information to that end.

