Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also start by thanking
Indonesia for organizing this debate and for bringing
much-needed colour to this Chamber. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General, the Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Director of
the Challenges Forum for their briefings.

Pakistan is a strong and consistent supporter of
multilateralism, with the United Nations at its centre,
to effectively address the global challenges of peace
and security. Peacekeeping remains a pivotal tool
to achieve that objective. Pakistan's participation in
United Nations peacekeeping is the most tangible
demonstration of our commitment to the United
Nations and a practical way of reaffirming our abiding
faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. For close to six decades, despite
our own challenges, we have contributed and provided
personnel, assets, training and financing for United
Nations peacekeeping. We are also host to one of the
earliest United Nations peacekeeping missions, the
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan, which continues to play an invaluable role in
a volatile and fraught environment.

Peacekeeping has, over the years, evolved from
single-dimensional monitoring to multidimensional
mandates, as recognized by resolution 2086 (2013),
adopted under Pakistan's presidency of the Council.
Conflicts today are becoming more complex, prolonged
and lethal, posing new challenges for peacekeepers.
The protection of civilians, supporting peace
processes, peace-building, national capacity-building
and institution-building are now all interconnected
dimensions of peacekeeping missions. That is the
context in which ongoing reviews, debates and
discussions on the evolving nature of peacekeeping
have to be situated. Allow me to make six quick points.

First, predeployment training, preparation and
the professional competence of peacekeepers are key
to success in the field. The Secretariat must ensure,
through predeployment assessments, that only the best
and adequately equipped are deployed. Pakistan has
been a leader in the field, and the performance of our
troops in the field is a testimony to the premium that we
place on training and professionalism.

Secondly, best practices and real on-ground
experience must be incorporated into manuals that are
shared with key players. Persons selected to impart
training must also have on-ground peacekeeping
experience and not rely on theory alone. We have
offered our expertise to other troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) in that regard.

Thirdly, the drafting of the mandates of
peacekeeping missions should be a phased process to
allow for consultation with relevant TCCs. Current
trilateral consultation mechanisms - both formal and
informal - must be improved and better utilized. The
group of TCCs that Pakistan and Morocco co-chair has
emerged as an important informal platform that can be
used for that purpose.

Fourthly, peacekeeping is a collective endeavour.
It is important to keep our expectations from
peacekeeping realistic. While TCCs are required to
provide well-equipped and well-trained personnel,
other peacekeeping stakeholders also have to give
their best for real success. Achieving more with less is
neither tenable nor rational.

Fifthly, the principles of peacekeeping are not an
impediment to mandate implementation. In fact, they
ensure the United Nations credibility and neutrality,
which have been achieved over decades of service and
sacrifice. They are also critical to ensuring the safety
and security of peacekeepers.

Sixthly, in order to attain durable peace, a political
track must accompany peacekeeping efforts. That is
obviously essential for credible exit strategies.

Pakistan's credentials as among the largest
and most consistent TCCs are well established. We
have an elaborate system of training that has been
institutionalized through the establishment of the
Centre for International Peace and Stability, which
was inaugurated by former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. At the recently held Peacekeeping Ministerial,
in addition to personnel and assets, we also offered
the peacekeeping competencies of the Centre to other
TCCs. Pakistan is also participating in the relatively
recent initiative of the training-the-trainers programme.

In conclusion, let me say that our commitment
to peacekeeping remains unflinching. Let us work
together to make missions successful in the face of new
and imposing challenges.
