Mr. Lovald (Norway): Norway appreciates this
opportunity to discuss in the Security Council the
subject of small arms and light weapons. We welcome
the Secretary-General's report (S/2003/12l7) and
concur with his description of the present situation.
There have been some advances in international
cooperation to control the flow of small arms, but
significant problems still remain. These problems call
for continued and improved cooperation among
nations, international organizations and civil society to
ensure further progress.

We have noted that in many international forums
there is increased attention to the humanitarian, social
and economic implications of the problem of small
arms. In particular, we would like to mention the
efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Human Security Network to address these
issues. Norway fully supports their work.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
fuels armed conflicts, causing suffering. States must
therefore recommit themselves to ensure respect for
applicable international humanitarian law.

Norway commends the outcome of the biennial
conference on the Programme of Action on small arms
that took place here in New York in July of last year.
Norway also welcomes the General Assembly's
decision, in its resolution 58/241, to request the
Secretary-General to hold broad-based consultations
with Member States, regional and subregional
organizations, international agencies and relevant
experts on further steps to enhance international
cooperation on the illicit brokering in small arms and
light weapons. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's future report on his consultations.

The Government of Norway and the Government
of the Netherlands have launched an international
initiative to enhance international cooperation on illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons. That
initiative aims at developing effective national control
mechanisms for arms brokering. As a result, the
Governments of the Netherlands, the United Kingdom
and Norway will sponsor a conference organized by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in February and March of this year to
improve regional cooperation on small arms issues in
West Africa.

Under the Dutch and Norwegian initiative, we
will also be supporting the efforts of the Secretary-
General to promote increased regional cooperation
against illicit brokering in small arms, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 58/241.
As we prepare for the next Biennial Meeting of
States on the Programme of Action, scheduled for
2005, emphasis must be put on the following: assisting
countries in developing their capacity to implement the
Programme of Action and produce national reports on
their implementation efforts; developing regional
cooperation to implement the Programme of Action in
all its aspects; supporting the participation of civil
society in the implementation of the Programme of
Action; greater emphasis on the humanitarian aspects
of the illicit arms trade; and developing national
legislation on the arms trade.

It is hoped that considerable progress will have
been made by the next Biennial Meeting in 2005. By
2006, we should be ready to discuss a comprehensive,
international, legally binding agreement.

