Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China voted in favour of the resolution just adopted on
piracy off the Somali coast. I wish to take this
opportunity to make a few points.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia is running
rampant and poses a direct threat to international
humanitarian assistance and the security of
international navigation. It also poses a potential threat
to the world economy. In the long run, it will harm
Somalia and its people as well.

The international community needs to work
together to solve the problem. The Security Council
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and is therefore
duty-bound to play a leading role on this issue.

That is why this year the Security Council
adopted resolutions 1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008) in
close succession, authorizing national warships to enter
the waters off the Somali coast to fight piracy. The
08-62880
resolution just adopted lays the foundation for the
establishment of a platform for international judicial
cooperation in the fight against piracy.

Combating piracy is a new challenge facing the
international community. As it has an impact on the
fundamental interests of Member States, it is obvious
that the United Nations should play a leadership and
coordinating role.

As a victim of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
China vigorously supports and is ready to participate in
the international anti-piracy endeavours coordinated by
the United Nations. Nevertheless, China believes that
the piracy issue is only a symptom of Somalia's
deep-seated political and social crisis. The issue cannot
be fundamentally resolved if the domestic crisis in
Somalia is not effectively addressed. While focusing
on piracy, the international community should not lose
sight of the root causes of the worsening piracy issue.
Only by starting the Somali reconciliation process will
it be possible to resolve the disputes among various
factions in the country, encourage the Somali people to
form a national consensus, promote economic
development and ensure that the people are content and
live in happiness. Otherwise, the security situation in
Somalia will not stabilize and there will not be a
lasting solution to the Somali issue, which has plagued
the international community for nearly 20 years.

The worsening humanitarian crisis in Somalia has
already evolved into one of the most serious
humanitarian crises in Africa.

China appreciates the important role played by
the African Union Mission in Somalia in addressing the
security situation in Somalia and calls on the
international community to provide real support to the
Mission. China has provided its assistance to the
African Union for its peacekeeping operations in
Somalia and will continue to give positive
consideration to similar requests for assistance in the
future.

China maintains that the United Nations should
be more actively engaged in the Somali issue. We call
upon the Security Council to heed the strong appeal of
the Somali Government and the African Union and
support the early deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping troops in Somalia to take over the
African Union peacekeeping mission there. We also
urge the various factions in Somalia to create
favourable political conditions in the country for the
early deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces.
08-62880

We are convinced that the Somali people long for
peace and that the various factions in the country will
one day overcome their political disputes, conform to
the aspirations of the people and reach political
arrangements that will put Somalia back on the track
towards peace and stabilization. The international
community should also be fully confident in this and
work with the Somali people towards this goal.

