Mr. Ankourao (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me, at the outset, to thank Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), for her excellent briefing on the situation on the ground. I wish to reiterate that the Niger, as current Chair of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), stands more ready than ever before to contribute to international and regional efforts for the peaceful resolution of the Bissau-Guinean crisis. The joint actions of international partners, in particular the group of five international organizations comprised of the African Union, ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the European Union and the United Nations, have contributed to the significant advances recorded in recent years in Guinea-Bissau. That progress made it possible to hold legislative elections on 10 March 2019, followed by the first round of presidential elections on 24 November and the second on 29 December, under conditions deemed just and fair by the entire international community. The Niger commends the holding of those elections, congratulates the people of Guinea-Bissau and thanks the international community for providing the necessary funding. However, while we celebrate the end of the electoral cycle - proof that the protracted political crisis in Guinea-Bissau has been resolved - the political stalemate that emerged after the recent presidential elections is increasingly a cause for concern. Currently, a potentially catastrophic scenario cannot be ruled out completely. Having led ECOWAS support missions to Guinea-Bissau several times, I recall that, in order to better appreciate the current crisis, it is necessary to pay greater attention to the following elements. First, the Bissau-Guinean crisis today has taken on an institutional form, rather than a violent one. The Constitution and electoral laws in force are sown with the seeds of chronic misunderstandings and are therefore fertile ground for all kinds of partisan interpretations. Secondly, the current President of the Republic concluded his legal mandate on 25 July. He has been kept in office by the will of ECOWAS through a resolution adopted at the July summit in order to prevent an institutional vacuum. Thirdly, the current Government emerged from the 2019 legislative elections. Established on 3 June, it is led by the largest party, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, which does not, however, hold an absolute majority, rendering it unstable. Fourthly, and finally, drug trafficking activities in the country is regularly indicated as one of the major destabilizing factors for institutions. In order to avoid a new political crisis in the country, the Niger reiterates ECOWAS call to the various bodies and institutions involved in the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau to contribute to its political and institutional normalization by finalizing their work no later than 15 February - that is, tomorrow. In that regard, Guinea-Bissau's bilateral and multilateral partners must remain determined and vigilant in order to implement the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS road map. They must also work to maintain the sanctions regime in order to ensure that offenders comply with it. With the upcoming closure of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, on 31 December, as Ms. Sori-Coulibaly just mentioned, the extension of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau will be necessary to help the country reform its security sector and those fundamental texts. To that end, the Niger reiterates the African Union's call for a collective mobilization of the international community, particularly the United Nations and the European Union, to provide greater financial support for the Mission in order to enable it to continue its operations until the national defence and security forces are able to ensure the country's security. The West African region, hard-hit by the increasingly intense and expanding terrorist attacks, cannot afford further instability in Guinea-Bissau, which is already seeing an in increase in crimes related to drug trafficking. In conclusion, I make an urgent appeal to the Council to work together to ensure that Guinea-Bissau does not relapse into instability and become a home base for terrorists in the Sahel.
