Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): All
protocol observed, I wish to concentrate my statement
today solely on the critical matter of settlement-
building in the occupied Palestinian territories, without
prejudice to the deep importance that we attach to
the other pressing emergencies in our region, which I
will come back to in our next intervention before the
Council under this item.
In two days' time, the United Nations will begin
marking the anniversary of liberation of Auschwitz
and, in doing so, recall one of the grimmest episodes in
human existence, when the Nazis, together with their
collaborators in occupied Europe, destroyed most of
eastern and central Europe's Jewish population, together
with a large number of Jews drawn from western
Europe, particularly from France, the Netherlands and
Belgium.

The industrial annihilation of a people was hitherto
unknown to a world that had long grown accustomed to
campaigns of persecution and mass killing; we think in
this regard of the suffering of indigenous nations, for
example. The principal lesson from all those experiences
has been clear: once we classify and subordinate
others to categories not equal with ourselves, along
a value chain not drawn from a universal perspective
but defined narrowly by the individual communities
themselves, we can easily slip into degrading the other,
stigmatize them and blame them for whatever negative
circumstances unfold, ultimately launching ourselves
towards outcomes otherwise thought impossible and
which became more possible with every curse.

The Arab-Israeli peace process has reached a
crucial point, and the Council over the coming year will
be the known to future generations as either the Council
that presided over the end of one of the longest conflicts
on its agenda, with the birth of a comprehensive
settlement based on two States existing side by side in
peace and security, or the Council that presided over
more ignominious outcome: the burial of peace and the
ruin of those living in the region.

We must now therefore do all we can to arrest
any development affecting negatively the prospects
of the relaunching of the final status negotiations. But
we can hardly stitch a credible international effort
together, with the fine adjustments it requires, if
every week we are being buffeted by news of planned
or new Israeli settlement activity, particularly were
it to be in occupied East Jerusalem, or in E-l, which
denies the Palestinians contiguity and will doom peace
for good. What is particularly vexing is that the law
on this issue remains unaltered and abundantly clear,
notwithstanding whatever decisions the Supreme Court
of Israel may choose to take.

The applicable law in respect of the exercise by
Israel of military control over the occupied State
of Palestine is, once again, neither Israeli law nor
whatever domestic law Israel sees fit to impose, but
international humanitarian law, applicable to all high
contracting parties as well as obligations that are erga
omnes. Israel's administrative and military regulations,
insofar as the West Bank is concerned, can be lawful
only if they are utterly consistent with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its control guided strictly by
its obligations as the occupying Power.

The International Court ofJustice's position on this
last point is crystal clear. It maintained in paragraph 78
of its 2004 advisory opinion that:

"The territories situated between the Green Line
[...] and the former eastern boundary of Palestine
under the Mandate were occupied by Israel in
1967 during the armed conflict between Israel and
Jordan. Under customary international law, these
were therefore occupied territories in which Israel
had the status of occupying Power. Subsequent
events in these territories [...] have done nothing to
alter this situation. All these territories (including East Jerusalem) remain occupied territories and
Israel has continued to have the status of occupying
Power." (see A/ES-10/273)

It is also worth noting that there are no territorial
exceptions to this finding. All the territory of the West
Bank, as described by the International Court ofJustice,
is considered occupied. A closer reading of resolution
242 (1967) also bears this point out, as we explained
before the International Court of Justice on 24 February
2004. In his oral submission, the late Sir Arthur Watts,
Q.C., Counsel for Jordan, noted how resolution 242
(1967)

"affirmed, unanimously, the principle of Israel's
withdrawal of its armed forces 'from territories
occupied in the recent conflict' - and that meant,
and could only mean, territories on the non-Israeli
side of the Green Line. Thus the Green Line is the
starting line from which is measured the extent
of Israel's occupation of non-Israeli territory;
originating in 1949 as an armistice line, it became
in 1967 the line to the Israeli side of which Israel
had to withdraw its forces, and on the non-Israeli
side of which territory was 'occupied' by Israel."

The transfer by the occupying Power of parts of its
own population into the territory it occupies represents
a clear and continuing serious violation of the laws and
customs applicable in international armed conflict, as
codified by article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
and which is also defined as a criminal act in article
8(2)(b)(viii) of the Rome Statute.

For those on the more extreme Israeli right who
seem to be largely unaware of this last point, or are
aware and do not much care, it is worth repeating again
that in respect of the Rome Statute, and pending the
Court's application of its jurisdiction over Palestine,
which is something that may now become possible, we
may move beyond simply State responsibility and cross
into the domain of individual criminal liability.

The actions of the Israeli settler movement
in the occupied Palestinian territories must, for
obvious reasons, now stop, and the deep suffering
of the Palestinian people must be brought to an end.
The actions of States must be guided by customary
international law, which this Council itself must uphold
and not undermine.

Moreover, our deep opposition to the policy of
settlement building and our repeated condemnation of
it, which we reiterate today, are not founded on some
form of bigotry toward the Jewish people. What they
are built on is a continuing, three-decade-long violation
of international humanitarian law, confirmed by the
International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion
of 2004 and understood as such by the vast majority of
States existing in the world today.

Finally, we hope that the international community
will be seized by the urgency of these delicate moments
to create the necessary conditions for the resumption of
the final status talks, within which the final shape ofthe
borders will no doubt be dealt with early. In this vein, it
is also worth recalling how, in negotiating the draft for
what became resolution 242 (1967), the understanding
reached between the principal interlocutors was for a
withdrawal from all non-Israeli territory, with only
minor reciprocal border rectifications.

Ultimately, our hope is to see the occupation of all
Arab lands ended fully, for the Palestinians to live free
in their new State and, 68 years after the Holocaust,

for the Israelis to feel secure, with all of us in the
region working together in the shade of a permanent
comprehensive peace.

