I would like to thank the delegation of France for the opportunity to speak to the Council today on behalf of the Community Empowerment for Progress Organization (CEPO), which is a member of the South Sudan Civil Society Forum, a coalition of over 200 groups working to promote peace, freedom and respect for human dignity. Our recommendations on priorities for civilian protection in South Sudan have been drawn up with our partner, the Ceasefire Centre for Civilian Rights, and distributed to the member delegations of the Security Council. On 22 February, the people of South Sudan welcomed the news that the Government and opposition groups had formed the central Government Cabinet of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. On 17 June, the people of South Sudan welcomed the news that, also after long delay, the Government and opposition groups agreed to allocate the states among themselves. We know that the political will to implement the provisions of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan in a timely manner is lacking, and it should be addressed by the Council. From the months of May to June, we have witnessed continuous fighting between Government forces and the forces of the National Salvation Front in the areas of Yei, Lainya and Morobo, which has led to the displacement of civilians and associated violations, including looting of civilian properties and crimes of gender- based violence like rape. These are worrying signs, and the Security Council must continue to insist that the ceasefire be respected. Our peace is fragile. The cessation of hostilities agreement of 21 December 2017 and the subsequent Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, signed on 12 September 2018, have been violated multiple times, yet no one has been held to account for those violations. The recent Rome Declaration, signed by the Government and the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance on 13 January, has also been seriously violated on repeated occasions, and those responsible for the violations have enjoyed complete impunity. In the course of the violations, civilians have been killed, abducted, tortured, raped and forced to flee their homes. Yet violations of human rights and humanitarian law have rarely resulted in criminal prosecution in South Sudan. We believe that there must be some effective and reliable deterrent to prevent the rampant rape, extrajudicial killings and the obstruction of humanitarian access that have become routine in South Sudan. We urge the Security Council to insist on the immediate establishment of both the Hybrid Court for South Sudan and the Compensation and Reparation Authority and to support efforts to strengthen the national criminal justice system. Further, the Security Council should call on the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to support continued outreach to and engagement with the armed groups so that they respect the peace agreement they signed. For sustainable peace and stability to be achieved in South Sudan, there must be continued efforts to build trust and confidence between armed actors with a view to ensuring that they can effectively work together in the same Government towards a common goal. Much of the intercommunal violence in South Sudan is politically motivated, and that has escalated recently as a result of competition among elites over natural resources but also of increased cattle raiding. The divisions between ethnic communities have grown so deep that it is sometimes difficult for us to coexist with each other. My organization supports community engagement in dialogue to resolve differences without violence. We urge the Security Council to call for increased support to local peacebuilding initiatives and for the timely establishment of the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing provided for in the peace agreement. We urge the Security Council to help ensure that our peace does not fall apart again. Peace requires that we South Sudanese be honest with ourselves. We must be free to openly deliberate and debate the governance challenges we face, including corruption and impunity. The peace agreement provides for specific roles for civil society, women and youth representatives in many of the bodies it envisages. These representatives will join bodies tasked with planning security sector reforms, monitoring the ceasefire, ensuring reconstruction in conflict-affected states and paying reparations to those affected by violence. However, in a context where critical voices are stifled and where peace and human rights activists, such as Monday Moses, are arbitrarily detained, no one will be free to contribute effectively to those bodies or to speak up when the provisions of the peace agreement are not implemented. Please continue to call for respect for freedom of expression and for the release of those who are arbitrarily detained. We urge the Security Council to pressure the parties to complete the formation of the transitional national legislative assembly, the Council of States and State and local Governments in a timely fashion; ensure that the ceasefire is respected and honoured by all parties; support the immediate establishment of the institutions of transitional justice specified in the 2018 peace agreement; and ensure that humanitarian access and the safety of humanitarian workers is a priority for the international community. We also urge the Council to support the official launch of the implementation plan by the Secretary-General and the Special Representative of the Secretary- General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in accordance with the signed joint communique dated December 2014 on the prevention of sexual violence. It must take effective measures to support the protection of civic space by actively promoting the engagement of independent South Sudanese civil society in all aspects of governance, development and peacebuilding and by pressuring the Government of South Sudan to respect freedom of speech and association. It is especially important that the international community stand against the unwarranted persecution of journalists and civic activists. We call on the Council to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping forces work to promote accountability and the rule of law by increasing engagement with communities and enhancing protection for individuals and communities. We urge it to lobby members of the international community to facilitate the proposed African Union Peace and Security Council decision of the 917th meeting online dated 9 April 2020 on the situation of South Sudan to conduct a South Sudan peace needs assessment. Our recommendations are laid out in more detail in the document we have shared with the Security Council. We urge the Council to continue its engagement with civil society and support for peace in South Sudan. We have come this far only because of the international community's support, and we need the Council's help to make further progress.
