Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): The situation in the Sahel
is a source ofincreasing concern, as has been stated by
all prior speakers. It has implications not only for the
millions of people facing insecurity and hunger, but
also for the wider region and globally. The root causes
are complex and transboundary. The effects of the
spread of violent extremism, organized crime, climate
change, a worsening human rights situation and weak
institutions are mutually reinforcing. They are having
devastating consequences for the people of the Sahel
and show the limits of traditional peacekeeping. In
response, a combination of short- and long-term efforts
must be applied. Sweden is heavily engaged with its
development cooperation and humanitarian assistance,
as well as its contribution to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the European Union missions.

Stability in Mali is critical for the Sahel as a
whole. Supporting the full, inclusive and effective
implementation of the peace agreement must remain a
priority, particularly in view of the upcoming elections.
It is our best chance to build sustained peace and
prevent the further spread of instability. The sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017)
should be an active tool in our endeavours to achieve
peace and stability in Mali. However, sanctions are not
an end in themselves; they are a means of encouraging
political momentum.

Allow me to dwell for a moment on the issue of
inclusivity. During their recent visit to Mali, members
of the Security Council met with women civil society
representatives. When they were asked whether
they had access to the political leadership in their
country, they responded that they did not only want
access to politicians; rather, they wanted to become
decision-makers in their own right, represented on
equal terms with men. As we discussed on Friday
(see S/PV.8079), women's representation is not just a
question of fairness; it is a matter of effectiveness and of
increasing the probability ofa lasting peace agreement.

However, when you fear leaving your house to fetch
water a few kilometres away, or when your children
are prevented from going to school for years, political
representation seems an abstract goal. That is the reality
in central Mali, as it is in many other places throughout
the Sahel. For me, the interlinkage between security,
human rights and development is evident. Without
security, there can be no development. Without full
respect for human rights, any security effort is doomed
to fail, further alienating the population from the State.

The collective efforts of the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to step up development
efforts and move towards the full operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are therefore truly
commendable. They have our wholehearted support.
Let me to highlight three areas that should guide our
continued engagement with the G-5 Sahel Joint force.

First, the Joint Force is one of many instruments
that make up an integrated, sustainable and regional
approach to the situation in the Sahel. The primacy of
politics should guide that work, and it is essential to
ensure that an overarching political framework for the
Sahel be put in place. We encourage strong engagement
by the African Union, not least in ensuring coordination
with other regional initiatives and frameworks and
in ensuring further integration within the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture. This is an
opportunity for the United Nations, the African Union
and the subregion to work as one, together with other
partners such as the European Union.

Secondly, the success of the Joint Force will
depend upon the support of the population. That is
particularly true where terrorist groups are entrenched
within the population, exploiting the absence of State
authority. A solid human rights compliance framework
will therefore be of the utmost importance, not least to
restore trust in State institutions and prevent fuelling
further radicalization and destabilization. The G-5
Sahel countries recognized that need in the concept
of operations for the Joint Force; we must now move
towards the establishment of mechanisms to prevent
and address international human rights law and
international humanitarian law violations and abuses.
It is essential that the activities of the Joint Force
include a gender perspective in planning as well as
in specific protection actions. The Joint Force might
also encounter children associated with armed groups.
Therefore, clear procedures on how to tackle the issue
are needed, including through cooperation with child
protection advisers.

Finally, peace is best pursued in partnership. We
need to ensure that our repeated calls for regional
ownership, expectations from the Force and our
demands for accountability are matched with adequate
resources and support. The suggested options for
support put forward by the Secretary-General illustrate
that many possibilities exist. Predictable and sustainable
United Nations support is vital for the Force to be
able to deliver on its objectives. Sweden stands ready
to explore all models, including those that are most
ambitious. A supportive role from the United Nations
can underpin a stronger political framework, including
through the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and mutual accountability.

The success of our efforts in the Sahel will be
judged by how we improve the lives of the people who
live there. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a welcome
initiative to increase security, complement the
activities of MINUSMA and end the terrorist threat.
It deserves our full support. Accompanied by robust
and meaningful development efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and instability, it offers a chance to
set the region on the path to sustainable peace.

