Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I would like
to thank New Zealand for convening this debate,
highlighting the extreme vulnerability of small island
developing States (SIDS) to the impact ofclimate change,
which threatens their very survival. The devastating
effects of climate change, which occurred once in a
century, are now occurring with increasing frequency
and greater intensity, warning and compelling us to act
accordingly and promptly.

We need to assist SIDS in combating the negative
effects of conflict, violence, organized crime and
cybercrime, human trafficking, terrorism and disease
epidemics because those countries face the highest
disaster risks and have less resilience to external shocks
and crises than any other group of countries. Those
threats know no boundaries; they are transnational.
They present a threat not only to SIDS but also to
other groups, such as least developed countries and
landlocked least developed countries, as well as to
global security in general.

We have to think collectively how to reduce the
strain on water resources around the world, which
will bring fundamental transformations in the global
landscape, agriculture, trade and human existence,
resulting in an unspeakable humanitarian toll. Our
immediate task is to reduce the impact on development
caused by the destruction of all types of infrastructure
that is disrupting not only the SIDS but causing
worldwide disruption in our interconnected world.

With their very fragile economies, SIDS need our
support for capacity-building; they need technology
transfer to overcome crises that can destabilize them
completely. Climate change adaptation therefore
demands a global response, while we formulate the
post-2015 development goals, and calls for maximum
commitments to the climate agreement to be forged in
Paris in December.

Kazakhstan gives serious attention to climate
change mitigation at the national, regional and
international levels. Just a few days ago, ice melting
on the glaciers near my former capital, Almaty, as
a result of unusually high temperatures caused a
flood and mudslide. That clearly demonstrated our
own vulnerability with regard to climate change and
disaster risk reduction. My country has officially
declared its intention to take on voluntary quantitative
commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
It has launched its own reduced domestic emissions
trading scheme, thereby moving towards a low-carbon
economy. The Government and business community
of Kazakhstan welcome enhanced cross-national
cooperation in reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and linkage to national markets as important tools for
climate change mitigation.

Kazakhstan will honour its obligations most
strictly and will lead the way, through the United
Nations hub in Almaty, for sustainable development,
humanitarian assistance, disaster risk reduction
and building resilience in Central Asia, and will
share those efforts with SIDS. Also the Centre for
Disaster Risk Reduction - under the Ministry of
Emergencies, with support from the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP),
the United Nations Environment Programme and other
international organizations, together with domestic
non-governmental organizations - will spearhead
capacity-building for climate mitigation, early warning
and preventive and emergency relief and rehabilitation
work on behalf of the Central Asian region.

Realizing that advanced energy technologies will
have anincreasingimpactonclimate change,Kazakhstan
has chosen the theme "Future Energy" for Expo 2017,
which Astana will host in 2017. The Expo focus will
be on developing and using alternative energy sources
and the best global energy-efficiency technologies, in
partnership with other countries. We have organized
seminars in Astana for over 60 developing countries
on Future Energy to take advantage of the Expo. We
also hosted a side event during the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States in Apia,
where we addressed future energy issues for SIDS
and introduced an ESCAP project on training for and
installation and maintenance of biogas systems for SIDS,
in which Kazakhstan is closely involved. Kazakhstan
will therefore provide support to representatives of
approximately 60 developing countries to participate in
the Expo.

In conclusion, I reiterate Kazakhstan's readiness
to be an active part in the international community
through decisive, bold action to deal with the challenges
faced by SIDS.

