Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Russia for organizing this meeting on the Sahel
under its presidency of the Security Council. My thanks
also go to the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, Ms. Guebre Sellassie, for her
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
on the progress achieved in implementing the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel (S/2014/397).
The report rightly highlights the importance to the
international community of taking a coordinated
approach to strengthening governance, security,
resilience and development in the Sahel region.
Since the beginning of the year, the security
situation has deteriorated in northern Mali, Libya and
around Lake Chad. We have witnessed an increasing
number of violent actions on the part of the terrorist
group Boko Haram, and human rights violations and
attacks on civilians and members of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, perpetrated by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en Afrique
de l'Ouest, Ansar Dine and Al-Mourabitoune. Those
terrorist groups and the criminal networks proliferating
throughout the region represent cross-border threats to
peace and security that undermine States' authority and
hamper development opportunities.

No State is capable of countering the threat alone;
strengthened regional cooperation and the support
of the international community are needed. Recent
activities of the Group of Five for the Sahel - the new
regional group comprising Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger- the ongoing efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
continuing Nouakchott process initiated by the African
Union amply illustrate the readiness of countries in the
region to strengthen cooperation in security matters.

Beyond security, it is important that the Sahel
States make sustained efforts, with the support of the
international community, to find lasting solutions to
the root causes of instability in the region that have
allowed criminal networks and terrorist groups to
thrive. We must respond to the structural humanitarian
crisis - particularly food security - and support
sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development
that creates jobs and ensures basic social services and
the development of agriculture and infrastructure,
based on lessons learned. Particular attention should
be focused on border areas and on the infrastructure
that facilitates regional integration. That will further
improve territorial control and strengthen States'
authority over their territory.

In addition, strengthening democracy, establishing
Government infrastructure conducive to development,
fighting corruption, promoting and protecting human
rights, as well as reconciliation and decentralization,
should in our view be at the heart of the action for peace
and security in the Sahel. Indeed, resilient democratic
institutions are a bulwark against violent radicalization
and the emergence of national and regional conflicts.
Today we are witnessing a proliferation of initiatives
and international coordination frameworks that reflects
the difficulty of developing a common approach to
solving the multiple crises that affect the Sahel. Faced
with that proliferation, a pragmatic approach is needed.
In that context, we believe that the key role should be
played by the coordination platform for Sahel strategies,
whose chairmanship will be held by Mali from 2013 to
2015. That platform, which was established during the
joint visit to the region by the Secretary-General and
the President of the World Bank last November, has the
advantage of bringing together around the same table
all the players of the region and their partners, which of
course include the European Union. It responds to the
need for national and regional ownership and is backed
up by a technical secretariat.

We would like to take the opportunity this meeting
offers to encourage the United Nations system as a
whole, along with all the relevant players, to strengthen
in a coordinated way their regional added-value
programmes in accord with the road map adopted
during the second ministerial meeting of the platform
for the coordination of strategies for the Sahel, which
was held on 16 May in Bamako.

For our part, through our bilateral and regional
cooperation programmes, our contributions to the
involvement of the European Union and regional actors
and as a new member, since last month, of the African
Development Bank, Luxembourg is determined to
continue working to strengthen the partnership and the
solidarity between the international community and the
countries of the Sahel region.

