Mr. Klein: I am grateful for your generous and
kind comments, Mr. President, and for those of
everyone else in the Council. I will relay them to the
personnel of the Mission, who are, after all, the
nationals and the citizens of Council members. I am
sure that they will be most appreciative.

With regard to the transition from the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) to the European Union Police Mission
(EUPM), it is on track. When we first constructed that
notion, we had said very simply that the European
Union (EU) was looking for a mission and a mandate
somewhere. It is building a construct of some 5,000
policemen. Within UNMIBH, we have 680 European
policemen already. So the transition really becomes
very simple and very easy. What we recommended to
the EU, however, was an expanded EU Police Mission.
We said that we felt that there was obviously a role for
Norway and Switzerland, which have been extremely
generous over the years, and for the Russian Federation
and the North Americans for the political umbrella, for
Turkey for historical reasons and for others, as well.

That is a direction in which I think the EUPM. is
going. They are housed in our building. We have that
building rent-free for six years. We have a police
commissioner now in the United Nations who is a
Dane, Commissioner Frederickson, who has had
experience in the United Nations Protection Force,
Kosovo and Albania. He will serve me as the United
Nations Commissioner for six months and then he will
revert to the EU in January.

With regard to regional cooperation, I am pleased
to say that the Ministers of the Interior of Croatia,
Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, basically under
a United Nations rubric, have signed an agreement that
deals with illegal migration, trafficking, customs
violations and other criminal acts. So regional
cooperation is working; those are things that would have
been impossible during the Tudjman-Milosevic era.

On the issue of Karadzic and Mladic, States need
to exert the political will. The mandate of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) is that, if, in the course of
its duties, it accidentally runs over Mr. Karadzic and
identifies him, it should arrest him. What is needed is a
clear signal from the Council and the North Atlantic
Council, which says: SFOR must locate, detain, arrest
and move to The Hague Radovan Karadzic. That is a
mandate it does not now have.

I have always been honest and candid with the
Council in the past, and I will continue in that vein
today.

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina must also
learn that, if you ride a dead horse, it is not going to
take you very far. This is something that they have not
quite appreciated yet.

I will tell the Council candidly that the electoral
victory of the nationalists was not a defeat for
democracy or multi-ethnicity in Bosnia, but it is a
recognition that much of what the international
community has been doing since Dayton has often been
uncoordinated, tempocentric and lacking in strategic
planning. The patient has not always been well served
by the doctors.

Cobbling together exceptionally weak non-
nationalist coalitions that clearly enjoy neither support
nor credibility from the core of three ethnic groups has
not been the answer. Fractured by inter-coalition
rivalry and poor leadership, these coalitions failed
themselves and the people they purported to represent.

We have an old Alsatian proverb that says, "If
you have to swallow a frog, there is not a whole lot to
be gained by staring at it". In that regard, the new High
Representative, Paddy Ashdown, has brought much-
needed vision, coordination and practical experience to
this Office. He has correctly identified the rule of law,
job creation and clean Government as his priorities and
has taken robust steps, for which I congratulate him, to
bring these to the public agenda.

Prudently, from the beginning of his tenure in
May, he has stated his support for policies and
programmes, not parties and personalities. All the
winners of the recent elections, even the nationalists,
have committed themselves to reform, that is, making
Bosnia and Herzegovina work rather than tearing it
apart. With the agenda set, it is now time for the High
Representative to use his powers to see this reform
through, regardless of which parties are in power.

The vast majority of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will support us, and Paddy Ashdown
deserves the fullest international support to get that job
done.

