Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for holding this debate. I also wish to extend
my appreciation to the briefers today for their stark
presentations. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union later
today.

More than a year ago, 59 students were shot and
burned to death at a boarding school in Buni Yadi and
more than 270 girls were abducted in Chibok by Boko
Haram in Nigeria. As others have noted, abductions
have continued as recently as yesterday. There were 150
Kurdish boys kidnapped by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant on their way home from school. Another 132
children were killed in a Taliban attack in Peshawar,
and forced conversions; public executions and killings;
mutilations; forced marriages; rape and sexual slavery,
including that of children, have occurred in areas under
murderous Daesh control. Girls as young as eight to
ten years old have been used as suicide bombers by
Boko Haram. In the past three months, Daesh recruited
at least 400 Syrian children 4 children who have
already suffered unspeakable hardships and horrors
as cubs of the caliphate for military training and hard-
line indoctrination. Even in the middle of Europe, the
phenomenon of child soldiers seems to be surfacing
under the lawless rule of the illegal militants ravaging
the eastern parts of Ukraine, where underage soldiers
were reported present among the militants, being used,
inter alia, to train other recruits.

All in all, around the world, some 300,000 child
soldiers are being deprived of everything that childhood
is supposed to be, mostly by non-State actors. Therefore,
in that light, today's focus on children who are victims
of non-State actors could not be more pertinent. The
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Protocols additional to the Geneva
Convention oblige non-State armed groups not to use
children under any circumstances. The past year saw
the launch of the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign.

At the national level, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo released some 4,000 children from the
armed forces, and groups have made progress in the
implementation of its action plan. Somalia created a
mechanism for the handover of former child soldiers to
the United Nations and established a child protection
unit. Progress in Chad enabled its armed forces to be
delisted from the annex of the Secretary-General's
report. Yemen signed an action plan pledging to put
an end to the widespread recruitment of children by
armed forces and non-State groups. Today, however,
as the country balances on the brink, there are various
groups and particularly the Houthis that are violating
the commitments undertaken in the signing of the
plan. On the other hand, UNICEF secured the release
of approximately 3,000 children from the South Sudan
Democratic Movement/Army's Cobra faction. In the
Central African Republic, more than 100 children
associated with anti-Balaka were released in the past
summer. The numbers of children who are forced to
carry arms, however, is much higher than those of
the children released. To date, merely 12 out of the
51 annexed armed groups have signed action plans. Just
one action plan has been signed since 2009, and that is
not enough.

As the UNICEF representative said, the release
of children is only the first step to ensure that
affected children can overcome, despite the risk of
re-recruitment, the horrific physical and psychological
traumas that they have experienced. They need to
be provided with all the necessary care, including
psychological and medical help. The lack of financial
resources and the stigmatization of the former child
soldiers threaten the sustainable reintegration of those
children and jeopardize their future. Governments
and financial partners must ensure adequate resources
for comprehensive reintegration programmes with
a specific focus on child soldiers, including the girls
among them. There is also a need to build community
and family support capacity and education and skills-
development opportunities, without which those
children will not be able to regain their lives. The
uncontrolled flows of small arms and light weapons
play into the hands of those who abuse children and
use them as combatants. All efforts aimed at countering
child recruitment and violence against children must be
undertaken in conjunction with the initiatives aimed
at countering the illicit flows of small arms and their
misuse.

The Council has a whole range of tools at its disposal
to tackle violence against children in conflict. One
such tool is sanctions designations. Child recruitment
and violence against children must become routine
sanctions designation criteria. All grave violent crimes
against children should be used to trigger designations
and listings. The abduction of children should be
included as an additional trigger for the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms and for the listings.

Other tools at our disposal include regular
interaction between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose work we appreciate very
much; the relevant sanctions committees and their
panels of experts; stronger engagement between the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the International Criminal Court, fact-finding missions
and commissions of inquiry; and the continued focus in
the Secretary-General's country reports on attacks on
and the military use of schools.

Further pursuit of relevant action plans is also
needed, including with non-State actors. Flexibility
and openness are required in handling the complex
issue of contacts with these groups; otherwise, the
sad state of affairs will not change. We urge relevant
Governments to facilitate access to and engagement
with non-State actors operating on their territories by
the United Nations and other international, regional
and non-governmental organizations.

Another key aspect is the pursuit of accountability,
both as a response to the crimes committed and as a
deterrent. Much remains to be done on this, including by
strengthening national capacities of the judicial sector
and acting more systematically within the framework of
international j ustice, including by referring perpetrators
to the International Criminal Court (ICC); but also,
importantly, creating the political will to pursue justice
against those who commit crimes against children.
To date, however, we have seen only one verdict for
the recruitment and use of children - the Thomas
Lubanga case at the ICC. The recent appearance before
the ICC of Dominic Ongwen, a former child soldier
and a commander of the Lord's Resistance Army, is
another welcome step. While we welcome these two
developments, such successes and cases are too few and
far between.

As terrorists increasingly use children and
adolescents both as targets of recruitment and
brainwashing and as perpetrators, coherent and
pro-active efforts are needed to inform vulnerable
communities on how to best protect their children under
given circumstances. Developing effective counter-
narratives, exposing the terrorist criminals for what
they really are, and cutting through the slick media and
online recruitment campaigns are required.

To conclude, it is our collective responsibility to
stem violence against children, including by non-State
actors, by resolute and targeted action. We call on all
States to redouble their efforts to that end.

