Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to welcome
Ambassador Sharma to the Council and thank him for
his comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Timor-Leste.

While we are happy to note significant progress
made by Timor-Leste in certain key areas, we should
also remain mindful of the serious challenges involved.
This year did not begin very auspiciously for
Timor-Leste, marred as it was by a series of
disturbances. However, we are glad to note that the
situation has improved since then. The internal security
situation, as the Secretary-General's report indicates, is
but one of many problems which that newly
independent country currently faces.

In our view, the biggest challenge before
Timor-Leste is its economic future. The Secretary-
General's report points out that "Timor-Leste remains
the poorest country in South-east Asia" (S/2003/449, para. 52). It therefore needs continued and sustained
assistance from the international community to
promote economic development.

Pakistan welcomes the signing of the Timor Sea
Treaty and the International Unitisation Agreement on
the Greater Sunrise field, which will allow Timor-Leste
to take advantage of significant oil and gas revenues.
We also welcome Timor-Leste's admission, last Friday,
to the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific as another step in the right direction.
Nevertheless, much more help is needed immediately
to allow this country, at least economically, to stand on
its own feet.

International assistance is required also in the
area of security. We are concerned to learn, through the
Secretary-General's report, that to date Timor-Leste
has not been able to make further enhancements to
defence and security through bilateral arrangements.
Similarly, the report also mentions shortfalls and
resource constraints on matters relating to the internal
security and justice sectors. The international
community must step in to fill the gap.

The Security Council took the correct decision
earlier this month when it unanimously adopted
resolution 1473 (2003). Through that resolution, the
drawdown of UNMISET was frozen and the necessary
adjustments to its composition were made. That
enabled UNMISET to appropriately address the
internal security challenges prevailing at the time as
well as to build the capacity of the National Police of
Timor-Leste to effectively respond to such situations.
We hope the Council can maintain this kind of political
flexibility and operational decisiveness in the future.
Needless to say, Pakistan fully supports the extension
of the mandate of UNMISET for another 12-month
period. As Pakistan has often repeated, there must be
no exit in any peacekeeping mission without
completing the task.

Pakistan believes that the development of close
and friendly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia is of utmost importance. Indeed, this is in the
interest of both countries and the region as a whole. We
welcome in this regard the commitment by the
Government of Timor-Leste to work with the
Indonesian authorities on various issues, especially
border security and control matters. We call on both
sides to work together to resolve any outstanding
problems, including transitional justice issues, and to
strengthen regional cooperation. Such cooperation can
be an example for other regions as well.

A lot has been achieved in Timor-Leste but still
more work is required to consolidate the gains made
thus far. The United Nations and the international
community must continue to utilize all necessary
means in that regard. Indeed, Timor-Leste is a success
story for the United Nations for more than one reason.
It is also an example of how the principle of self-
determination was successfully implemented by the
United Nations. There are other parts of the world,
especially Jammu and Kashmir, that await the exercise
of the right of self-determination promised to them by
the Security Council.

