Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdzic', Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him
for his statement. I thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko for his briefing on developments in the country
during the past six months.

Nigeria welcomes the positive developments,
including the progress made in addressing the
conditions for visa liberalization with the European
Union, as well as the acceptance of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's application for a Membership Action
Plan by NATO. We are pleased with the improved
relations between the country and its immediate
neighbours, resulting in increased diplomatic activity
among them, as well as the furtherance of
reconciliation and the promotion of peace within the
region.

We note that attacks against State institutions and
nationalistic rhetoric undermine efforts to promote
peace and stability. Such actions have also constrained
efforts by the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council to fully
implement their mandates. The limited progress made
in implementing necessary reforms and in meeting the
outstanding requirements set by the Steering Board for
the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union presence requires
attention. The General Framework Agreement for
Peace needs sustained support.
If these issues are not handled properly, they
could trigger further tension and possibly affect the
general election slated for October. The leaders must
demonstrate the requisite political will to promote
reconciliation, peace and development in the country
and the region as a whole. In this regard, we urge
political leaders to refrain from divisive and
anti-Dayton rhetoric, as this may impede the progress
recorded thus far. They should also commit to dialogue
and compromise in resolving their differences.

We welcome the efforts of the United States and
the European Union to assist the country in resolving
the remaining issues on the agenda set by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative and in reforming the
Constitution Within the framework of the Dayton
Agreement. We also welcome the follow-up meeting
being facilitated by the United States in June.

We note the call by the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe for constitutional reform, and
the Sejdic-Finci decision on the election eligibility
provisions of the Constitution. It is our hope that any
envisaged process will take into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all the country's
peoples. We appreciate the role of European Union
peacekeeping, in collaboration with the armed forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in fostering stability and
security in the country. We urge the High
Representative to continue with his efforts to promote
the admission of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
European Union.

In conclusion, we urge continued support for the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina in its efforts to
implement its justice sector reform strategy, to promote
the return of internally displaced persons, and to
strengthen its economy. We call for concerted action by
the international community to facilitate attainment of
the goals of these reform efforts.

