Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation appreciates the opportunity to
participate in this open debate of the Security Council.
I should like to congratulate Costa Rica and President
Oscar Arias for this excellent initiative intended to
launch a joint examination of the need to strengthen
multilateral mechanisms for collective security and
adapt them to the new challenges facing today's world.
In that regard, I should like to fully endorse the
statement delivered this morning by the representative
of France on behalf of the European Union.

The international community should be prepared
to respond effectively to new and complex challenges
in a coordinated and comprehensive manner. To that
end, there is a need for renewed determination to
establish effective multilateralism through which the
United Nations, as the guarantor of international
legality, can act as the essential instrument in
facilitating cooperation that can allow us all to make
progress in three inextricably linked priority areas,
namely, the maintenance of international peace and
security, economic and social development and respect
for human rights and the rule of law.

The Charter of the United Nations confers
various responsibilities on the Security Council and the
General Assembly in the area of maintaining
international peace and security. It also calls for
appropriate interaction between those two primary
organs as regards goals pursued by the Organization as
a whole. We should welcome today's initiative by
Costa Rica, which serves to frame the debate and calls
on the Security Council, in close cooperation with
other international and regional organizations, to
support efforts to promote the establishment and
maintenance of international peace and security. That
could serve to open the way for a reduction in
armaments and troops, thereby freeing up human and
material resources for the achievement of economic
and social development.

There is no doubt that the world must move
forward in that direction and thereby avoid human and
economic costs that weigh on the whole of humankind.
As President Arias clearly noted this morning, that
would make the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 more feasible.

For Spain, as a member of the European Union,
promoting and maintaining peace are hallmarks of our
foreign policy and that is why we participate in many
global and regional initiatives, in favour of
non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control. In
the context of the United Nations, Spain supports the
work of the Security Council, participating in
peacekeeping and conflict-prevention operations and
strictly complying with its decisions and
recommendations. Similarly, Spain participates
actively in the work of the General Assembly and
supports many initiatives in the areas of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
disarmament and conventional weapons control. Spain
has also subscribed to the universal conventions in this
area. We take part in the principal negotiating forums
and support the institutions and mechanisms that
promote those objectives.

In the current international context, Governments
and civil society must promote international and
regional initiatives to counter the insecurity and armed
violence in various parts of the world that seriously
limit the development capacity of the most
disadvantaged regions. A notable example is the
Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development of 2006, in which Spain participated
alongside a broad group of countries and whose
objective is to promote sustainable security and a
culture of peace and to act to reduce armed violence
and its adverse impact on socio-economic and human
development.

Another specific example is the financial and
technical support given by the Spanish Government to
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean, which works to promote understanding
and cooperation among States of the region in these
areas of activity.

Along the same lines, Spain has been working
actively on the implementation of the 2001 United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in

All Its Aspects, as well as other initiatives - for
example, on anti-personnel mines and cluster
munitions - that have a great impact in the

humanitarian sphere and in general on the political
stability and economic development of countries and
the everyday lives of people.

Similarly, the Spanish Government has promoted
the development of new international instruments and,
in particular, a draft arms trade treaty of a legally
binding nature that would establish universal criteria to
regulate the world trade in conventional weapons. That
is the spirit that inspired the Master Plan for Spanish
Cooperation, the peacebuilding strategy of Spain's
development cooperation and its sectoral plans, which
include the three interconnected dimensions of security
and defence, socio-economic development and political

development. The implementation of that cooperation
policy has allowed Spain to become an important
donor, in terms of both technical and financial
assistance, in areas such as humanitarian de-mining,
the removal of explosive remnants of war and the fight
against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, with particular attention to assisting victims,
their families and the communities to which they
belong. All of these actions are part of a genuine effort
to move forward in the area of non-proliferation,
disarmament and arms control and to achieve results
that benefit millions of people throughout the world.

The international community must respond
urgently and decisively to the new challenges heralded
by the twenty-first century. It is the duty of all Member
States to support the work of the United Nations by
assuming the leadership necessary to bring us closer to
a renewed system of collective security that is based on
trust and equipped with a comprehensive approach
through gradual steps in all the areas we have
discussed. The objective is to build a stable peace
based on respect for human rights, the promotion of
good governance and sustainable development. As the
initiative launched today by Costa Rica demonstrates,
this task is in our hands and it is a moral duty of all, for
the sake of future generations.

