Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks High Representative Inzko for his briefing.

China has maintained a consistent position of
respecting Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity,
while respecting the choice of its people in charting
the way forward for their country and supporting the
various ethnic communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
living in harmony and seeking common development.
China congratulates Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
October 2018 holding of general elections and the
country's recent successful holding of the twenty-
second Mostar International Trade Fair.

We welcome the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to promote national reconciliation and socioeconomic
development. We look forward to seeing all parties
in the country work together to form a cabinet as
soon as possible, actively reinforce the political
process, search for consensus through dialogue and
consultations, comprehensively implement the Dayton
Accords and accord further attention to, and support
for, the country's socioeconomic development so
that they can collectively benefit from the peace and
development dividends.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. Maintaining peace, stability and
development in the country and ensuring harmony
among the various ethnic groups are in the interest
of the international community in the large and small
countries of the region. With regard to the issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the international community
should listen with an open mind to the positions and
concerns of all parties and take a balanced and prudent
approach. While advancing the reform process, the
international community should duly consider the
specific characteristics of the country and its level
of resilience, focus on helping people overcome their
challenges independently and as they see fit, and step
up support for the country's economic development.

China welcomes the positive efforts of High
Representative Inzko to move Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political process forward. We hope that the High
Representative will work according to his mandate and
contribute to the implementation of the Dayton Accords.
We also hope that the European Union-led Operation
Althea will continue to strengthen engagement with
the parties concerned to help maintain the security and
stability ofBosnia and Herzegovina. China stands ready,
together with the rest of the international community, to
do its part in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve
lasting peace, stability and development.

