Mr. Lamba (Malawi): I join preceding speakers,
Sir, in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. Our congratulations go also to Pakistan on its
stewardship of the Council as President for the month
of May. My delegation wishes to assure you, Mr.
President, of its continued strong support and
cooperation as you diligently steer the business of this
important organ towards a successful conclusion.

The gravity of this debate is beyond question.
The issue currently before the Council is important for
the integrity of the United Nations Charter in its role as
the gatekeeper of international peace and security. It is
delicate, as it touches on the very foundations of
durable peace, stability, equality and justice, namely,
international law and international humanitarian law.

Just to put this matter in context, let me recall
that following the broad-scale atrocities of the Second
World War, the victorious Powers decided -
fortunately - to bring to justice those who had
perpetrated grievous crimes against humanity and
peace. To that end, two international judicial bodies
were established, namely the Nuremberg and Tokyo
tribunals.

With a view to offsetting the shortcomings
inherent in those two ad hoc tribunals, the question of a
permanent international tribunal was raised in the late
1940s and the early 1950s within the context of the
1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide. This gave rise to a debate on
having the Nuremberg tribunal further elaborated,
leading to a motion by the Latin American and
Caribbean States for the creation of an international
criminal court. Regrettably, not much progress was
achieved for a long time afterwards.

However, the gross injustices, massacres and
human rights abuses that accompanied the policy of
ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia in the early
19905, and the infamous Rwanda genocide of 1994
gave added impetus to longstanding calls for a
permanent international criminal tribunal going beyond
the legal scope and criminal jurisdiction of the two
original tribunals of the late 1940s, which were
perceived to have had shortcomings.

That historical context is necessary to serve as a
reminder to all gathered here about the painstaking and
arduous negotiations that have taken place over the
past five decades, culminating in the 1998 United
Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on
the Establishment of an International Criminal Court, a
product of universal courage and resolve. The noble
task of making the Court work remains our imperative
in the twenty-first century.

The International Criminal Court has been more
than 50 years in the making and remains the single
most important intergovernmentally agreed legal
framework for ending impunity for all manner of war
crimes and other crimes against humanity.

Without a credible intergovernmental mechanism
to correct and punish the wrongs of man against fellow
man, such as that offered by this permanent criminal
tribunal, global peace and stability could not be
assured, and anarchy would continue to reign supreme
in politically troubled flashpoints - such as Africa,
where the vast majority of United Nations
peacekeeping missions are deployed.

Council resolution 1422 (2002) is likely to
reverse the positive gains and historic milestones of the
Rome Diplomatic Conference, and goes against the
spirit behind the Rome Statute. The resolution weakens
an earnest global collective crusade against the
recurrence of the humanitarian catastrophes of, for
example, Cambodia, the Balkans and Rwanda, Sierra
Leone and other parts of Africa where civil wars and
war crimes are currently raging and where crimes
against humanity may be taking place. My delegation
appeals for careful consideration of the advantages of
the International Criminal Court as a deterrent to
crimes and in the promotion of global peace.

Our concerns should be seen in the light of the
need to consolidate the commendable achievements of
the International Criminal Court since the coming into
force of the Rome Statute on 1 July 2002. The
Assembly of States Parties, now 90 strong, has held
three successful rounds of consultations since its
inaugural session in September 2002. The Court's
functionality was sealed by the operationalization of its
legal instruments following the successful conclusion
in July 2002 of a four-year preparatory process.
Further, the Court was able to elect its first 18 Judges
early this year. These have since elected a President.
The Prosecutor is now in post and the recruitment of
other principal officers and support staff of the Court is
well under way, thereby making the Court practically
up and running.

Those developments bear strong testimony to the
solemnity with which United Nations Member States
view the Court's potential contribution to the
promotion of the international rule of law. Any move at
this critical juncture for exemptions to the Rome
Statute will without doubt open up this nascent
international instrument to fresh and expensive
negotiations that would negatively affect its thrust.

Renewing this resolution would also serve to
erode the newly emergent global political will to
promote the momentum created by the International
Criminal Court to fight repugnant crimes against
humanity. It is important to note that resolution 1422
(2002) has inimical effects on international law,
international humanitarian law and the spirit of
multilateralism in international affairs, and on the
criminalization of acts and behaviours in armed
conflict that confound the human conscience.

If this draft resolution should be adopted, as
seems likely, nothing will stop it from evolving
perforce into a permanent fixture on the Council's rule-
making platform. In that way, we shall have failed
those who, in one way or another, needlessly paid the
ultimate price and are now seeking justice and
appropriate redress, which only the Rome Statute can
guarantee.

It is the ardent hope of my delegation, as a State
party to the Rome Statute, that reason and justice will
prevail as we tread down this delicate path, and that a
strong attempt will be made to preserve the
international rule of law through a renewed joint global
effort to support the consolidation of the ideals and
purposes of the Rome Statute, as well as the
universality and integrity of the International Criminal
Court, whose safeguards reside in the Rome Statute
alone.

