Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me also add
our voice of thanks to Mr. Mladenov for his briefing
and to Ms. Raemer for the perspectives that she shared
with us.

South Africa thanks the Secretary-General and
welcomes the second written report for 2019 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938).
We hope that the practice of written reports continues
and look forward to the next written report in June 2020.
South Africa fully supports the negotiations
in pursuit of the two-State solution and the agreed
peace processes aimed at ensuring two viable States
coexisting side by side to the mutual benefit of all
peoples in the region. The continued disregard for those
prevailing and longstanding internationally accepted
concepts cannot be allowed, particularly with regard
to the circumvention of final-status issues such as the
borders, the status of Jerusalem and the right of return
of refugees.

As we and other Member States have stated on
numerous occasions, the only way to achieve sustained
peace and security in the Middle East is through
reaching a lasting agreement between the Palestinians
and the Israelis themselves, based on the agreed peace
process and the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international terms of reference, including the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, among others.

That can be done only if all sides abide by their
obligations under international law, including Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, South Africa remains
extremely concerned about the continued settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. As
reported by the Secretary-General, over 3,000 housing
units were advanced or approved in the occupied West
Bank, including 300 units in East Jerusalem, during
the reporting period alone. In relation to the expansion
of illegal settlements, the seizure, destruction or
demolition of Palestinian property has led to the
displacement of 260 people, including 133 children.

Additionally, the Secretary-General's report
highlights incidents of Israeli security forces in Hebron
firing teargas canisters and stun grenades at schools
in response to children throwing stones at a military
patrol. Such disproportionate and undue reaction by the
Israeli security forces cannot be allowed and must be
condemned. We cannot allow children to fear places
that are supposed to be places of learning and refuge.

South Africa emphasizes that those actions
undermine the prospects for peace and contravene the
decisions of the Council, effectively undermining its
own credibility. If the Council is unable or unwilling
to uphold its own decisions, it loses its effectiveness. In
that regard, my delegation will continue to insist on the
full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and all
other Council resolutions on the matter.

The situation in Gaza is of grave concern to South
Africa. The recent increase in tensions has led to further
killings and a perpetuation of the conflict. South Africa
calls on all parties to cease those violent attacks, which
only drive the parties further away from each other and
diminish any hope for the restoration of negotiations.

South Africa welcomes the significant progress
made on implementing the package of intervention
for Gaza of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, particularly in the delivery of electricity
and health-care services. However, despite those
interventions, the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situations remain dire. We echo the Secretary-
General in that the provision of health care should
not be determined by political considerations but
should be based on the needs of the people of Gaza.
We commend and support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in ensuring that those and other vital needs of the
Palestinian people are met.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the efforts
of the Special Coordinator to ensure that inclusive
Palestinian elections are held in the near future. We
note Hamas's acceptance of the proposed election plan
of President Abbas and call on all parties to ensure that
safe and inclusive elections are held throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

