Mr. Binrn Lian (Norway): Allow me first to say that
it is a particular pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this
very important meeting. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman for the excellent
manner in which he carried out his duties as President in
November.

Norway welcomes today's resolution authorizing the
deployment of the multinational implementation force
(IFOR). It authorizes a multinational force led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), with important
contributions also from several non-NATO States, including
the Russian Federation. In the European context, this stands
out as a hallmark event.

For its part, Norway will participate in IFOR with
approximately 1,000 troops. We are satisfied that today's
resolution contains the elements necessary for IFOR to
carry out its task efficiently. A heavy responsibility now
rests with the parties to show a spirit of reconciliation and
a genuine will to avail themselves of the presence of IFOR
to build the foundations for peace and stability.

The contribution of IFOR to preventing a resumption
of the war must be supplemented by concentrated efforts
aimed at peace-building, nation-building and economic
reconstruction. We believe that the Peace Implementation
Conference in London last week created a good framework
for the coordination of these efforts. The success of
implementing peace in Bosnia will also depend upon
developments in the rest of former Yugoslavia, and in
 

particular, we feel, on the follow-up of the Basic
Agreement for Eastern Slavonia.

The Norwegian Government is fully committed to a
continued policy of active involvement through our
contribution to IFOR and through our extensive
participation in the humanitarian efforts and the process
of reconstruction. We are looking forward to working
together with the High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, and
relevant organizations in this crucial endeavour. The High
Representative will need the support of all organizations
and countries involved in order to ensure the rational
utilization of the resources available. We would also like
to emphasize, as does the resolution, the relationship
between the fulfilment by the parties of their
commitments in the Peace Agreement and the willingness
of the international community to provide funds for
reconstruction. It must be clear that international patience
can have its limits.

For the initial phase of the peace-building in 1996,
Norway is prepared to commit close to $50 million. Half
of that amount will be earmarked for reconstruction and
rehabilitation purposes. The remainder will cover areas of
a more short-term humanitarian nature such as health and
programmes for children and youth, as well as human
rights monitoring.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is a
key element in the comprehensive peace settlement.
Norway fully supports the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as
the lead agency responsible for promoting the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons. The Norwegian
Government also attaches great importance to the
principles and recommendations concerning the
repatriation of refugees advocated by the UNHCR. We
urge other States acting as hosts to refugees from the
former Yugoslavia to cooperate with the UNHCR with a
View to integrating repatriation into the overall peace
process.

Justice must be an integral part of a comprehensive
and lasting peace. The parties have an obligation to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia as one of the entities involved in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. All competent
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina should cooperate
fully and provide unrestricted access for the Tribunal's
investigators to any person and to any site they may want
to v1s1t.

 
We expect a decision by the Council next week to
establish the United Nations civilian International Police
Task Force (IPTF), to be financed through assessed
contributions. Its task should consist mainly of monitoring,
observing and inspecting law-enforcement activities and
facilities throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
effectiveness of the IPTF will depend to a major extent on
the willingness of the parties to cooperate, and its
operational guidelines should be formulated accordingly.
Norway has been a major contributor to the United Nations
civilian police force in the former Yugoslavia up to now,
and we are prepared to continue our cooperation with the
United Nations in this field.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) will be put to its greatest challenge up to
now. It will be instrumental in establishing a democratic
constitutional structure in Bosnia and Herzegovina and will
contribute to the humanitarian and reconstruction efforts, in
cooperation with the United Nations and other international
organizations. Norway will actively support the OSCE with
respect to the very difficult tasks it has been given in the
field of democratic elections and human rights monitoring.
The successful conclusion of an arms-control agreement for
the Balkans is an indispensable part of the broader peace
process. The ambitious task is to remove the use of military
forces as an instrument of policy in this war-tormented
region, and we are honoured that Ambassador Vigleik Eide
of Norway has been designated for this important task. In
order to succeed, he will need full support from all of us.

Today is an occasion to pay tribute to all those who
have served in the United Nations peace-keeping and
humanitarian operations in former Yugoslavia, including
those who lost their lives, and to the Secretary-General's
Special Representatives and Mediators. All of them have in
a very substantial way helped prepare the ground for peace
and deserve proper recognition for their role.

