Let me begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening this annual briefing on the United Nations police (UNPOL). I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and the Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti for their insightful briefings and for bringing the experience from the ground. Indonesia is keen to participate in this debate not only because we have always put priorities on peacekeeping and peacekeepers, including police peacekeepers, but also because we would like to hear updates from the ground. As we mark the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations police (UNPOL) this year, I would like to salute all police peacekeepers, men and women, for their service and dedication in peacekeeping and special political missions around the world. Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the fallen peacekeepers who served with honour and made the ultimate sacrifice to advance the cause of peace. Indonesia takes pride as a longstanding and major contributor of UNPOL. Since our first participation in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group in Namibia in 1989, we have deployed more than 2,700 police officers in 17 peacekeeping and special political missions. Currently, 307 Indonesian police officers serve in five peacekeeping missions, namely, MINUSCA, MINUSMA, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and UNMISS. Allow me now to make general observations on the role of UNPOL, followed by some questions to the briefers. My first point is on the increasing role and contribution of UNPOL to peacekeeping operations. Since its first deployment in the United Nations Operation in the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) in 1960, the role of UNPOL has vastly expanded and today includes assisting host countries in maintaining security, law and order, protecting civilians, combating crime and building the capacity of the police service. With the increasing complexity of conflict and challenges faced by peacekeeping missions, the role of UNPOL will be even more important. That requires better planning and coordination and a more efficient recruitment and deployment process, as well as stronger institutional support for UNPOL. The growing tasks and role of UNPOL must also be supported with adequate and sustainable financial resources. Furthermore, as peacekeepers are dealing with more dangerous environments, more efforts should also be made to ensure their safety and security, particularly in the time of the coronavirus disease. The Secretariat must redouble its efforts to improve the protection capacity and medical facilities in the missions. My second point concerns enhancing the performance and the professionalism of UNPOL. To effectively discharge their mandate, it is vital that police peacekeepers be well trained and well protected. Indonesia has long been consistent in promoting training and capacity-building for peacekeepers. Our peacekeepers receive rigorous training not only in basic policing skills but also in other skill sets, such as language, understanding of the local culture and human rights. Such training is crucial not only to prepare peacekeepers to carry out their tasks professionally, but also to engage with the local population through effective community-oriented policing. We in Indonesia also train our police officers with specialized expertise, such as forensics, investigation, serious and organized crime and sexual and gender-based violence, as well as public order management. We stand ready to deploy them as part of specialized police teams in various missions. My third point is on women's participation in UNPOL. In line with the recently adopted resolution 2538 (2020), we need to continue our collective efforts to increase women's participation in peacekeeping. We are pleased to note that targets have been achieved in increasing the number of women personnel, both as individual police officers and as part of a formed police unit. At the same time, we believe that there is still plenty of room for improvement in order to ensure better participation of women in peacekeeping. To increase women's participation, Indonesia focuses on investing in training and capacity-building. For that reason, early next year Indonesia and Norway will organize training to prepare Indonesian women police for deployment. Indonesia will also host the annual training conference of the International Association of Women Police in Yogyakarta in September next year. Allow me now to put two questions to all the Police Commissioners. My first question is related to the mandate. Based on the experience of the Police Commissioners on the ground, what aspect of the mandate related to UNPOL needs to be strengthened and focused? Are the missions supported with the necessary and adequate resources to carry out their tasks? What can the Council do to address this issue? My second question is about women in peacekeeping. As the Police Commissioners are aware, resolution 2538 (2020) also calls for the provision of an enabling, safe and gender-sensitive working environment for women peacekeepers in missions. Could they share with us the measures that have been taken in their respective missions to provide an enabling environment for women officers? What are their recommendations with regard to increasing the participation and the role of women peacekeepers? Noting that there are many questions today, I fully support the proposal of the three African members of the Security Council plus Saint Vincent and the Grenadines regarding the request for the Secretariat to come up with a report in 2021 on the work of UNPOL. I would like to add that the report should also reflect the progress on the implementation of resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping operations, with a particular focus on efforts to increase the numbers and the performance of women police peacekeepers. To conclude, let me once again reaffirm our commitment to providing our full support to police peacekeeping. Rest assured that Indonesia, as the largest troop- and police-contributing country in the current membership of the Security Council, will continue to support the Blue Berets. I would like to personally thank all the peacekeepers on the ground for their dedicated service to the cause of peace.
