Mr. Shen Bo (China) (Spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Lithuania's initiative in organizing
this briefing on the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and would like to thank
Mr. Burkhalter, President of the Swiss Confederation
and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, for attending
today's meeting. We have listened very carefully to his
briefing.

As an important regional organization, the OSCE
has over the years made a positive contribution to
efforts to conduct preventive diplomacy, enhance
security and mutual trust, mediate regional disputes
and combat terrorism and crime. China appreciates
those efforts, and we listened carefully to the three
priorities presented by Mr. Burkhalter for the Swiss
chairmanship. We encourage the OSCE to continue to
fully exploit its advantages, to settle disputes through
peaceful means, such as mediation and good offices, and
to play a positive and constructive role in maintaining
regional peace, security and stability.

Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. China
supports the efforts of the United Nations, including
the Security Council, in line with Chapter VIII of the
Charter, to enhance its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. Such cooperation should
strive to maintain strict compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms of international relations, in particular
the principles of respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in internal affairs.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should capitalize on their respective
advantages and enhance their complementarity and
coordination.

China supports cooperation between the United
Nations, the Security Council and the OSCE in
maintaining regional peace and stability. We hope
that the channels of cooperation will be expanded and
approaches diversified, so as to achieve pragmatic
and effective cooperation, thereby jointly contributing
to international and regional peace, stability and
development.

China has followed the political situation in
Ukraine very closely. We hope that all parties will
continue to settle their disputes and differences
peacefully and lawfully through political consultation
and that political stability is achieved and order restored
as soon as possible. China hopes that the international
community will continue to make positive efforts and
play a constructive role in achieving stability in the
situation in Ukraine. We respect the choice made by the
Ukrainian people on the basis of national conditions. We
are ready to continue to develop a strategic partnership
with Ukraine on the basis of peace and mutual benefit.

