Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to start by
thanking the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General for his incisive briefing.

Speaking in this Chamber a few days ago, Secretary-

General Antonio Guterres sounded the warning that
the Cold War had returned with a vengeance across a
multiplicity of divides, including in the Middle East
(see S/PV.8231). Moreover, he observed that this new
Cold War was under way without the mechanisms and
safeguards used to manage the risk of escalation in the
past. Big Power rivalries combined with the divergent
policies and interests of major regional States presage
a period of continued conflict and instability in the
region, contributing to the suffering of the millions of
innocent victims of the regional conflicts and the rising
danger of major international conflagration.

In recent times, no people have suffered greater
injustice than the people of Palestine. During the past
70 years, they have been driven from their homes and
their homeland, militarily occupied and obligated to
living conditions that resemble apartheid. The world
witnessed the latest manifestation of Israel's cruel
occupation and repression during the Great March of
Return in Gaza. A peaceful protest was transformed
into a callous killing zone by the occupying Power even
as the world watched the wanton shooting of unarmed
Palestinians on their television screens.

While the Palestinians mourned the pointless
murder ofscores oftheir men, women and children, some
as young as 14, the Security Council was unable to even
call for an independent and transparent investigation
into the incidents, much less condemn the crimes of the
occupying Power. The Palestinian demand for justice
was met once again by arrogant dismissal. International
peace and stability cannot be promoted by denying
freedom and justice to peoples living under foreign
or alien occupation. The international community has
long since recognized that peace between Israel and
the Palestinian people and other Arab and Muslim
peoples can only be built through a two-State solution.
An illusory one State will perpetuate occupation and
conflict and provide neither peace nor security.

Pakistan also deplores the constraints placed on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). It is deplorable
that the suffering of Palestinian refugees is sought
to be mortgaged to political ambitions. Sufficient,
predictable and sustainable financing of UNRWA's
activities is essential, moral and legal, all the more so
at this grim political juncture when prospects for the
negotiated settlement appear so sombre and so bleak.

We have heard some characterize the Middle East
as a troubled place. The Council should analyse the
reasons for the region's troubles. Most of these troubles
are a direct consequence of foreign occupation,
annexation and intervention. The region stands at a
dangerous crossroads. The seething fires of conflict
and violence threaten to exacerbate the multiple
intersecting and overlapping regional fault lines, thus
presenting a greater risk to international peace and
security than ever before.

We are gravely concerned by reports of the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria. Any use of chemical
weapons by anyone anywhere is abhorrent and illegal
and deserves unreserved condemnation. We welcome
the deployment of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission to the Syrian
Arab Republic and are confident that its investigations
will assist in establishing and ascertaining the facts. At
the same time, we reiterate our call on all sides to refrain
from actions that are incompatible with the Charter of
the United Nations and with international law.

Pakistan views the forthcoming parliamentary
elections in Iraq as another important landmark in
the march of our Iraqi brothers and sisters towards a
democratic and pluralistic Iraqi State that reconciles
the interests of all the Iraqi people.

Meanwhile, the situation in Yemen remains a cause
for extreme distress. Some 22 million Yemenis are in
dire need of immediate humanitarian assistance, which
warrants both a surge in diplomacy to realize a political
settlement and the provision of generous humanitarian
support to the millions in need across the country.
We will continue to extend our full support for all
diplomatic efforts, including those being made under
the auspices of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths, to find an inclusive and just political
solution in Yemen.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the Middle
East is a cradle of civilization, but it has been
transformed into a cauldron of conflict. Unless the
value of human life and the rights of all peoples are
respected and unless the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are upheld in the Middle East and
other regions near and far, the Middle East may well be
racing towards unprecedented disaster.

