Mr. Klein (United States of America): I would like
to thank the Mission of Chile for its steady leadership
during the busy month of January. We are grateful, Sir,
for your team's diligent and conscientious hard work.

As these first few weeks of 2015 have shown,
this year we will be returning to several of the same
crises that we faced last year, while also needing to
turn to new challenges. This month, the Council has
discussed continuing crises in Syria and Ukraine,
growing terrorist threats in West Africa, and continued
friction in the Middle East. With your leadership, sir,
we travelled to Haiti to review the composition of the
United Nations Mission there and to assess the political
climate leading up to elections, as we just discussed
this morning. We also again used the Arria Formula
to inform ourselves informally about human rights
components of peacekeeping operations, and we thank
Lithuania for its initiative in that regard. Tomorrow, we
will finish the month with an important open debate
on protection of civilians. Looking ahead, we see a
number of issues that will certainly need our continued
attention.

First, on Ukraine, according to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the past two
weeks have been the deadliest period in Ukraine since
the 5 September agreement was signed in Minsk.
During this time, an average of 29 people have been
killed each day. More than 5,000 people have been
killed and almost 11,000 wounded since the conflict
began in April 2014. The conflict reached a new low
point with the attacks on the civilian population of
Mariupol, well away from the Minsk ceasefire lines.
We continue to believe that the only viable solution to
this situation is a political solution, not a military one.
The United States of America urges Russia to withdraw
its armaments and forces from eastern Ukraine and end
its support to the separatists.

On the situation in Yemen, we see that the Security
Council members clearly recognize the seriousness of
the crisis following the resignation of President Hadi
Mansour, the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. We
agree that an immediate ceasefire remains imperative
and that the Yemeni people deserve a clear path back
to a legitimate Yemeni Government, consistent with
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, the national
dialogue outcomes and the resolutions of this Council.
Any understanding reached on the ground should
include clearly defined timelines to complete Yemen's
draft constitution, to hold a referendum and to launch
national elections. We also continue to support the
mediation efforts of Special Adviser Jamal Benomar,
along with the group of 10 ambassadors in Sana'a.

We are pleased to see that some Security Council
members this month raised the findings of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
fact-finding mission reports on Syria, which clearly
point to the Al-Assad regime's using helicopters to
drop barrel bombs filled with chlorine on three villages
in northern Syria. These actions are clear violations of
resolution 2118 (2013), and the Council should certainly
condemn such actions.

Turning to Africa, we fully agree with the
Secretary-General's observation that the parties
in Mali need sufficient time to resolve contentious
political issues in order to ensure a truly inclusive,
viable and implementable agreement. That said, we do
need to start seeing progress on this agreement. We
strongly support the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the robust
implementation of its mandate to protect civilians
and United Nations personnel and facilities, as
demonstrated by the critical and important use of its
attack helicopters when its peacekeepers came under
hostile fire in Tabankort in northern Mali on 20 January.

On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/l
to show its concern over security in the eastern part of
the country due to the ongoing activities of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). As
the Council said in its statement, the surrenders so
far are not sufficient and do not come close to the full
demobilization of the FDLR that we have called for.
The FDLR must be held accountable, and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must continue to
apply robust military pressure on the FDLR elements
that refuse to demobilize.

In early January, the United Nations Office in
Burundi formally closed and transitioned to the United
Nations Electoral Observation Mission in Burundi
(MENUB) with a mandate to support the country's
electoral process ahead of the 2015 elections. MENUB
will play an important role in providing support to
the Government in the development of an inclusive
and transparent 2015 elections cycle. We urge the
Government of Burundi to engage productively with the
new Mission to ensure that all political and civil society
leaders play an active role in the electoral process and
that the people of Burundi enjoy a fully free and fair
electoral process.

This month, Special Representative Bernardino
Leon succeeded in bringing together key Libyan
political leaders for a United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue, holding two rounds in Geneva so
far, one on 14 and 15 January and another that began
26 January. We all welcomed these initiatives through a
press statement on 17 January. We especially commend
those who are engaging in the talks, which are aimed at
producing a unity Government, and we encourage other
Libyan leaders to participate in this effort as well.

For the last three consecutive wrap-up sessions, we
have ended our remarks on the issue of terrorism, and
this month, sadly, is no different. As the Council stated
in its 19 January presidential statement S/PRST/2015/4,
we all condemn the attacks perpetrated by Boko
Haram, particularly the suicide bombings in Maiduguri
and Potiskum involving the use of children as suicide
bombers. These events were simply heartbreaking, and
serve as another example of why combatting terrorism
continues to merit the Council's close and sharp
attention.

This Council also strongly condemned the series
of outrageous terrorist attacks in and around Paris on
7 and 8 January, including the barbaric and despicable
shooting at the offices of Charlie Hebdo magazine.
We have expressed it before, but it is worth repeating
that we extend our deepest sympathies to the people of
France, my country's first friends, and our condolences
to the family and friends of the 12 people murdered
at the offices of the magazine, the policewoman who
was killed the following day, and the four people who
were murdered in the attack on the kosher market. As
President Obama said in the wake of those attacks,
we must continue to work to see that all our countries
are working together seamlessly to prevent attacks
and to defeat the terrorist networks. The freedom of
expression is a key element in every democracy, and
senseless violence cannot change that.

To conclude, I want to renew a warm welcome
to the newly elected members. We already enjoy and
benefit from working with them. To our Chinese
colleagues who take over the presidency on Sunday,
we look forward to working with them cooperatively
in February and, of course, we wish them a happy new
year - the Year of the Sheep - on 19 February.

