Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I thank the
delegation of the Netherlands for organizing this timely
open debate on the collective action to improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

In the 70 years since the establishment of the
United Nations, the need for the Organization to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
has never been greater. In that regard, South Africa
reaffirms that United Nations peacekeeping remains a
flagship activity at the disposal of the United Nations to
contribute to the ideal of peace, security and stability.
Since the inception of the Organization, United Nations
peacekeeping has provided essential security and much-
needed hope to many people around the world, and the
necessary support to countries emerging from conflict.

Peacekeeping must be used to support political
processes and solutions to any conflict situation. South
Africa holds the view that we must undoubtedly aim
to strengthen the tools at our disposal in addressing
conflicts as they arise. We need to put emphasis on
the preventative approach, including mediation, in
addressing conflicts and their root causes so as to
prevent them. Our efforts must also focus on preventing
countries emerging from conflict from relapsing
back therein. Conflict prevention must therefore begin
with steps to prevent conflicts rather than to respond to
them after violence has already occurred.

Consequently, South Africa believes that global
peace and stability will remain elusive if we do not
address the nexus between security and development;
one cannot be achieved without the other. Sustainable
peace can be achieved only by building a just world in
a rules-based international order that is inclusive and
addresses the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
injustice and discrimination.

As the organ entrusted with the deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and in the
context of new emerging threats aimed at our troops and
United Nations personnel, the Security Council must
ensure that operations are fully resourced, entrusted
with the appropriate mandate to respond to the context-
specific environment in which they are deployed and
ensure that peacekeepers are adequately equipped to
protect themselves and defend their mandates.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
highlights the role of regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. My
delegation supports the implementation of the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed
between the Secretary-General and Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, which emphasizes
preventing and mediating conflict and sustaining peace;
responding to conflict; addressing root causes; and the
continuous review and enhancement of the partnership.

While the primary responsibility for international
peace and security lies with the Security Council, it
is often regional organizations, such as the African
Union, that deploy early in order to stabilize crisis
situations. South Africa wishes to reiterate that the use
of United Nations assessed contributions will provide
the most reliable, sustainable and predictable avenue of
support for Security Council-mandated Africa Union
peace operations.

South Africa supports recommendations for
more realistic, tailored and flexible mandates, which
will contribute towards more efficient and effective
peacekeeping operations, and, ultimately, to more
successful outcomes in conflict resolution. Mandates
should be drafted in consultation with those who are
responsible for their implementation - for example,
the troop- and police-contributing countries. The view
of troop- and police-contributing countries should be
heard, as they have a unique perspective being on the
ground and understanding the specific challenges their
peacekeepers face in a particular environment.

As peacekeeping continues to evolve, the United
Nations must also evolve. That is important in view of
the increasing asymmetrical threats and acts of terrorism
directed against peacekeeping missions and violence
towards innocent civilians. My delegation notes the
recommendations of the report on improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers, known as the Santos-
Cruz report, and further requests that the Secretary-
General consults troop- and police-contributing
countries before and during the implementation
of those recommendations. As the report states,
peacekeepers need adequate equipment, especially
modern technologies. We therefore believe that modern
technology can help minimize harm and the loss of
life of our troops deployed in fragile and dangerous
environments. The use of information, communication
and technologies, including night-flying fighting
capabilities, should be adopted in order to ensure that
peacekeepers are ready to counter any attack by armed
groups and able to fight in all conditions.

The protection of civilians must be at the heart
of peacekeeping missions. In some cases, that may
require the use of force, in accordance with the mission
mandate and in compliance with the applicable legal
framework. In that regard, the deployment of the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a credible example of what can be achieved to
address potential threats to a peace mission.

South Africa strongly condemns sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers. When
the very people charged with protecting civilians
become the violators, the trust established between
those communities and the United Nations missions is
betrayed and the credibility of the United Nations is
compromised. I wish to reconfirm that South Africa
is fully committed to a zero-tolerance policy against
sexual exploitation in peacekeeping operations. We
will continue to take strong, immediate and decisive
action against those found guilty of such abuses.

In conclusion, South Africa would like to pay
tribute to the men and women who continue to serve
in United Nations peace missions, including those who
paid the ultimate price in service of maintaining peace
in the challenging and often dangerous environments.
The number of peacekeepers who are lost to disease
during deployment remains too high, and it is in our
hands to adopt and implement policies to prevent that
from happening again.

The year 2018 has been declared the year of Nelson
Mandela in celebration of the centenary of his birth.
Former President Mandela dedicated his life to the
service of humankind and contributed immensely to
the promotion of a culture of peace throughout the
world. It is my Government's hope that he will be
remembered worldwide for his values and dedication
to the service of humankind in the fields of conflict
resolution, reconciliation and the promotion of peace,
which is the ultimate goal of all peacekeeping missions.

