Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 1718
(2006). The proclaimed test of a nuclear device by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea unquestionably
poses one of the gravest threats to international peace
and security that the Council has ever had to confront.
Today we are sending a strong and clear message to
North Korea and other would-be proliferators that there
will be serious repercussions in continuing to pursue
weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

Three months ago, the Council sent an
unequivocal and unambiguous message to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea: suspend your
ballistic missile programme, stop your procurement of
materials related to weapons of mass destruction and
verifiably dismantle your nuclear weapons and existing
nuclear programmes. Security Council resolution 1695
(2006) also demonstrated to North Korea that the best
way to improve the livelihood of its people and end its
international isolation was to stop playing games of
brinkmanship, comply with the demands of the
Security Council, return to the Six-Party Talks and
implement the terms of the Joint Statement from the
last round of those talks.

Sadly, the regime in Pyongyang chose a
disturbingly different path. It answered the Security
Council's demands with yet another direct threat to
international peace and security, proclaiming to the
world that it had conducted a successful nuclear-
weapons test. With its actions, the North Korean
regime has one again broken its word, provoked an
international crisis and denied its people the
opportunity for a better life.

Three months ago, the United States counselled
the members of this body to be prepared for further
06-57213
action in the event that North Korea failed to make the
strategic decision to give up its pursuit of weapons of
mass destruction and comply with resolution 1695
(2006). We are pleased that the Security Council is
united in condemning the actions by the regime in
Pyongyang and in taking clear, firm and punitive action
in passing this resolution, thus proving to North Korea
and others that the Security Council is prepared to meet
threats to international security with swift resolve.

This resolution demands action. Acting under
Chapter VII, it has imposed punitive sanctions on Kim
Jong Il's regime. It has broad provisions deciding that
Member States shall not engage in any trade with the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, not only for
items that could contribute to their nuclear weapons
and other WMD programmes but for high-end military
equipment as well. The United States will rely on a
number of control lists already in place as a baseline to
implement the decision by the Security Council to ban
trade with North Korea in WMD-related materials,
including lists published by the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime and the
Australia Group. To further that goal, this resolution
also prevents the travel of Government officials of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea who are
known to be involved in their WMD efforts.

This resolution also targets other illicit activities
of the regime in Pyongyang and includes a ban on trade
in luxury goods. It targets the way Kim Jong Il
finances his weapons of mass destruction programmes,
through criminal activities like money-laundering,
counterfeiting and the selling of narcotics. It imposes a
binding requirement on all Member States to take
action against those activities and freeze the assets of
entities and individuals of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea involved.

The resolution also provides for a regime of
inspection to ensure compliance with its provisions,
building on the existing work of the Proliferation
Security Initiative. The resolution imposes other strict
demands on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. It requires Pyongyang not to conduct any
further nuclear test or launch of a ballistic missile. It
demands that North Korea abandon all of its WMD
programmes, including nuclear, chemical and
biological weapon programmes, in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.
06-57213

It is our understanding that the full compliance of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with this
resolution and the successful resumption of the Six-
Party Talks would lead to the Council acting to lift the
measures imposed by the resolution. At the same time,
we need to be prepared if North Korea again decides to
ignore the Security Council and continue its pursuit of
weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver
them. That is why it is important that the United States
and other Member States have the opportunity at any
point in time to strengthen measures against North
Korea and return to the Council for further action.

As we pursue a diplomatic solution, we are also
reassuring our allies in the region that America remains
committed to their security. In response to North
Korea's provocation, we will seek to increase our
defence cooperation with our allies, including
cooperation on ballistic missile defence, to protect
against North Korean aggression, and cooperation to
prevent North Korea from importing or exporting
nuclear or other missile technologies.

Our goals remain clear: peace and security in
North-East Asia and a nuclear-free Korean peninsula.
We will support our allies in the region, we will work
with the Security Council and, together, we will ensure
that North Korea faces serious consequences if it
continues down its current path.

Let me end with a final point. This resolution
provides a carve-out for humanitarian relief efforts in
North Korea. The reason is clear: the concern of the
Security Council is with the regime in Pyongyang, not
the starving and suffering people of North Korea. We
hope that North Korea implements and complies fully
with the provisions of this resolution, in the hope that
its people can have a brighter future.

