Mr. Ging: Today I will provide the Council with
an update on behalf of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock.

I would like to start with the alarming developments
in southern Syria where Violence has escalated sharply
last week and heavy artillery and aerial shelling is under
way. To date, an estimated 45,000 to 50,000 people
have been displaced owing to this fighting, most from
eastern Dar'a governorate to areas near the Jordanian
border. A number of villages either impacted or fearful
of the proximity of the fighting have been almost totally
abandoned. According to the World Food Programme,
"the number of displaced people could nearly double
if violence continues to escalate". Dozens of civilians
have reportedly been killed, including children, and
many more have been injured.

Attacks have also hit civilian infrastructure causing
widespread damage, including an air strike yesterday
that rendered a hospital supported by Me'decins
Sans Frontieres (MSF) in Al-Hirak city inoperable.
According to MSF, that hospital supported 90,000
people and provided more than 15,700 emergency
room consultations in the past year alone. Another
hospital in eastern Ghariyeh had to suspend operations
owing to insecurity. In eastern Maliha, the local
health centre and local council building were also both
rendered inoperable.

This morning media reports announced that air
strikes struck yet another health facility - this time
in the town of Jizeh, east of Dar'a city. In addition,
Naseeb hospital declared the suspension of its services
and the Dar'a Education Directorate announced the
adjournment of all classes and examinations. Some
100,000 people in Dar'a city and surrounding villages
have been impacted by a complete electricity blackout,
which occurred yesterday when Government forces
launched an assault on the divided southern city.

Despite the hostilities, the United Nations and
its partners continue to provide food, health care,
nutrition, education and core relief items to more
than 400,000 people in need in southern Syria from
across the border in Jordan. Humanitarian partners
supporting cross-border operations have been actively
planning for such an escalation since the first quarter
of the year and supplies are prepositioned in Dar'a and
Quneitra governorates. Any further escalation will
significantly increase the number of displacements
and jeopardize the United Nations capacity to conduct
further humanitarian operations. Today, the United
Nations cross-border convoy, for example, had to be
postponed owing to the bombardments that took place
within kilometres of the Jordanian border. I recall in
that regard the Secretary-General's own statement last
week, underscoring "the fragile situation of civilians
in southern Syria" and calling "for an immediate end
to the current military escalation". I also call on all
stakeholders to ensure that cross-border humanitarian
deliveries continue in a sustained, safe and unimpeded
manner to reach all those in need, including the newly
displaced people.

In north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib, the
humanitarian situation is increasingly dire. This is
linked to the massive new displacements since late
last year. More than half a million people have been
displaced to and within Idlib in these past six months,
whether from eastern Ghouta, northern rural Homs,
Yarmouk or other parts of Idlib itself. There is a
growing concern around military escalation with 60
people reportedly killed by air strikes between 7 and
10 June alone, and armed clashes in the vicinity of
the two most recently besieged communities in Syria,
namely, Fo'ah and Kefraya. Moreover, improvised
explosives have been detonating regularly throughout
the area, with over 20 incidents reported in May and two
recent incidents in Idlib city itself on 21 June, killing
eight people and wounding another 40. In addition, a
number of abductions for ransom of medical and health
professionals was reported in June, which led local
authorities to suspend non-emergency activities for
several days.

In Raqqa city, the United Nations Department
of Safety and Security and the United Nations Mine
Action Service conducted an assessment mission on
13 and 14 June. While the United Nations remains
concerned that contamination of explosive hazards
makes the city unsafe for returns, an estimated 138,000
people have already returned to the city since the
withdrawal of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
October 2017. Most returnees have settled in areas with
comparatively less infrastructure and less explosive
hazard contamination. There has been a reduction in the
average number of blast-related casualties reported by
health facilities from over 170 per month in November
and December 2017, to an estimated 43 in April. That is
the most recent data that we have.

Access to basic services within Raqqa city
continues to gradually improve with hospitals
reopening and electricity re-established in rural areas
to the north of the city, as well as other infrastructure
sites. The rehabilitation of the water network within
Raqqa city continues at too slow a pace. Only 50 per
cent of the city is reportedly receiving water through
the network, and it is often in insufficient quantities. In
neighbourhoods that do have access, the water network
supply is often intermittent with concerns about poor
water quality contributing to health risks. The United
Nations and its implementing partners continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to those in Raqqa city
and throughout Raqqa governorate, reaching nearly
300,000 people every month.

Further to the west, 136,000 individuals are
estimated to remain in Afrin district, including
over 40,000 people in Afrin city. Another 134,000
individuals from Afrin district remain displaced in
the Tell Rifaat subdistrict, Nubul and Zahra towns and
the surrounding communities. Some limited return
movements to Afrin district took place in May when
some 3,000 to 5,000 individuals reportedly returned to
that district.

The humanitarian access situation in Afrin district
continues to improve, and while Turkey and the Turkish
authorities provide the majority of the response in
those areas, the United Nations - through its cross-
border humanitarian partners * is also contributing to
life-saving services and activities in the district. Based
on a recent multisectoral rapid assessment conducted
by humanitarian partners in May, needs are considered
to remain very high, with most health facilities in rural
areas closed, many service providers having fled the
area and a large proportion of schools, markets and
bakeries not yet functional, owing again to the presence
of explosive remnants of war and the continued absence
of staff, workers and tradespeople.

In Tell Rifaat and the surrounding areas, the United
Nations continues to provide humanitarian assistance to
the displaced populations mainly from its warehouses
in Aleppo. However, additional assistance and services
are required, particularly for the people in the rural
areas and the internally displaced persons sites.

In eastern Ghouta, close to 16,000 people are
reported to have moved back as of early June. Estimates
indicate that there are currently 125,000 people living
inside the enclave. The United Nations has largely
been unable to access eastern Ghouta since the change
in control in March. A Visit to Saqba and Kafr Batna
took place on 14 May, but a full assessment of needs
is yet to be authorized by the Government of Syria.
Assistance is being provided through the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent (SARC) and other local partners.
A SARC convoy delivered United Nations assistance
including, wheat flour for 60,000 people and food for
45,000 people, in Douma on 10 June. United Nations
personnel were not permitted to accompany the convoy
or conduct a needs assessment, despite the convoy being
implemented under the agreed bimonthly inter-agency
convoy plan. Moreover, two inter-agency convoys were
deployed in May, namely, to the hard-to-reach locations
of Talbiseh, in northern rural Horns, and Tlul Elhomor,
in southern Hamah. As was the case for the convoy to
Douma, United Nations personnel were not permitted
to participate in the two convoys. The Syrian Arab Red
Crescent delivered the United Nations multisectoral
assistance for 92,750 people in Talbiseh, as well as
food assistance for 12,000 in nearby Al-Jabriya village.
Yesterday multisectoral assistance was delivered to
107,500 people in Al-Rastan, in northern rural Homs.
Initially United Nations personnel were not authorized
to accompany that convoy. However, following intense
negotiations, including with the help of the Russian
Federation, the Syrian authorities amended their
decision to allow a United Nations presence, as well as
the delivery of all medical and health items.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has
documented reports of nearly 700 attacks on health
facilities in Syria since early 2014, with 112 confirmed
attacks already this year. We are now at par with the
number of attacks registered for all of last year. That
is more than 16 per month 4 one attack every other
day, on average. Syria now accounts for nearly 70 per
cent of all reported attacks on health-care facilities
documented by the World Health Organization
worldwide. According to WHO, it is "the deadliest
place in the world for health workers". Let me highlight
our efforts to prevent such attacks from occurring.

Since March, the United Nations has deconflicted
more than 500 humanitarian premises and sites with
the Russian Federation, the United States-led coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and
Turkey. Those sites were deconflicted in an effort
to prevent them from being targeted by mistake or
incidentally. Yet four ofthose deconflicted sites - all of
them health facilities - were hit, in eastern Ghouta and
northern rural Horns on 20 March, 6 April and 29 April.
That is four too many. We must all ensure that none of
our deconflicted sites is hit or damaged unlawfully.

Late last year, the Council requested the Secretary-
General to conduct a written review of United Nations
humanitarian cross-border operations. A report
(S/2018/617) was issued this past week. I will not go
through all of its details and findings, but will make a
few points on the impact of our cross-border operations
on the people in need in Syria.

As the Council knows, nearly 5 million people are
in need in areas that are more accessible via cross-
border operations than from within Syria. Of those,
2.67 million people are in areas solely accessible via
cross-border operations. Those are people without
access to assistance from within Syria. From July
2014 to April of this year, a net total of 3.7 million
people received food assistance, many of them on a
monthly basis; 4.7 million people received sanitation
and hygiene assistance; education supplies were
delivered to 946,000 people; and nutrition assistance
was provided to 611,000 people. Some 21.1 million
medical treatments and procedures were conducted in
82 hospitals and 70 mobile clinics, which are operational
and supported by medical supplies provided by the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners through
cross-border operations.

The year 2018 has seen a rapid evolution of the
conflict, with shifts in control of territory, mass
movements of people and nearly an additional 1 million
people displaced. While geographical space for
operations has shrunk as areas in the south-east of Idlib
have transitioned in control, the size of the population
being supported by United Nations cross-border
operations has actually increased and the needs of
people have become even more acute. For example, in
2014, when resolution 2165 (2014) was adopted, Idlib's
population was estimated at 1.9 million. Today it stands
at 2.5 million, with half of that number representing
displaced people. Resolution 2165 (2014) was adopted
out of a dire humanitarian need and imperative, with
millions of people in need of assistance who were
inaccessible from within Syria. As long as people
remain inaccessible from within Syria, which remains
the case today, cross-border humanitarian deliveries
continue to be the indispensable lifeline for those
millions of Syrians dependent on humanitarian
assistance to survive.

