Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): Since this
Council last discussed Afghanistan in October, the
Taliban have advanced north of Kabul and into central
Afghanistan in an effort to push aside their rivals, General
Dostum and Commander Massoud. These military moves
towards the northern border and the Taliban's extremely
conservative social policies greatly alarmed Afghanistan's
neighbours. Observers vary on whether the Taliban can
prevail over Dostum and Massoud and succeed in taking
over the north, but this remains a possibility.
The United States Government has repeatedly urged
an end to the fighting and urged a practical dialogue in
the spirit of compromise. We have also encouraged others
to make this key point, in particular to the Taliban:
stability cannot be achieved if one group tries to rule all
Afghanistan on its own. All groups must work towards a
broadly representative government acceptable to all
Afghans.

Let me take this occasion to respond to
disinformation that the United States has given support to
the Taliban. We do not support the Taliban or any other
group. But neither do we put blame on the Taliban for the
ills of Afghanistan, for which all parties are responsible.
We have repeatedly and clearly conveyed to parties our
deep concerns on terrorist/militant training camps, on
narcotics production and trafficking and on human rights,
particularly the rights of women and girls. We have
reminded the Taliban that it is their responsibility to
reassure their neighbours that they have no intention of

 

challenging their territorial integrity or exporting Taliban
ideology.

In our View, this Council should remain concerned
about the unrelenting flow of weapons and equipment to the
warring parties by outside powers, despite the disclaimers
we hear from all. So to all those engaged in such resupply,
the members of this Council should have only this to say:
"You are undermining the cause of peace in Afghanistan
and perpetuating the conflict. And, ironically, your efforts
are unlikely to change the outcome."

The Head of United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan, Mr. Norbert Holl, has worked tirelessly to
persuade the warring groups to sit down together and
discuss the parameters of a peace. The United States
Government commends the enormous efforts and dedication
of Mr. H011 and his staff in what must seem to be a
thankless and unproductive task. We stand fully behind the
United Nations Special Mission. We believe it could
succeed in launching a true political process if the Afghan
groups were willing to negotiate in good faith.

Many Afghans openly express their hopes and
aspirations for their country. They long for peace and
security and a government that will restore the economy,
the infrastructure and their livelihoods. Much of the
populace has accepted Taliban rule - not, I would say,
because they want a severe judicial regime or social and
religious restrictions imposed on all, but because they are
desperate for peace and a semblance of normal life. The
Taliban have brought a modicum of peace to much of
Afghanistan, but at a real price.

In our view, the Afghan people should not be faced
with a stark choice between security with political
constraints and social intolerance, and no security at all.
The voices of those who want all their fellow Afghans to
have a role in selecting their leaders and in determining the
social practices for their communities deserve to be heard.
The United Nations and our individual Governments should
do all we can to ensure that this silent majority has a voice.

