Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is very grateful to the Under-
Secretary-General and to the Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans
Corell, for his briefing just now, which has provided us
with some very helpful information on United Nations
activities in combating international terrorism.

Acts of terrorism represent an enormous threat to
international peace and security. That threat is looming
even larger in View of terrorism's increasingly
transborder nature and its growing use of high-
technology methods. The Chinese delegation has
always opposed and condemned terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, by any state, organization,
group or individual, irrespective of motive.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
progress that the United Nations has made in the last
10 years in promoting international cooperation and
elaborating legal instruments in the fight against
terrorism. Resolution 1269 (1999), adopted last year,
has already become a very important guideline for the
Security Council in addressing the question of
international terrorism.

On the other hand, we also believe that in our
approach to individual terrorist activities, the Security
Council should endeavour to avoid or minimize resort
to sanctions, because sometimes sanctions, while
failing to satisfactorily resolve the problem, can bring
about very serious humanitarian consequences.

S/PV.4242

 

Since 1994, when the General Assembly adopted
the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism, anti-terrorist legislation in the United
Nations system has registered considerable progress. In
1996, the General Assembly adopted the Declaration to
Supplement the 1994 Declaration and established the
Ad Hoc Committee to strengthen legal measures to
combat terrorism. In the four years since then, the
Committee's efforts have led to the adoption of the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and
we have reached consensus on most of the text of the
draft international convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism. This year the Ad Hoc
Committee began work on formulating a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
All of these efforts will contribute to the further
implementation and consolidation of the existing anti-
terrorist legal system.

China has already acceded to all international
anti-terrorism Conventions that are in force.

Cooperation between the Chinese Government
and other States to combat terrorism has been
increasing day by day. In July this year China, together
with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation
and Tajikistan, issued the Dushanbe Declaration within
the framework of the Shanghai Five, in which those
countries reaffirmed their determination to jointly
combat acts of terrorism, which constitute a major
threat to regional security, stability and development.
They also committed themselves never to allow their
territories to be used for activities aimed at harming
State sovereignty, security and social order in any of
the five countries. We believe that this regional
mechanism of international cooperation will play a
very positive role in combating international terrorism.

