Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting
and the complementary presentations of our
briefers, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Mr. Chergui and
Ambassador Lauber.

Peru takes note of the recent developments with
regard to preparations for general elections in Burundi,
which include the adoption of an electoral code and
President Nkurunziza's important announcement
that he will not stand for election. We hope that those
actions will be followed by others that can ensure an
inclusive, credible and transparent process, in line with
the Kayanza road map, and that it will translate into an
effective consolidation of the rule of law and democratic
institutions in the country. It will be particularly
important to promote and guarantee the free and full
participation of all forces in Burundi's political life.
The success of those efforts will depend to a great
extent on the support of the international community
and especially on follow-up and support from the
African Union and the East African Community, which
have a central responsibility in these processes. We also
consider it essential to simultaneously and urgently
intensify efforts to revitalize the inter-Burundian
dialogue as an ideal platform for making political
commitments that will help advance sustainable peace.

Additionally, in keeping with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, we stress the importance
of the national reconciliation process, particularly the
work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as
the body responsible for laying the foundations that
will enable the Burundian people to once again trust
their institutions. It will also be critical to avoid new
escalations of cross-border violence that jeopardize the
stability and security of the country and the region, and
we welcome the progress made at the community level
in conflict resolution, particularly the participation as
mediators of women's groups, who, together with young
people, are being called on to participate more actively
in the country's political processes.

Peru notes with concern the continuing reports of
human rights violations in Burundi and stresses how
important it is that such reports are duly investigated
and those responsible prosecuted and punished. We
also urge the Government of Burundi to strengthen its
cooperation with the various United Nations human
rights protection mechanisms and with independent
civil-society organizations.
We also emphasize how urgent it is to address the
humanitarian situation at the same time, particularly
where the thousands of refugees and internally
displaced persons are concerned. That means ensuring
the availability of financial resources and above all the
political will needed to enable them to return safely
and with dignity, with a view to their reintegration into
the country under internationally accepted parameters.
We emphasize the importance of implementing the
2019-2020 Burundi regional refugee response plan and
ensuring the valuable support of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

The implementation of Burundi's national
development plan for the period from 2018 to 2027 and
the 2019-2023 United Nations Development Assistance
Framework are also critical as relevant instruments that
could contribute to Burundi's political stability and
socioeconomic development of Burundi in the medium-
and long-term.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Peru's commitment
to achieving sustainable peace in Burundi, thereby
contributing to regional stability and supporting the
important work of Special Envoy Michel Kafando
towards our shared objective.

