Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would first like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, for his update on recent developments in the
Middle East. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Ms. Gabriela Shalev, and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour,
for their presence and contribution to our debate.

The Security Council is meeting at a time when
new risks are emerging in the Middle East. These risks
can potentially jeopardize the efforts of the various
players focusing on enhancing the peace processes in
the region. However, as has been said so many times
before, while negotiation processes are crucial, lasting
peace in the Middle East is urgently needed.

Therefore, at the outset, Bosnia and Herzegovina
calls for the urgent resumption of negotiations that will
lead, within an agreed time frame, to a two-State
solution, with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security.

In the wake of the first anniversary of military
operations in the Gaza Strip, allow me to emphasize
our grave concerns regarding the living conditions in
that area. It is discouraging that, despite the
international community's calls, no progress has been
made in Gaza in the past year.

Bosnia and Herzegovina urges that all possible
steps be taken to ease restrictions of movement in
Gaza. We call for the further sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for access to
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza. We believe in the necessity of fully
implementing the Agreement on Movement and
Access. Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns all
violations of international humanitarian law and
emphasizes that the Israeli and Palestinian civilian
populations must be protected.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned over
the decision on the new settlement activities of Israel
in occupied East Jerusalem. Settlements on occupied
land are illegal under international law. The demolition
of homes and expulsions in East Jerusalem represent a
grave obstacle to the peace process. Therefore, we join
the numerous calls of the international community for
Israel's settlement activities to be brought to an
immediate halt. We fully support United Nations
activities aimed at diffusing the tensions and call on all
sides to show restraint.

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that securing
lasting peace and stability in the Middle East region is
possible only through diplomatic efforts and full
commitment to the peace process. Hence, we urge that
both the Israelis and the Palestinians immediately start
unconditionally to implement their obligations,
stipulated by the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, including land for peace, the
Road Map and the agreements previously reached by
the parties, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative. In that
context, we would also like to commend the efforts of
the Quartet, the mediation efforts of Egypt and the
Arab League, as well as other international factors
seeking to contribute to the peace process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that the
regional context is of great importance. A
comprehensive peace in the Middle East must include a
settlement between Israel and Syria and Israel and
Lebanon.

The political progress made in Lebanon since the
new Government was formed late last year is
commendable. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcome the
efforts of the Lebanese Government in the field of
political, social and economic development.

Regarding the Syrian track, we welcome the
willingness demonstrated by Israel and Syria to
advance the peace process. As a part of our strong
commitment to comprehensive regional peace and
stability, we fully support all efforts aimed at
reactivation of the talks between the two countries.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates
the urgency with which Israelis and Palestinians must
resume the peace negotiations. Such negotiations are of
utmost significance for progress towards a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

