Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports today's resolution 2244
(2015), which targets many of the most serious causes
of instability and insecurity in Somalia and mandates
the United Nations Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea to continue its important work. The resolution
reflects the Security Council's understanding that the
international response to the situation in the Horn of
Africa must be comprehensive in order to be effective.

As was highlighted during the Secretary-General's
high-level meeting on Somalia during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventieth
session, Somalia's trajectory has turned from State
failure towards State-building. That is why the United
States strongly supported language in this resolution
that underscores the importance of stronger and more
transparent legal frameworks and of ensuring regional
administrations' participation as Somalia continues to
make strides in its State-building process this year.

The United States continues to support the Security
Council's commitment to eliminating all sources of
funding for Al-Shabaab, including by reauthorizing
the maritime interdiction of Somali charcoal exports
in order to enforce the Council's ban on such exports.
Somalia is clearly a country blessed with rich natural
resources, but without stronger legal frameworks and
resource-sharing agreements, those potential sources of
wealth for all Somalis risk becoming drivers of conflict.
We therefore welcome the resolution's attention to those
ongoing challenges to governance, and the importance
that the Federal Government of Somalia has placed on
addressing such issues expeditiously.

The Federal Government of Somalia has sought
greater international recognition and support for
Somalia's challenges related to the extensive illegal
fishing occurring in waters where it has jurisdiction.
In recognition of that, today the Security Council
acknowledges its concerns about the matter and
encourages the Federal Government of Somalia,
with the support of the international community, to
undertake efforts to better address this practice.

By supporting full implementation of the measures
reflected in today's resolution, Member States will
help to promote the long-term peace and stability of
the wider region. Additionally, and importantly, we
call on all countries to cooperate with the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea so that this vital body
can carry out its mandate effectively. We also call on
Eritrea to respond to the Monitoring Group's requests
for information and permit the Group to travel to
Eritrea. Eritrea's refusal to engage constructively with
the Monitoring Group must change before we can take
seriously Eritrean calls for these sanctions to be lifted.

Somalis are laying the foundation for a more
stable, representative and inclusive Government. The
international community and the Security Council
must remain engaged in order to ensure that Somalia
and the region realize a more peaceful future, and we
thank Council members for joining with us in sending
that strong message today.

