At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of May and to wish you and your delegation every success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period from 16 October 2019 through 15 April 2020 (S/2020/345, annex). First, let me address the most urgent issue. The first cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Bosnia and Herzegovina were confirmed at the beginning of March. Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities responded very swiftly. Various urgent and necessary measures have been put in place to contain the spread of the virus, including declaring a state of emergency and setting mandatory quarantines. All resources at our disposal have been mobilized. Our hospitals and medical and other relevant institutions had to adapt overnight to these new and unforeseen circumstances. Doctors, nurses, first responders and many others are rising to the challenge, risking their lives in fighting this ferocious and highly contagious disease. We take this opportunity to thank all of them for their indispensable efforts and dedication. We would also like to thank our international partners for the valuable assistance and support that has been rendered in these difficult times for all humankind. In addition to its impact on our health system, the pandemic has hit our vulnerable economy very hard. Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities have introduced some necessary measures to mitigate those negative effects. Some urgent financial packages have been created in order to help those suffering the most. These efforts will take time, and significant resources will be necessary to recover from the unprecedented situation caused by the virus, which has claimed so many human lives worldwide. Lastly, we need the assistance of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and other international financial institutions to overcome the negative economic and social effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that connection, the role of the United Nations, including through its country team, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Health Organization, and UNICEF, will be indispensable. Let me now turn to some points relating to the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina prior to the COVID-19 outbreak. The new Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina was appointed by the Parliamentary Assembly in December. The Council of Ministers has continued to cooperate with the entity Governments on issues related to European integration and on reform processes to stabilize the economy, increase the effectiveness of public administration and attract domestic and foreign investments in order to enable job creation. In November, the Government adopted a national reform plan that defines the country's future relations with the Atlantic alliance, a document that was subsequently submitted to NATO in order to implement the 2016 review. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are fully committed to overcoming the remaining challenges and implementing the necessary reforms for full-fledged integration into the European Union (EU). In that regard, we are grateful to the EU for actively supporting my country's European path. We urge the EU and its member States to maintain and intensify that support. For our part, we have redoubled our efforts in a number of relevant areas, including the implementation of the reform agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a matter of priority. We affirm our unflagging determination to strengthen the rule of law and good governance in order to fulfil the EU requirements for obtaining candidacy status. Most importantly, on 28 April the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina took a decisive step towards obtaining candidacy status and beginning membership negotiations with the European Union by adopting a plan for implementing the European Commission's 2019 recommendations. The fostering of friendly and constructive cooperation among the countries of the region on issues of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia and Herzegovina's foreign policy. The cooperation of Western Balkan States within the framework of the Berlin process remains a key driver of their integration into the European Union and of regional stability. Bosnia and Herzegovina plays an active role in regional initiatives through the South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western Balkans Fund and the Central European Initiative, tonamea few. The construction of the Sarajevo-Belgrade highway is a good example of cooperation among three partner countries - Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina. During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international obligations with regard to countering terrorism and violent extremism. With the extensive support of the EU, Bosnia and Herzegovina took significant steps to strengthen the rule of law and fight against organized crime. EU experts have been working together with Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to implement the Action Plan on Combating Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the period 2018-2022. The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to prosecute individuals who fight for terrorist organizations, as well as those who facilitate the recruitment of terrorist fighters. With regard to prosecuting war crimes in domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that, as a complex and multinational State, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that fighting impunity is vital. With regard to socioeconomic development, Bosnia and Herzegovina is continuing to develop a critical planning, monitoring and evaluation process that is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that connection, let me express our gratitude to the United Nations country team in Bosnia and Herzegovina for its outstanding contributions and tireless efforts to assist our institutions in the implementation of a development agenda. I would like to draw the Council's attention to one of the main concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities - the issue of illegal migrants. The international migrant crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge to the States of the region and their economies. In the past year, my country has registered a significant increase of refugees and migrants on its territory, most of whom crossed the border illegally. Our institutions do not have the capacity to implement the necessary measures to curb the migrant crisis in accordance with the highest European and international standards. Bearing in mind that lack of capacity and the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a final destination for migrants, our Government is in need of stronger international support, especially from the European Union, which is often the migrants' final destination. We are grateful to the European Commission for its financial support to bolster our authorities' migration and border-management capabilities, but for an effective response, our institutions need much more support from the European Union and United Nations agencies. In these trying times, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute actively to international peace and security by deploying its military and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions. We currently have approximately 45 people serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide. Bosnia and Herzegovina has endorsed the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire of all conflicts worldwide in order to silence the guns, stop violence and raise voices for peace. At this very challenging time, there is nothing more important than an immediate ceasefire in all corners of the globe to reinforce diplomatic action, help create conditions for the delivery of life-saving aid and bring hope to some of the places that are most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina stands ready to cooperate with United Nations Member States and the broader United Nations family on this most critical and pressing issue that the world is facing today. Finally, we would like to express the readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their work to secure a better and more prosperous future for its citizens, as well as my country's gratitude to its international partners for supporting us on that path.
