Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
have paid very careful attention to the troika statement
and the United Kingdom, I think, can say that it agrees
with everything in it, so I will not repeat what is in the
statement.

I would like to draw attention also to a statement
made by the European Union (EU) yesterday, which was
issued in Brussels and which is available from the EU
office in New York. It comes down very much in the
same area: Mr. Savimbi bears the prime responsibility for
the war in Angola and the Security Council now has to
take that into account. Both the troika statement and the
EU statement make it very clear that the Government of
Angola itself has some responsibilities and some things it
needs to do - perhaps some things it needs to do better.

There is very broad international agreement, as
shown by the EU and troika statements, that, first of all,
the Lusaka Protocol remains the foundation for a political
solution in Angola - that is something which the
Government of Angola fully agrees with - and that
Savimbi's defiance of that Protocol and of the resolutions
of this Council are the prime cause of the continuing
conflict and the human catastrophe that has resulted from
it.

It is quite clear to all of us that the Government of
Angola and UNITA need to enter into a dialogue to
create a political solution, but Jonas Savimbi has
abrogated any right to be part of that solution. He has let
Angola down too often; his word is worthless. Both the
troika and the EU statements make clear that progress can
be made towards a political solution only with those
members of UNIT A who are prepared to work genuinely
for national reconciliation. Clearly, it is time for decisions
to be taken that put the Angolan people first and not last
in this conflict.

 

On the humanitarian side, we must not lose sight of
the need for human rights to be observed by all
protagonists and the United Nations has a primary role in
assisting the Government of Angola to promote and respect
human rights. I hope that Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast can confirm to us that there are some human
rights observers remaining in Angola and I would be
interested to know what their status is pending the
establishment of the United Nations Office in Angola.

On the humanitarian front, there is already a dire
humanitarian situation and we need access for humanitarian
personnel and for the delivery of emergency assistance in
areas under their control. I should be grateful to know from
the Secretariat what access the humanitarian agencies still
have to Angolan territory.

As for sanctions, I think we all applaud what
Ambassador Fowler is doing and we are very grateful for
his briefing this morning, but we particularly look forward
to the expert panel's report, which we hope will contain
firm recommendations to make sanctions against UNITA
bite. The United Kingdom would want the international
community to be in a position to name and shame
individuals, companies and, if necessary, Governments
involved in sanctions-busting. The United Kingdom is
beginning to get more active on this front nationally, as Mr.
Peter Hain, our Minister of State, has just made clear in a
parliamentary statement today. I shall bring that statement
to the attention of the sanctions Committee Chairman.

We welcome the Secretary-General's intention to get
the adoption of a United Nations Office in Angola under
Security Council resolution 1268 (1999) implemented. It is
disappointing that there has been no progress on that in the
past three months. We warmly hope that the Government
of Angola and the Secretariat will soon reach a conclusion
on that.

We welcome the appointment of Ambassador Gambari
to focus on Angola. We hope that he will bring greater
vigour, commitment and cohesion to the international effort,
which it now badly needs. We need some progress now on
the political front, on the humanitarian front and on the
sanctions front to show that the continuation of the civil
war is absolutely pointless.

We thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
bringing this to the Security Council in open meeting, and
we hope that the publicity that this meeting will give to this
question will help us move forward in practice.

