Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Equatorial Guinea for its initiative in convening
this open debate under the rotating presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Oyono Esono Angue, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea,
to New York and would like to thank him for presiding
over this meeting. I also thank Mr. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and Mrs. Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC), for their briefings.

Oceans are a fount ofthe resources on which we rely
for our survival and development. They are instrumental
to international peace and security, interconnectivity
and free trade. Pirate attacks and armed robbery at
sea still occur frequently. Maritime trafficking in
arms, drugs and persons continues unabated. Illegal
funds flow into terrorist organizations, extremist
forces and criminal groups, exacerbating national and
regional instability and threatening international peace
and security.

In recent years, pirate attacks in the Gulf of Aden
have significantly decreased thanks to the concerted
efforts of the international community. However, the
situation of maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, off
the west coast of Africa, remains grim and has severely
affected the economic and social development of coastal
States in Africa. China always actively supports mutual,
pragmatic and win-win maritime security cooperation
and abides by the new common, comprehensive,
integrated and sustainable maritime security strategy.
We support the countries concerned in their efforts to
enhance coordination, formulate common strategies
and mechanisms, and combat transnational organized
crime at sea, thereby promoting development and
prosperity in the coastal States and regions. 1 would
like to highlight the following points.

First, we should assist the capacity-building efforts
of coastal States, while respecting their sovereignty.
That involves supporting coastal States in improving
their domestic legislation and in establishing
and strengthening maritime security forces. The
international community should take an active part
in the construction, operation and maintenance of the
ports and other facilities of the coastal States so that
they can provide better service to ships in the areas
of docking, supplies and maintenance and be better
equipped to provide adequate logistical support. It is
also necessary to help coastal States and areas, as well
as countries of the region, to improve their operational
capacity in joint law enforcement and monitoring.

Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
should have a greater role and a long-term mechanism
should be put in place at the regional level. China
welcomes the adoption of the Charter on Maritime
Security and Safety and Development in Africa at the
African Union (AU) Extraordinary Summit of Heads
of State and Government on Maritime Security and
Safety and Development in Africa, which guides the
way forward for African countries to jointly address
maritime security issues and develop the marine
economy. We call on the international community to
support regional and subregional organizations such
as the AU, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the GGC in their efforts to fully implement
the comprehensive anti-piracy strategy. We support the
capacity-building of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, the Regional Maritime
Security Centre for West Africa and the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf
of Guinea through increased funding and technological
input and enhanced information-sharing so that the
regional mechanisms can operate fully and effectively
over the long term.

Thirdly, it is necessary to mobilize resources to
strengthen international cooperation. The relevant
United Nations agencies, including the International
Maritime Organization, and INTERPOL among others,
should provide more assistance to coastal States.
Drawing on past successes and on the basis of full
consultation with the coastal States, the international
community should strengthen joint law enforcement,
increase the transfer of pirates and others suspected
of transnational organized crime at sea, step up the
exchange of evidence and information and facilitate the
investigation, prosecution and trial of relevant cases
with all the necessary assistance.

Fourthly, I would like to point out the importance
of increasing development assistance to coastal States.
Development is the overarching key to solving all
problems. The international community should look
at the economic and social development plans of those
countries and increase assistance to help them root
out the causes of poverty and social injustice, speed
up economic and social development and increase
the youth employment rate and counter-terrorism
cooperation so as to effectively combat transnational
organized crime at sea.

China has always been good friend, partner
and brother of African States and has been by their
side through thick and thin. We adhere to the policy
concept of sincerity, practical results, affinity and good
faith towards Africa, uphold the values of friendship,
justice and shared interests and actively assist Africa
in its security capacity-building. In accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
China has carried out escort operations in Somalia's
coastal waters, actively participated in international
cooperation against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and
provided assistance to coastal States in strengthening
infrastructure and other capacity-building.

China will continue to implement the Beijing action
plan adopted at the Summit of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation in September last year so as to
strengthen our exchange and cooperation with African
ports and support African countries in promoting port
informatization. We will scale up defence and security
assistance in Africa and strengthen results-based
cooperation in the areas of social governance, counter-
terrorism and counter-piracy. The China-Africa peace
and security cooperation fund will be put in place to
support Africa's efforts in strengthening maritime law
enforcement capacity-building. China stands ready
to continue its efforts to support African countries in
achieving lasting peace and common prosperity.
