Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We offer our thanks
first to you, Madam President, and to Cote d'Ivoire for
convening today's important debate, and to our briefers
for giving us their time and their insights.

The deteriorating situation in West Africa is
a source of major concern, as we have heard from
everyone in the Council today. That was underlined
again by this past week's terrorist attack in western
Niger, in which many Nigerien soldiers lost their lives.
Our condolences go to the families of those troops
and of all those civilians, national forces and United
Nations peacekeepers who have suffered at the hands
of violent extremists in West Africa

As we have heard, the Organization also has a vital
role to play in supporting national and regional efforts
to address the drivers of violence. But that instability
cannot be solved by the United Nations alone, nor can
it be solved through purely military or counterterrorist
initiatives. We need to address the underlying drivers
of the conflict. Strengthening stability and security
across West Africa requires a comprehensive approach
to the interconnected drivers. In too many parts of the
region, corruption, failure to provide basic services
and the lack of economic prospects for young people
combine to provide fertile grounds for extremist
groups. The impacts of climate change cause shocks
and stresses that exacerbate the risks of intercommunal
violence, including by contributing to competition over
scarce resources, and serious organized crime networks

often operating across national boundaries exacerbate
instability and prey on local communities in the absence
of State authority.

Tackling those challenges requires a comprehensive
approach across all three pillars of the United Nations
system - peace and security, development and human
rights - and it requires coordinated work on the part of
all partners. We recognize the important role ofregional
efforts to tackle terrorist groups, including through
the task force deployed to help the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF), just as we commend the efforts of
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.

For our part, the United Kingdom is set to
deploy 250 personnel to Mali in 2020 in order to
provide vital long-range reconnaissance capabilities
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We have contributed
over $6.6 million in bilateral funding to support the
operationalization of the MNJTF and $2.4 million
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We are working closely
with West African partners to support nationally and
locally led conflict prevention efforts to prevent both
extremism and intercommunal violence, for example,
in northern Nigeria. United Kingdom development
funding, worth nearly $50 million over five years, is
currently supporting initiatives to increase economic
opportunities for marginalized youth. In Borno state,
we are providing a further $28 million in funding for
projects to reduce young people's vulnerability to
recruitment by violent extremist groups.

However, while individual initiatives like this
matter, we know that long-term solutions to instability
are grounded in prosperous and inclusive economies.
To that end, the United Kingdom is proud to be hosting
the United Kingdom-Africa Investment Summit, on
20 January in London, in order to mobilize high-quality
international investment for the region.

We need to also deliver long-term solutions
because there are no quick fixes to such complex
issues. While States must, of course, take the lead
in delivering for their citizens and finding political
solutions to conflicts, there is more the United Nations
can do to support them. A coherent whole-of-United
Nations approach is required. That should include work
by United Nations country teams to support national
efforts to prevent violent extremism from taking hold,
following a proper assessment of national capacities,
capabilities and resources.

We are keen to see more coherent coordination
among the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel and the United Nations development actors
in the region. We should continue our work through
the counterterrorism and sanctions committees to
deny terrorists access to arms and funding and to
bring them to justice, as well as supporting Member
States in strengthening their own counter-terrorism
frameworks and capacities. We should also scale up
efforts to address the root causes of instability in the
region through focused and coordinated peacebuilding
programmes. In that regard, we are very pleased that
the Secretary-General has recently reapproved Mali's
eligibility for access to peacebuilding funds. The United
Kingdom remains one of the biggest supporters of the
Peacebuilding Fund, having doubled our contribution to
$43 million in 2018, and we look forward to continuing
to work with the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Commission to leverage those resources
to the benefit of communities facing the challenges of
intercommunal violence and terrorism.

I have had the privilege to serve in West Africa
and to travel extensively around the countries of the
region. This is an issue that is very close to my heart.
I think we need to focus on three particular areas,
and the United Nations needs to come together to
focus more fundamentally on them. Essentially, the
three ingredients are security, good governance and
economic growth and development. We have already
talked about security. Progress will not be made unless
States can provide security within their territory and
can work together across boundaries and borders to
deliver security within the region. We need to work
together to help them build that capacity. Security will
be sustained only if Governments work to deliver good
governance and the rule of law. Many of us have spoken
about that, and we set it out very clearly in Sustainable
Development Goal 16. Good governance is the key
precursor to investment and growth. Investment and
growth, when they come, can help deliver the third
ingredient, which is economic growth and development.
It lifts people out of poverty and stops them from being
tempted down the routes and path of violence.

We have heard everyone talk about those things
today; the challenge is how we deliver them. I think,
in that regard, that it was very interesting to hear the
African Union Commissioner talk about the concept
of a reset in order to look again at all the multiple
initiatives that we have across the region - there were
15 or so mentioned - and see how we can bring greater
coherence to them so that the United Nations and the
region can work better together to deliver them.

For our part, the United Kingdom will continue to
play our role in partnership with the United Nations and
with all our friends across the West African region.

