Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this timely briefing to promote an exchange of views
on cooperation between United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We are also grateful for the concept paper
that was circulated for this meeting. We note the
presentations of Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.

As we have affirmed on other occasions,
Guatemala attaches great importance to United Nations
peacekeeping operations as an indispensable instrument
for international peace and security. That also explains
our desire and resolve to contribute to peacekeeping
operations in Africa, the Middle East and Haiti. That
participation has given us the opportunity to see how
United Nations peacekeeping efforts have evolved both
conceptually and in terms of operations. Given the
increasing number of complex operations launched in
recent years, the Organization faces a growing need for
resources and has therefore had to face an unprecedented
number of challenges. For my delegation, it is clear that
any response to those challenges will require, among
other things, the participation of the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.

One of those challenges is how best to improve
cooperation between missions. While such cooperation
has been carried out on an ad hoc basis for some time,
there are still misgivings regarding the timeliness,
requirements that must be met, the impact on the
two or more participating missions, and its proper
implementation. This means that, in spite of the
apparent progress and general acceptance of the need
for closer cooperation between missions, the progress
that has been made in this area is still modest.

In that regard, in line with the latest report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/66/l9), we encourage the Secretariat to explore,
in consultation with troop-contributing countries,
all opportunities for and obstacles to inter-mission
cooperation and to present them for consideration by
the Council.

Against the current backdrop, it cannot be denied that
there is a need for greater inter-mission cooperation. It is
needed as a result, first, of the budget realities in a world
facing serious financial constraints, and, secondly, of
the changing nature of peacekeeping operations, which
are increasingly required to addressing trans-boundary
conflicts. Furthermore, inter-mission cooperation
must also take into account the preparatory measures
that must be taken beforehand with regard to the legal
and financial implications that such cooperation may
have for troop-contributing countries. In that regard,
we believe that standardizing or adopting agreements
could be an option worth considering as long as any
agreement on cooperation is the outcome of an exercise
that takes the interests of all States involved into due
account.

At the same time, we believe that due attention
must be paid to all regional factors in the planning and
implementation of mission mandates in order to ensure
effective inter-mission cooperation.

It is essential to recall the lessons that can
be drawn from past experience with regard to
inter-mission cooperation. The information provided
must be comprehensive and balance so as to ensure that
interested Member States are able to take decisions that
are based on specific data. In that context, information
exchange is ofparticular relevance in those cases where

two or more peacekeeping missions are located in the
same region or may even share borders.

Finally, we believe that the Security Council
must play a leading role in promoting inter-mission
cooperation. In any case, that role must be played
with caution, respecting the individual mandates of
each mission and the memorandums of understanding
signed between the troop-contributing countries and
the United Nations regarding the operation in question.

Guatemala reiterates its support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations and stands ready to
participate in a creative and constructive manner in
future discussions on this matter.

