Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing on the developments in the situation in
Ukraine. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine, His Excellency Mr. Yuriy Sergeyev, to the
Council.

Luxembourg is deeply concerned about the recent
events in eastern and south-eastern Ukraine. Yesterday
in Sloviansk, in the Donetsk region, masked and armed
men took control of a police station, and then the
headquarters of the town's security services, and put
up barricades, blocking access to the town. There are
also reports coming from the town of Kramatorsk that
armed individuals have taken over a police station and
there has been an exchange of fire with the police. Over
the weekend, other towns in the Donetsk region saw
similiar incidents, which appear to be coordinated and
well orchestrated, recalling the events that took place
in Crimea.

In that regard, we see a continuation of the actions
undertaken by Russia on the territory of Ukraine in
recent weeks. Those actions are a flagrant violation
of international law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and run
counter to the commitments that Russia has made to
Ukraine under the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and
the Treaty between the Russian Federation and Ukraine
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership, signed in
1997.

In that context, we welcome the self-control and
restraint shown to date by the Ukrainian authorities
in the face of repeated violations of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of their country in the past
six weeks. However, we all know that the Ukrainian
Government cannot stand there without doing anything
in the face of this new threat to its territorial integrity.
Like every State Member of the United Nations, Ukraine
has the right to defend itself by virtue of Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations.

This evening, Russia reiterated its version of events,
according to which the demands of the eastern and
south-eastern regions of Ukraine are being ignored by
Kyiv. However, that does reflect the facts. We commend
Ukraine's consistent affirmation that it is ready for an
inclusive political dialogue that takes into account the
interests of all Ukrainians and all regions of Ukraine.
The Prime Minister of Ukraine, Arseniy Yatsenyuk,
recently reaffirmed that during his visit to Donetsk on
11 April. However, political dialogue on the country's
future and revising the Constitution cannot take place
under the threat of a foreign invasion. That threat must
not j eopardize the opportunity for Ukrainians to express
their sovereign will, in the presence of international
observers, in the free and fair presidential election on
25 May.

We must urgently strive to de-escalate the crisis.
We therefore join colleagues in calling for calm and
restraint and in renewing the appeal to Russia to
withdraw its forces massed near the Ukrainian border.
Russia must stop its actions to destabilize eastern
Ukraine and distance itself from the separatist militia
activity. Continuing the military escalation would have
untold consequences.

For its part, Luxembourg would like to believe
that it is still possible to settle the Ukrainian crisis
peacefully. Multilateral bodies, the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe all have a role to play, in particular through the
observers whom they have deployed on the ground.
However, a peaceful solution first and foremost requires
direct dialogue between Russia and Ukraine. In that
regard, we hope that the four-party talks, bringing
together the diplomatic leaders of Ukraine, Russia, the
United States and the European Union in Geneva on
17 April, will make is possible to begin a dialogue and
to find a way out of the gravest crisis that Europe has
seen since the end of the Cold War. The tension and
violence of recent days must not be used as a pretext to
reject all dialogue.

The time is critical. There is not a minute to lose
in ensuring that dialogue prevails over violence, reason
over emotions and peace over war.

