Mr. Kubis: Following the Bonn Conference
in 2011, the recent series of successful high-level
meetings has redefined and reinvigorated the long-term
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community. The NATO Summit in Chicago produced a
solid commitment to supporting Afghan security forces
well beyond the end of the international combat mission
in 2014. The Heart of Asia ministerial conference in
Kabul put the Istanbul process, regional cooperation
and political consultations on firm ground with
prioritized confidence-building measures. Finally,
in Tokyo on 8 July, Afghanistan and its international
partners concluded a long-term compact based on
mutual accountability. Generous donor pledges for
social and economic development were matched by
Afghan Government commitments, notably in the areas
of good governance, anti-corruption, human rights and
elections.

Continued, predictable support and funding for
Afghanistan is dependent on credible progress in
meeting the mutually agreed Tokyo benchmarks.
Donors in turn have committed not just to funding
levels, but on how money is to be spent. It is understood
that assistance must reinforce Government systems.
That applies also to the United Nations family. And
we, the United Nations family, are also committed to
reinvigorating the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board as a more effective forum to ensure mutual
accountability in driving and monitoring the Tokyo
Framework.

As reported by the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Afghan authorities,
both the military campaign and the security transition
are on time and on track. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/703) shows a decrease in security incidents
between May and July as compared to 2011. Yet many
ordinary citizens and Government officials throughout
Afghanistan continue to point to the ongoing fragility
of the security situation in Afghanistan and to the fear
and insecurity that impede everyday life. Even where
there are no armed clashes, an insidious campaign of
intimidation and targeted killings is claiming the lives
of Government officials, women's rights activists,
tribal elders and community leaders, including those
actively working for peace. Insecurity comes not just
at the hands of the Taliban and other anti-Government
forces, but also from predatory armed groups and
narcotics rings. The impact is visible in the curtailed
delivery of development programmes and humanitarian
aid. Outreach by Government services and personnel is
limited in many part of the country.

Recently I visited Kunar, a province bordering
Pakistan. There I learned about the concerns of civilians
arising from cross-border shelling. Humanitarian
agencies have registered more than 700 families - that
is, approximately 4,000 individuals - displaced from
Kunar border districts to the neighbouring province
of Nangarhar since April. I was also glad to hear that
authorities in Afghanistan and Pakistan are already
engaged in multi-level dialogue in order to resolve this
situation and address its root causes.

Reports of uprisings against the Taliban in various
areas of the country are a new development requiring
greater analysis. Amidst three decades of conflict, the
drivers of violence are complex and the actors and their
allegiances fluid. The desire of local communities to
have security and justice has led them to taking the
situation into their own hands. There is a risk of even
greater fragmentation of the security environment.
Many of these localized conflicts would appear to be
resistance to the Taliban, but not necessarily in support
of a greater Government presence. The Government
should eventually be the solution, notably by ensuring
improved sub-national governance and the rule of law.

The success of another transition - that of detention
facilities - will depend in large part on the extent to
which any future administrative detention regime
respects core human rights protections for detainees,
particularly fair trial standards and the prevention of
torture. I call on the new leadership in the National
Directorate of Security and the Ministry of the Interior
to implement the reforms necessary to prevent torture
and inhumane treatment in all of their facilities.

The ultimate key to a future stable Afghanistan will
be, however, successful Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
political transition. The 2014 presidential elections are at
the centre of attention. The conduct of credible polls with
a mandate for the new country's leadership is essential
to national unity and legitimacy and, as highlighted in
Tokyo, a critical component of ongoing international
support. I continuously encourage wide consultations
and robust public debate over the future election
process, including an improved legal framework for
the elections, independent electoral institutions and the
media coverage of the elections. It is such inclusiveness
that will help ensure the transparency, integrity and
acceptability of the elections and their results. At the
same time, this is a time-bound process, and crucial
decisions by the Independent Election Commission on
voter registration, drawing lessons from past problems
and mistakes and ensuring that all eligible voters
have a chance to vote, are required soon, as is the
demonstrable support of the Government and donors.
The United Nations will support decisions taken by the
Afghan authorities that contribute to the sustainability,
integrity and inclusiveness of the electoral process.

The strong and credible leadership of and by
the Independent Election Commission is another
vital aspect of electoral preparations. In appointing
senior electoral officials, a wide-ranging consultative
process on potential candidates who enjoy respect and
acceptability across the political spectrum is essential.
Also crucial is clear agreement, with wide buy-in, on
the final dispute resolution mechanism.

Fostering an environment conducive to building
national accord on a peaceful and stable Afghanistan is
among our priorities. As part of this, we plan to support
a track 11 inter-Afghan dialogue to help engage civil
society and broad political forces in discussing the
future of the country. Given the increasing urgency
of seeing progress towards peace and reconciliation,
I would consider it useful to reflect upon possible
revisions of the travel ban procedure, while fully
respecting the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the sanctions regime under resolution 1988 (2011). Such
revisions could further facilitate the safe passage and
travel of those anti-Government forces that genuinely
wish to participate in contacts, discussions and talks for
the purpose of reconciliation.

I welcome the continued momentum of the Istanbul
process and the gradual start of the activities of the
relevant working groups on confidence-building
measures. I also welcome the emerging interest
of regional organizations, notably the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, in engaging with Afghanistan and
UNAMA in a structured dialogue for the benefit of
Afghanistan and the region.

At UNAMA, together with the wider United
Nations family, we are working to sharpen and focus
activities in a challenging and ever-shifting security
and political environment. A criticality review - the
first undertaken by a special political mission - is
currently under way. Good offices, regional cooperation
and support for elections, peace and reconciliation;
an impartial voice and advocacy on human rights,
including the rights of women and children; and helping
drive development coherence and humanitarian aid are
at the very core of what UNAMA does and I assume
will also do after 2014, while fully respecting the new,
sovereign Afghanistan.

Despite the closure of nine field offices, UNAMA
still emphasizes national outreach and will continue
to provide support throughout the country. I myself
visited seven provincial capitals in this quarter. In two
of these, Uruzgan and Ghor, while UNAMA will no
longer maintain a permanent physical presence, we
managed to hand over our field offices to other United
Nations agencies. UNAMA's increased focus on core
activities amidst transition is taking place in conditions
of a steep budget reduction for 2013. Fewer resources
necessarily mean that UNAMA can deliver less, and
I will not pretend otherwise. But in making strategic
choices, we will focus on support for the Afghan
authorities in the priority areas of our mandate in a way
that ensures maximum impact.

