Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I wish to make
a statement on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association member of the
European Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union welcomes the adoption of the
draft resolution before the Council. The commitment and
professionalism of the members of both the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) remain a major force for
change in Bosnia. A number of European Union countries
contribute personnel to both. The European Union would
like to pay tribute today to all of the men and women in
both organizations working hard in the service of peace.

Ministers of the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board met in Luxembourg on 9 June, against the
heartening backdrop of progress on the ground in Bosnia
and the genuine hope that Bosnia's divided past can be
replaced by a shared future. While there is much work
still to be done, it would appear that the huge
international effort in Bosnia, in lives, resources and
money, is finally beginning to pay off.

The European Union strongly endorses the message
of the Luxembourg meeting - that the international
community cannot remain engaged in Bosnia forever, and
that the time has come for the Bosnian people to deliver

 

their share of the bargain, to start to take control of their
own country and of their own destiny.

The challenges which the international community
now faces are fewer, but they include some of the most
sensitive, in particular the return of refugees and displaced
persons to areas in which they are in a minority. The
European Union deplores the recent increase in violent
incidents against these people and urges local police
authorities, with the assistance of the International Police
Task Force, to pursue the restructuring of their forces and
to provide for the integration of minority officers in order
to help create confidence for returning refugees, in
particular those belonging to minority groups.

As Bosnia and Herzegovina prepares for national
elections in September of this year, it has a critical
opportunity to shape its future as a modern European
democracy. The European Union and member States will be
meeting up to two thirds of the total costs of the
supervision of the elections by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, including the provision of a
large number of personnel.

Against this backdrop, the support of SFOR in
providing a secure environment and broad support for
civilian implementation in the coming months remains
crucial to Bosnia's prospects. Similarly, the work of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be at the heart of efforts to restore peace and
reconciliation to Bosnia and to build the multi-ethnic
society upon which the success of the Peace Agreement
ultimately depends.

So I hope - to inject a word in parentheses and to
pick up on Ambassador Sacirbey's injunction against
stereotypes - that we will not blame all the past on the
United Nations, nor on the European Union either, whatever
it takes to end the war.

As the largest single donor of aid to Bosnia, the
European Union will continue to play a role in a wide
range of activities on the ground. The European Union and
World Bank conference on 7 and 8 May raised a further
$1.25 billion, much of it from the European Union itself
and from European Union member States. Aid procedures
have been adjusted to ensure rapid and more flexible
disbursement, and to facilitate a more proportionate split in
aid distribution between the entities. This will demonstrate
to the people of the Republika Srpska the rewards that
Dayton compliance can bring.

Finally, as an increasing number of persons indicted
on war crimes charges arrive at the International Tribunal
in The Hague - either through voluntary surrender or by
the actions of the Stabilization Force acting under
authority contained in the relevant Security Council
resolutions - there is an opportunity at last for the
people of Bosnia to build peace and reconciliation on the
firm foundation of justice.

The goal of the European Union, like that of all the
international community, is to see a democratic,
prosperous Bosnia taking its place as a modern nation in
Europe. The message to the people of Bosnia is clear:
such a future is within their grasp, provided they continue
to make good progress on the Dayton road, leaving the
violence and ethnic hatred of recent years behind them.
