Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia wishes to
express its condemnation of yesterday's attack in
Afghanistan, which took the lives of 13 people and
wounded numerous others. Moreover, Bolivia wishes
to express its solidarity with the families of those
deceased or injured in the passage of Hurricane Harvey
in Texas, in the United States.

We are grateful for the briefing provided by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame. We take this opportunity
to welcome him and wish him the greatest success in the
delicate tasks that have been assigned to him. We are
also grateful for the briefing provided by Ambassador
Carl Skau on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

We take note of the progress made by the Constitution
Drafting Assembly, the work of which resulted in
the approval on 29 July of a new draft constitution
that should be subject to a popular referendum before
entering into effect.

We believe that the commitment to political
dialogue demonstrated by the parties during the
reporting period should be maintained and reflected
in the holding of a transparent popular consultation
process that would enable the Libyan people to define
their future and to carry out a peaceful, orderly and
inclusive transition. In that context, we also highlight
the mediation and reconciliation efforts that are being
developed by various regional and international actors,
such as the African Union, the League of Arab States
and, of course, the United Nations to promote the
Libyan political process and provide impetus through
the strengthening of cooperation mechanisms. We also
recognize the initiatives developed by Egypt, Algeria
and Tunisia during the months of June and July to
support and promote that process.

Despite those significant steps, we are concerned
by the sporadic clashes between the parties, which come
at a high cost for the civilians trapped in the middle
of the conflict. According to the 22 August report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/726), from April to July
there were 66 and 78 reported deaths and injuries,
respectively, adding to the scores of fatalities caused by
the conflict since 2011.

In addition, according to the report on civilian
casualties published on 1 August by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, during the month of July
21 people were wounded and 15 killed as a result
of bombings, in crossfire or due to the presence of
explosive remnants of war and explosive devices, which
constitute a serious threat to the safety of the population
and negatively impact the return of internally displaced
persons to their places of origin. In that regard, we
encourage the Libyan national institutions and the
agencies and services of the United Nations as a Whole
to continue, within the framework of resolution 2365
(2017), to do their utmost to neutralize the threat of
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants
of war that are still scattered throughout Libya, which
threaten the security of thousands of returning civilians
and refugees, as well as the humanitarian staff providing
assistance on the ground.

We also note with concern the terrible plight of
refugees and migrants who, according to the Secretary-
General's report, continue to be arbitrarily detained by
the parties, subjected to degrading treatment, torture,
sexual violence and the denial of medical care. That
is further exacerbated by the proliferation of criminal
organizations and trafficking networks, which,
according to the report of the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), referred to in the Secretary-
General's report, could be linked to slave markets.

Added to this is the alarming number of migrants
who have lost their lives in the Mediterranean Sea,
which, according to the report also published by the
IOM, exceeded 2,200 fatalities from January to August.
We welcome the efforts made by Italy in that regard. In
that respect, we remind the actors and parties involved
in the conflict that they have an obligation to respect
and to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian law, to avoid causing greater suffering
to the civilian population and to refrain from violating
their fundamental rights. We reiterate that a political
transition is the only solution to this conflict. It has
already begun and must continue. We therefore urge
them to abandon any belligerent attitudes or claims
that arms can be used as a means to resolve this or any
other conflict.

On another note, we wish to express our support
for the progress reported today by the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) with respect to the implementation of the
Committee's mandate, which, in accordance with
resolution 2362 (2017), now includes the illegal export
of petroleum and its by-products.
Finally, it is important that the Council take into
account the impact the Libyan conflict has on the volatile
security situation in the region. The consequences
of interventionism and regime change policies have
had a great impact on the Sahel, particularly in Mali,
bringing with them the emergence of chaos, terrorism
and militarization, with regrettable results being
experienced to this day.

Let us not forget that the final report of the Panel
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, submitted
in the year 2015, established that weapons from Libya
considerably strengthened the military capacity of
terrorist groups operating in the Sahel subregion, and
are currently used to carry out attacks against national
security forces, civilians and members of peacekeeping
missions in the field. In that regard, the Council should
be able to analyse the causes of conflicts in sufficient
detail, avoiding misguided assumptions and fully
assessing the evidence before it. The Council should
understand the magnitude of the actions taken and,
above all, take responsibility for the results achieved. If
we do not learn from these lessons, we should refer to
such activities not as calculation errors, but as actions
intended to destabilize.

