Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): The
Government of Canada would like to commend you,
Madam President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this open meeting of the Council on the
critical issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We also welcome the statements made today
by the Secretary-General, the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator. We would also like to
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by Austria, on behalf of the Human Security Network.
Most importantly, we salute the integrity, devotion and
courage of humanitarian workers and peacekeepers,
who risk their lives to provide physical protection and
material assistance under the most difficult and
dangerous of conditions.

The Government of Canada both welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General and endorses its
recommendations. His report is not merely a useful
update, it also offers an important diagnosis of the
current challenges we face in protecting civilians. The
Secretary-General has rightly emphasized the priority
issues that urgently require international action,
namely, the increase in terrorism, the problem of
gender-based violence and the commercial exploitation
of conflict.

Civilian protection is an urgent priority. Despite
the fact that we have repeatedly stated that the failures
of Rwanda and Srebrenica must never be repeated, new
and old forms of aggression continue to produce
civilian casualties, both as collateral victims and,
increasingly, as deliberate targets.

(spoke in English)

Distressingly, a recent study by the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) showed that
civilian fatalities in wartime have climbed from 5 per
cent at the turn of the century, to 15 per cent during the
First World War, to 65 per cent by the end of Second
World War. Those figures have climbed to more than
90 per cent in the recent wars of the 1990s. The
destruction of the World Trade Center in New York, the
recent terrorist attacks in Bali and Mombasa, massacres
in Burundi, indiscriminate killings in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - notably in the Ituri region -
and wide-spread displacement in parts of Central Asia
make it clear that civilians are on the front lines of
modern conflict.

At its best, the Security Council has been a
powerful vehicle of collective action to protect
people - for example, in East Timor. But at its worst,
it has seemed an indifferent instrument of abdication,
turning a blind eye to the most vulnerable at their time
of greatest need. The Council's inconsistency -
everyone's inconsistency - compels us all to take
effective steps, not only to prevent assaults on
civilians, but also, where prevention fails, to react. The
Secretary-General has called on all of us to take up this
challenge, and it is our responsibility to do so.

We urge the Secretary-General to continue to
direct the Council's attention to instances where action
in support of civilian protection must be taken. He is
uniquely placed to do so. For its part, the Council
needs to re-visit its own performance at regular
intervals, as it did in July 2002 on Sierra Leone.

We commend the Council for seeking to apply the
principles of civilian protection in its deliberations on
specific conflicts. This is evident in the design and
monitoring of new sanctions regimes and of peace
missions. It is also evident in the development of the
aide-memoire adopted last March, which should be
updated on a continuing basis.

Individual agencies have also made progress.
This includes the development of field tools and
operational procedures for improving cooperation and
strategic planning between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). We
particularly applaud the regional seminars organized by
OCHA, aimed at adapting the norms developed by the
Council to regional realities. My Government was
pleased to support the October policy seminar in South
Africa as a contribution to building an alliance for the
protection of civilians.

Encouraging advances have also been made on
the difficult issue of separating armed elements from
refugee populations. The Conclusion adopted in
October 2002 by the Executive Committee of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Refugees (UN HCR) and discussions held in the context
of UNHCR's Global Consultations on International
Protection are excellent examples of forward-leaning
norm development.

It is also critical that States promote capacity
building. In an example of one such effort, we have
been deploying the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to
the UNHCR operation in Guinea. This one-year pilot
project will task officers to work with local authorities
on community policing and camp security.

Valuable strides have also been made in
upholding the rule of law and ensuring accountability
for those who commit international crimes against
civilians. The Special Court for Sierra Leone has now
been established, in line with Security Council
resolution 1315 (2000). Since the entry into force of
the Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on 1 July 2002, we have seen a decisive global
movement in favour of accountability - with a
dramatic increase in the number of ratifications, from
48 to 86. To support law, justice and international
peace and security, the Council needs to support the
ICC in its vitally important work.

In this regard, we again express our deepest
disappointment that the Council chose this year of all
years to put impunity above accountability, by adopting
Security Council resolution 1422 (2002). The ICC has
extensive safeguards for preventing politically
motivated prosecutions. In its principle of
complementarity, it explicitly recognizes the primary
jurisdiction of sending States. We therefore hope that
the entirely unnecessary and counterproductive
message sent by that resolution last July will not be
repeated when the resolution comes up again for
discussion a year from that time.

We are fully conscious of the need to take urgent
action to deal with the three challenges identified by
the Secretary-General in his report. While the rise of
terrorism has rightly demanded concerted action and
response, such action must not be allowed to weaken
the very legal and institutional mechanisms that shield
civilians from the effects of conflict. We welcome in
this regard the adoption in the Third Committee of the
General Assembly of the draft resolution entitled
"Protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism". That draft resolution
underlines the crucial responsibility of the State to
fully respect international human rights and
humanitarian law when taking counter-terrorism
measures. We are very interested in the possibility of
developing guidelines for future work on civilian
protection in conflict areas where terrorist
organizations are active.

Secondly, despite the advent of new mechanisms
to investigate the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, that type of exploitation continues. Even
where we have been most effective in addressing war
economies, through targeted sanctions or instruments
such as the Kimberley Process, it is not yet clear if any
of those methods have tangibly improved protection for
ordinary people or built a sustainable peace.

More potent enforcement is required to target
those who are repeatedly identified as sanctions-
busters. In fact, the names of certain individuals can be
found in every single one of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's reports. And there must be a way of
bringing those people into line. In that respect, the
Secretary-General's proposal that the Council consider
imposing sanctions directed at companies and
individuals involved in the plundering of resources in
conflict situations merits attention.

Accountability and enforcement of core United
Nations principles are at the heart of recent discussions
on gender-based violence. In his introduction of his
report to the Council on women, peace and security
(S/2002/1154) to the Council, the Secretary-General
stated that the United Nations will not tolerate sexual
or other abuse by any staff - civilian, military or
humanitarian. Like others, we join him in strongly
condemning any form of sexual violence or
exploitation. Civilian populations, in particular women
and girls, must not be put at further risk by those
whose job it is - acting on behalf of the international
community, that is to say acting on our behalf - to
provide physical protection and material assistance. We
urge the Secretary-General to provide broad guidance
to the entire United Nations family. We call on the
Council to take up the Secretary-General's proposal to
insert language in relevant texts, requiring follow-up to
allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation.

The protection of civilians is a shared
responsibility. It resides first and foremost with States;
indeed, it is an essential element of a State's sovereign
status. Protecting its citizens is the most fundamental
obligation of a State. But there is a growing consensus
that when States are unable or unwilling to protect their
own citizens, the international community must
engage. This responsibility was powerfully articulated
in the report entitled "The Responsibility to Protect",
by the International Commission on Intervention and
State Sovereignty. Atrocities that shock the conscience
of humanity cannot be allowed to stand, or those
atrocities will never end.

While few beyond the Security Council have the
authority or the capacity to compel Member States to
act in support of civilian needs in situations of conflict,
action and advocacy are not the duty of the Council
alone. The General Assembly, regional organizations,
United Nations operational agencies, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), the private sector
and individual countries all have obligations. All need
to be proactive in protecting the vulnerable.

Canada has argued from the outset that the
protection-of-civilians agenda requires sustained and
pragmatic commitment. The protection agenda will
thrive on the development of norms and effective
practice in specific instances. Our collective success
will rightly be judged on whether we have reduced the
vulnerability of civilian populations in conflict. Let all
of us, but especially the members of the Council,
resolve to protect those who most need our protection.
History will judge this institution and its members
harshly if we fail and positively if we succeed.

