Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the initiative taken by your
Government, Madam President, to convene today's
open meeting, and we would like to thank you for the
5
information that has been distributed, including the
discussion paper prepared for this important debate. I
should also like to thank Judge Rosalyn Higgins and
Mr. Nicolas Michel for their very relevant
contributions to today's discussion.

As far as Guatemala is concerned, any actions
taken by the Security Council must be restricted to the
mandate conferred on it by the United Nations Charter
in the area of maintaining international peace and
security. We feel that that mandate does not include
any role relating to the codification or development of
the rules of international law.

Bearing that in mind, we have drawn lessons
based on our own experience, which we feel places us
in a privileged position for commenting upon a number
of concerns raised in the discussion paper distributed
by the presidency. For example, we believe that efforts
to integrate the promotion of justice and the rule of law
in the work of the Security Council, in particular in the
context of peacekeeping operations, should be made
from the first moment that the Council begins to
consider a conflict or post-conflict situation, and that
both elements must be key objectives of peacekeeping
operations from the very outset.

We are convinced that no reform effort in the area
of the rule of law or the re-establishment of justice can
be successful or sustainable if it does not form part of a
minimum platform of agreements reached between the
various sectors of civil society and the Government. In
this respect, when issuing recommendations, planning
mandates for missions or designing assistance
programmes, the Security Council must carefully
consider the specific requirements pertaining to the
rule of law in each country.

It should be acknowledged that international
cooperation is essential and that the United Nations
presence is irreplaceable. That entails not only the
daily work of the Security Council and the
peacekeeping missions and the support the agencies,
funds and programmes can provide, but also efforts to
promote an environment within which dialogue,
tolerance and understanding can flourish.

Clearly, it is easier to achieve reconciliation in
the context of economic well-being than in one in
which there is not enough to go around. It is also clear
that in order to bring about true reconciliation, the
institutions that underpin the entire democratic society
must be further strengthened. In that way, the progress

made in the implementation of any agreement will be
the outcome of internal efforts, complemented in a
significant manner by the role of the Security Council
and the international community, which must always
be one of solidarity and not of replacement.

On this particular point, we regret the lack of the
report on the implementation of the proposals made by
the Secretary-General on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies that was requested in the presidential
statement of 6 October 2004 (S/PRST/2004/34). We
believe that such a document would have been a very
useful tool as we seek to respond to the various
concerns being raised today.

Furthermore, we believe that it is important to
remain aware that in many cases expectations are high
and that there is therefore a tendency to set goals that
are overly ambitious, that do not take account of the
fact that progress is not linear in nature and that, on
occasion, lack of progress in certain areas may
undermine other progress.

In this context, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission can assist the Security Council, in
particular when it comes to evaluating progress and
assessing the various factors that may influence its
development, such as the nature of the underlying
conflict and the identification of vulnerable groups
such as indigenous peoples, girls and boys, the
situation of and the role played by women, the impact
of peace agreements on the rule of law, and the diverse
traditions that may coexist within a specific country
and that might affect the performance of the justice
system and the adaptation of the legal framework of a
country.

Concerning the possibility of developing policies
for peacekeeping operations with regard to gaps in the
rule of law, we believe that we should proceed
cautiously, as the body that is responsible for designing
policies in that area is the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

It is paramount that we maintain the coherence of
the United Nations system. We believe that the
Security Council must focus on ensuring better
coordination in the implementation of policies and
must further promote the relationship between those
who plan, direct and administer peacekeeping
operations and those who implement the mandates of
those operations, in order to improve them. We believe

06-4010]
that we should await the outcome of the recent request
by the Special Committee to the Secretariat for an
evaluation of experience gained in the promotion of the
rule of law, of the options on possible rule-of-law
strategies for peacekeeping operations, both current
and future, and of potential human and material
resource needs to support peacekeeping operations in
the areas of legal, judicial and penal reform.

We would like to congratulate Japan for the
impetus that it has given to the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. That is
an underused body, which should, indeed, be utilized
further in future in order to implement and extend
mandates that seek to strengthen activities relating to
the rule of law.

Terrorism is another area relating to peacekeeping
and international security, and the Security Council
must ensure that the fight against terrorism is carried
out within the rule of law. Only in that way will be able
to protect norms of international value that prohibit
terrorism and - while ensuring full respect for human
rights - alleviate the conditions capable of giving rise
to cycles of terrorist violence and mitigate the
grievances and resentments that can act as a breeding
ground for terrorists.

We therefore wish to reaffirm our full support for
the provisions of paragraph 109 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, which called on the Security
Council to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist
for placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists
and for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions.

We welcome the partial review of guidelines
undertaken by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), which we believe is a step in
the right direction. Furthermore, we look forward with
interest to the proposals to be issued by the Office of
Legal Affairs in the area of targeted sanctions in order
to ensure that such sanctions are neither discriminatory
nor arbitrary in nature.

Finally, for there to be reconciliation, we cannot
overestimate the importance of strengthening the rule
of law and the administration and implementation of
justice. In many countries, as a legacy of conflict, there
remain many illegal bodies and clandestine
mechanisms that undermine human rights. In this
regard, the Government of Guatemala is making a
special effort to fulfil its commitments by urging the

06-4010]

establishment of an international mechanism that
would act, in accordance with national legislation, to
investigate and dismantle such clandestine mechanisms
by identifying and bringing to justice those
responsible.

Before concluding, it would be remiss of me not
recall the special efforts made by Ambassador Lej as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
helping States to submit their reports and to implement
measures against terrorism.

