The Secretary-General: I am deeply concerned
over the evolution of the situation in Timor-Leste since
the incidents of 28 and 29 April. The violence and
unrest that Timor-Leste has experienced in recent
weeks is particularly painful because, in many respects,
Timor-Leste is a child of the international community.

Through four successive missions - the United
Nations Mission in East Timor, the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor and the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste - the United
Nations has played a key role in laying the foundation
for Timor-Leste's democratic institutions and
processes.

Today, those institutions and processes stand
exposed. The sad events of recent weeks reflect
shortcomings not only on the part of the Timorese
leadership, but also on the part of the international
community in inadequately sustaining Timor-Leste's
nation-building process. We have learnt, at a painful
price for Timor-Leste, that the building of institutions
on the basis of fundamental principles of democracy
and the rule of law is not a simple process that can be
completed within a few short years.

Clearly, tremendous work lies ahead, both for the
Government of Timor-Leste and for the international
community, but, as I told the Timorese people in a
video message on 1 June, the United Nations is
determined not to abandon them at this critical time of
need. I therefore appeal to the Security Council to
stand united in supporting Timor-Leste's return to
normality so that its citizens may resume their work of
building a peaceful and prosperous nation.

In that context, last month I dispatched My
Special Envoy, Ian Martin, on a short mission to
review the situation on the ground. Since his return last
Friday, I have benefited greatly from his assessment,
which he will share with the Council today. His report
highlights not only the immediate security challenges
facing Timor-Leste but also the complex political
situation there and other problems faced by that
country.

In conclusion, I would like to mention that on 8
June I received a letter from the Senior Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Jose

S/l'V.5457

 

Ramos-Horta, on behalf of the Government, inviting
the United Nations to establish an independent special
inquiry commission "to review the incidents on 28 and
29 April and on 23, 24 and 25 May, and other related
events on issues which contributed to the crisis".

In response to that request, I am asking the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to take the lead in
establishing such a commission, and I will keep the
Council informed of his progress.

