Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We need to understand the important
discussions that have taken place in the Chamber today.

I invite Council members to review a report
published by the Daily Mail in January 2013 and
later withdrawn. The report includes the e-mail
correspondence between sernior officials at a British
company called Britam Defence. It describes a plot
that was subsequently approved by Washington, DC,
whereby Qatar, in cooperation with Turkey, would
finance and support rebels in Syria to use chemical
weapons and then blame the Syrian Government for the
use of those weapons. The report was published in a
British newspaper in 2013, not a Syrian newspaper.

Unfortunately, some members of the Council are
treating the cases of the false justifications that were
made in the brazen invasion of Libya and Iraq as
though they were incidents that would be forgotten by
the Council, and could be repeated at any time with
guaranteed impunity. We cannot allow that. Fortunately,
there are some members of the Council whose memory
is still good, and they do not forget.

Russia did not obstruct the work of the Security
Council today. It has worked to prevent another
tragedy such as that witnessed in Libya and Iraq. It has
preserved the integrity of the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations at a time when integrity and purity
have been lacking. The vote of the Russian Federation
today has saved the Council from manipulating a
United Nations mechanism whose Chair is supposed
to have at least the same courage as the Chairman of
the United Nations Special Commission established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 687 (1991), the
Swedish Rolf Ekeus and the Australian Richard Butler,
who refused to legitimize the United Kingdom-United
States invasion of Iraq.
We in the Syrian Arab Republic - a founding
Member of the United Nations - still believe that the
Organization plays a vital role in finding solutions to
crises when Member States comply with the purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations, foremost of which
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is the main responsibility of the Council.

However, the fact of the matter is that there are
three permanent members of the Council who have
adopted aggressive and hegemonic policies. They
regard the United Nations and the Security Council
as mere administrative offices or commercial entities
in the service of achieving their goals. Fortunately,
two permanent members, along with other states,
oppose such practices and attenuate that hegemony
and aggression. Were it not for those two countries,
which are committed to the purposes of the Charter,
to date the world would have experienced even more
destruction, wars, crises and iterations of the A1-Nusra
Front, which was created by those three countries when
they decided to sponsor and finance terrorism and
use it as a weapon against all those who oppose their
interventionist policy. In the Syrian Arab Republic, we
therefore continue to believe that it is the principles of
international law and the purposes of the Charter that
must govern international relations. We continue to
believe that truth and justice will ultimately prevail, as
the only alternative is chaos.

Accordingly, from the very beginning my
Government has cooperated with the United Nations,
its bodies, committees and numerous envoys. When
armed terrorist groups carried out their crimes in
Khan al-Assal, near Aleppo, on 19 March 2013, which
marked the first case of the use of chemical weapons,
the United Nations was the only entity from which my
Government sought assistance to investigate the use of
chemical weapons there. Only hours after that incident,
I personally met with former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. I asked him to send an emergency mission to
help the Syrian Government investigate the use of toxic
chemical substances and identify the perpetrators.
Within just a few hours following our meeting, as he
told me, the Secretary-General consulted with the
influential members of the Council.

He then called back to inform me that the United
Nations would provide assistance only in determining
whether chemical substances had been used, but that it
would notbe able to help identify the perpetrators of those
crimes. Although we agreed to receive that incomplete
mandate, it took four months for the Secretary-General
to send an investigation mission, under the leadership
of the Swedish professor Ake Sellstrom. Despite that
unjustified delay of four months, the Mission has yet to
set foot in Khan al-Assal. That was four and a half years
ago. The mission has not yet gone to Khan al-Assal as a
result of the fabircation of the Ghouta incidents, which
took place just minutes before Mr. Sellstrom's mission
was supposed to leave for Khan al-Assal.

I am recounting that story only because it has been
repeated many times. It was a rather historic moment,
as it showed that the mechanisms and committees
established by the United Nations to investigate
the use of chemical substances in Syria would not
be permitted to establish the truth or carry out their
work professionally, impartially, independently and
transparently. The three States and their proxies in
the region were focused on only one aspect - their
conspiracy with armed terrorist groups to stage crimes
using chemical substances against Syrian civilians and
to accuse the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
of them because they have not found more dangerous
types of weapon to carry out their interventionist and
destructive agendas after having exhausted all other
tricks up their sleeve.

In the Syrian Arab Republic, we are not at all opposed
to the establishment of investigative mechanisms that
are independent, honest and professional to determine
who is responsible for the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. As Ijust said, we were the first to ask for such
assistance. We believe that the draft resolution that was
introduced by Russia and China and vetoed by three
States since the beginning, was aimed at assisting the
Mechanism to carry out its mandate, in accordance with
the norms pursuant to the relevant international terms
of reference, and steering it away from politicization
and the pressure that has been exerted by the United
States, the United Kingdom and France. This would
have righted the course of its work in a way that would
have enabled it to find that truth based on physical and
conclusive evidence, which does not allow for multiple
interpretations, falsification or manipulation. Any
draft resolution failing to consider those standards and
safeguards would be analogous to a mere PlayStation

game and represent a desperate attempt to pursue the
dangerous endeavour of conducting investigations from
afar, relying on false witnesses, information provided by
the Al-Nusra Front, a terrorist group; on open sources
affiliated with it, such as the White Helmets; and early
warning mechanisms, as mentioned in the report of the
Chairman of the Mechanism, that are able to predict the
unknown and can somehow detect chemical weapons
carried by aircraft flying at a distance of several
kilometres away.

I remind everyone that the United States delegation
was quick to ask the Council to extend the mandate
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism only 48 hours
after its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex) was issued,
although by then it had been revealed that the report had
already been prepared and written in the dark rooms of
London, Paris, and Washington, DC. The leadership of
the Mechanism only had to sign and seal the report to
present it to the Council on 7 November (see S/PV.8090).
It did not burden itself with even noting the remarks
made by Council members and responding to them at
that meeting. I will not repeat the remarks that I made
at last week's meeting in this Chamber on the legal,
technical, and scientific aspects that refute the report
and all that it includes regarding the methodology
and specious conclusions of the Mechanism related to
Khan Shaykhun.

Some Council members may not be aware of the
fact that a British expert from the United Kingdom
Permanent Mission to the United Nations visited many
permanent mission to advocate for the same findings of
the report before it had even been submitted. When I
say the same findings, I mean the exact same wording,
terminology and information. What impartiality and
professionalism are we talking about with the presence
ofa British expert who had promoted the same outcomes
that were to be issued in the report?

My country, Syria, reiterates that it has complied
with the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Since we acceded to the Convention in 2013, we have
possessed no banned toxic chemical substances, as
confirmed by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Head of the Joint
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations for the
Elimination of the Chemical Weapons Programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic, in her report to the Council
that was submitted in June 2014 (S/2014/444, annex).
Syria considers the use of chemical to be an immoral
act that must be condemned, regardless of where, when
and under what conditions they are used.

In conclusion, together with a number of other
Member States' Governments, we believe that the time
has come for the Council to shoulder its responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security with
integrity and in a balanced manner. To that end, some
members of the Council must ensure that their actions
match their words, especially those that enthusiastically
advocate for extending the Mechanism according to the
American way. Those countries must demonstrate the
same enthusiasm to ensure the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, some of which
are based on Chapter VII of the Charter, and investigate
violations of those resolutions by Governments of
some States. Those countries should also consider
the hundreds of letters that we sent to the Council on
the support and funding of arms that has been and is
still being provided by the Governments of the United
States, France, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia,
Qatar and Turkey to armed terrorist groups in Syria and
the ongoing support of Israel to the Al-Nusra Front in
the separation zone of the occupied Golan, which led
to the abduction of two members of the contingents of
Fiji and the Philippines deployed to the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force.

I wish to inform you, Sir - and I am sure that you
are aware of this - that I sent a letter yesterday to the
President of the Council asking for an investigation
into a documented report published by the British
Broadcasting Cooperation on the support provided by
the so-called international coalition forces to terrorists
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). This
support was supposedto secure the exit of ISIL elements,
provide them with shelter and obstruct the operations
of the Syrian Arab Army and its allies against ISIL.
We look forward to the same level of enthusiasm that
the Council demonstrated today in dealing with all the
issues that I have mentioned in my statement.

