Ms. Khatri (Fiji): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to thank you for having convened this open
debate on regional partnerships in peacekeeping.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General and
the representatives of the African Union and the
European Union for framing the debate through their
presentations.

Fiji aligns itself with the statementjust delivered by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

The examination of this theme is timely, as the
United Nations peacekeeping community applies itself
to the rehatting oflarge regional peacekeeping missions
such as the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia, whose
experiences will provide valuable lessons for the future.

In previous United Nations debates on
peacekeeping, including here in the Council in August
2013 (see S/PV.7015), my delegation has made two
points that are pertinent to the issue at hand and which
I wish to reiterate and expand upon.

First, regional organizations ofwhich the concerned
country is a member are often likely to have a better
understanding of the local situation and culture, thereby
allowing a better focus on people-oriented responses
tailored to the local situation and the needs of the
host country. A linked potential advantage is that the
institutional systems of regional neighbours are likely
to be similar, rather than a multiplicity of global troop-
contributing countries, which would first have to learn
the host country's institutional setup before being able
to contribute to durable peace impacts.

The logical corollary is that the response times of
regional initiatives tend to be faster than the logistics of
launching a global force-generation effort, and a rapid
response in conflict situations can save many lives and
arrest conflict before it escalates to scales requiring
proportionally larger responses.
Secondly, and this point is related to that made by
many other delegations in today's debate, is the need
for adequate resourcing and the means to achieve this.
Although regional organizations have the know-how
and the personnel to assist neighbouring countries in
conflict situations, they do not always have the resources
to support such actions. Regional organizations and
their members that are able to provide troops, all of
which make large sacrifices in the service of humanity,
must not be made to feel that their contribution is
somehow inadequate because of the lack of enablers
such as armoured personnel carriers, helicopters or new
technologies, or, indeed, because ofa lack of financing.

If we are truly to benefit from the comparative
advantage that regional and subregional organizations
can provide, we must, as a United Nations peacekeeping
community, ensure that partnerships are created for
the long term rather than only in crisis situations,
for the proper resourcing of efforts by regional
and subregional organizations. As this affects the
durability of peacekeeping efforts, the onus should be
on the Secretariat to actively facilitate cooperation of
the nature envisaged in the successive reports of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
on triangular cooperation in peacekeeping.

The United Nations peacekeeping community must
also examine how best to support regional peacekeeping
initiatives in the medium term. If the best solution
for the resourcing shortfalls is to rehat a mission as a
United Nations mission, methodical planning through
use of best practices is essential, as is the need for a
detailed mandate that does not overburden a mission
and provides for clear exit strategies. Consultation with
troop-contributing countries in this process, again as
called for by the C-34, is essential.

Greater support should also be provided for regional
peacekeeping training initiatives to be conducted in
regions to build up their peacekeeping capacities. The
United Nations already has institutionalized relations
with various regional organizations and should look to
develop such relations with other regional organizations,
and support the establishment of peacekeeping training
institutes with United Nations accreditation, through
which bilateral support to address the resourcing
problems of potential troop-contributing countries
could also be addressed.

In my own delegation's region, the Melanesian
Spearhead Group, composed of Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, the Front de liberation
nationale kanak socialiste (FLNKS) of New Caledonia
and Fiji, is examining collective peacekeeping
capability in the area of police peacekeeping, and we
look forward to working with the United Nations to
establish capability in this regard, building on Fiji's
proud record and established tradition ofpeacekeeping.
Fiji itself is in the process of establishing an integrated
peacekeeping training institute, whose services Fiji will
extend to regional partners once it is established. We
look forward to getting United Nations accreditation
for this institute to strengthen the contribution that
we are steadfastly committed to providing to United
Nations peacekeeping.

Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all
the peacekeepers, from United Nations and regional
missions, who have lost their lives in the service of
humanity, as well as to all victims of past and current
conflicts, including in the Middle East. To do anything
other than our very best for them would be a disservice
to us all.

