Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their comprehensive and insightful briefings. I would like to say a special thanks to Ms. Mona Freij for her powerful and sobering statement. That serves to underline the importance of the Security Council being briefed by civil society representatives and is a clear reminder that effective counter-terrorism depends to a great extent on civil society. The role and influence of civil society in preventing individuals from falling prey to the false promises of terrorist groups cannot be overestimated. We are concerned that the terrorist threat remains imminent despite the military defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Syria and thedeath of Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, as demonstrated by the very disturbing increase in ISIL-linked terrorist activities in West Africa, the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. Countering terrorism and violent extremism needs to remain at the top of our international security agenda. I would like to briefly touch on three issues that seem very important to us: the need for international cooperation on, and a comprehensive approach to, counter-terrorism; the need for any reaction to terrorism to be in line with our standards and principles; and the importance of including a gender perspective in the Council's work on counter-terrorism. On the first issue, international, regional and subregional cooperation remain crucial to successfully fighting terrorism. A transnational threat can be overcome only through joint, comprehensive international action. In that regard, we would like to express our appreciation for the broad scope of United Nations activities in the field of counter-terrorism, as outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/95), and we commend the women and men in the field who do the actual work, members of the armed forces and law enforcement agencies and others on the front line. It is the Council's duty to ensure a comprehensive approach tocounter-terrorism, while balancing preventive and repressive measures, in order to achieve sustainable long-term success in the fight against terrorism. No fight can be won by military means alone, which definitely holds true for the fight against terrorism as well. Such a fight includes, among other things, finding a common approach to dealing with returning foreign terrorist fighters and their families in terms of prosecution and criminal justice, as well as deradicalization, rehabilitation and reintegration. It is obvious that civil society plays a very important role in that regard, too. Furthermore, we need to counter terrorist financing, including through social media platforms or new methods, such as cryptocurrencies. We are particularly committed to supporting the work of the Financial Action Task Force as the international standard-setter on counter-financing. Secondly, any reaction to terrorism must be in line with our standards and principles. Our values strengthen our credibility and enable us to defeat terrorist ideology. As soon as we are perceived as employing methods similar to those used by the very terrorists we claim to fight, we have lost the battle for hearts and minds. Counter-terrorism measures must never serve as a pretext for human rights violations. Yet there are multiple examples around the world of counter-terrorism measures that indiscriminately target ethnic or religious minorities, in violation of international human rights law. Furthermore, the exclusion of ethnic or religious minorities can cause marginalized persons to turn to violent extremism and fall into the hands of terrorist networks. It is therefore additionally counterproductive in trying to prevent terrorism. That is why we must ensure that human rights, international humanitarian law and the rule of law are respected in the fight against terrorism, which will increase trust in State structures. In that context, I would like to underline the need for international mechanisms that ensure due diligence is done and, in that regard, commend the Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, for his exemplary work, which is vital to the credibility, fairness and effectiveness of the sanctions regime. Thirdly, I would like to stress the importance of including a gender perspective in the work of the Council, particularly in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The gender dimension plays an important role in countering the terrorist threat in a number of ways. Women are particularly affected by violent conflict and terrorism. However, as the report shows, women are not only victims of terrorism but are also taking on a more important operative role within ISIL. Therefore, female radicalization and women linked to, and operating for, terrorist groups should also become a priority item on our agenda. Let me conclude by stressing once again that international cooperation based on adhering to international law and principles is key to our success. Going it alone and questioning our values means playing into terrorist hands.
