Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his timely briefing and
complete recommendations for action by the
international community in Somalia to achieve a long-
lasting solution to this protracted conflict.

We are concerned about the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
especially in Mogadishu, and the increasing suffering
of civilians caught in the fight between the insurgents

and Government forces. We believe the international
community must do everything possible to ease their
suffering and to provide humanitarian assistance to all
those in need. The need for an international response is
urgent, and all parties in Somalia must do whatever
they can to ensure secure access to international
humanitarian assistance.

At the same time, all parties in Somalia should be
reminded that the key priority is the protection of
civilians and that the abuse of international
humanitarian law and human rights law is totally
unacceptable. We deplore the abductions and killings
of independent journalists and human rights activists in
Somalia over the last year. We hope that the French
journalist who was abducted just last weekend in
Puntland will be freed as soon as possible.

We are also worried about reported restrictions
placed by the Transitional Federal Government on the
independent media, which have been reporting on the
unfolding situation in the country. At the same time, we
believe the humanitarian disaster in Somalia can be
avoided only through national reconciliation and
stabilization in the country. Slovakia believes that the
National Reconciliation Congress held in Somalia
earlier this year was an encouraging step in the
political process, and we hope that its outcomes will be
implemented expeditiously.

We welcome the recent appointment of the new
Government of Somalia under the leadership of Prime
Minister Nur Hassan Hussein. We share the View of
Special Representative Ould Abdallah that the
President and Prime Minister need to be more active in
addressing the crisis through political dialogue
involving all parties, including opposition and
independent personalities, in deciding the future of
their country. We hope that the transitional federal
institutions will now seize the momentum and move
expeditiously to establish inclusive democratic
institutions in Somalia, including in the area of
preparing for the census and elections due in 2009.

We note the recommendations of Mr. Ould
Abdallah on simultaneous actions on the political and
security fronts. We hope that the international
community, including the United Nations, will play a
more instrumental role in assisting Somalia in its
efforts to achieve peace, stability and prosperity.

Finally, we would like to reiterate the necessity of
addressing the ongoing arms embargo violations that
contribute to increasing tensions and hostilities
between the parties, and we call on all States - in

particular those in the region - to fully comply with
the arms embargo and prevent any actions and
activities by non-State actors to supply arms into
Somalia.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for the
positive role it continues to play in Somalia, since
there are very few options other than more support for
AMISOM. at the moment. We therefore look forward to
the deployment of Burundian troops, which we hope
will contribute to improving the security situation on
the ground. Finally, we support the call of Mr. Ould
Abdallah to strengthen the operational capacities and
capabilities of AMISOM.

