Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): On
25 May this year, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea conducted a nuclear test, violating relevant
resolutions and statements by the Security Council and
defying repeated warnings by the international
community. The action taken by the Democratic
People's Republic poses a serious threat to peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula and beyond.
Furthermore, the overt declaration by the Democratic
People's Republic of its intention to pursue the
development of its nuclear weapons programme is a
grave challenge to the international regime for nuclear
non-proliferation.

In conducting this second nuclear test, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has clearly
demonstrated a complete disregard for its commitments
under the 19 September 2005 Joint Statement and other
subsequent Agreements reached at the Six-Party Talks.
It is also a clear violation of resolutions 1695 (2006)
and 1718 (2006), as well as of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/7) of 13 April 2009. Those
violations by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea must be met with a strong and unequivocal
response by international society.

In that regard, my Government welcomes and
fully supports the resolution just adopted unanimously
by the Security Council and appreciates the efforts of
the members of the Council to address this grave
common challenge. This resolution is an expression of
the international community's firm will to collectively
respond to such provocative action on the part of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
09-36806

We urge the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to fully comply with this resolution and to heed
carefully the united voice of the international
community that such acts will never be condoned. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea must refrain
from any action that would further aggravate the
situation on the Korean peninsula.

My Government also strongly urges the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to return to the
Six-Party Talks, in pursuit of a peaceful resolution of
the nuclear issue, and to abandon all of its nuclear
weapons and missile programmes once and for all.

We also hope that all Member States will make
united efforts to duly implement the measures outlined
in the present resolution. My Government will continue
to work closely with the international community to
achieve those goals.

