Mr. Wehbe (Syria) (interpretation from Arabic): I
would like at the outset of my statement to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are convinced
that your wisdom and experience will contribute to
ensuring the success of the Council during this period. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express our
thanks and profound appreciation to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Kenya, for his efforts last month.

Given the attempts made in the occupied Arab
territories to undermine the foundations of the peace
process in the Middle East, the Security Council is
meeting under extremely delicate and important
circumstances. Israel is'once again defying international
will by taking the decision to build a new settlement and
to continue its settlement activities in the region of J abal
Abu Ghneim in the southern part of East Jerusalem.
3745th meeting iKSSumpllOn 1)

Security Council 6 March [997

Fifty-second year

 

It is no longer possible to remain silent in the face of
all these injustices inflicted by Israel on the Palestinian
people, particularly in the face of the serious and continued
attempts to change the urban and demographic character of
the City of Al-Quds, a historic and holy city and symbol.
This is being done in order to enshrine the occupation of
Al-Quds, judaize the Holy City and drive out the Arabs still
living there. '

All this constitutes a clear and flagrant violation ofthe
principles and basis of the peace process and of the
decisions of the international community -- particularly
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968), 338
(1973) and 465 (1980) ~-- that affirm the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force. These decisions deem
all measures and actions, including the expropriation of
land and property, to be null and void and without effect on
the status of occupied Jerusalem.

The Netanyahu Government planned this new
provocation very well within the framework of his
aggressive colonization and ongoing campaign to Judaize
Al-Quds. Indeed, it has already built the first Jewish
neighbourhood in the Al-Quds neighbourhood of Ras al-
Amud. It is clear that this recent decision of the Israeli
Government is aimed at creating an explosive situation, as
was the opening of the tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mesque.
At that time, the Security Council adopted resolution 1073
(1996) of 28 September 1996. In that resolution, the
Council called for:

"the immediate cessation and reversal of all acts
which have resulted in the aggravation of the situation,
and which have negative implications for the Middle
East peace process". (res. 1073 (1996), para. 1)

It is regrettable that Israel has not respected that
resolution- just as it has not respected other
internationally binding resolutions. Israel's feverish
settlement activities may be seen in the framework of its
aggressive behaviour, which is provocative and defies the
binding decisions of the international community; the
international community must firmly denounce and
condemn that behaviour. The representatives who spoke
here yesterday expressed that position exactly.

As early as 1 December 1996, the Council of the
League of Arab States condemned the settlement activities
in the occupied Arab territories and the attitude of the
Israeli Government, which persisted in its expansion of the
settlements in violation of international law and
internationally binding decisions, in particular Security
Council resolution 465 (1980). That resolution determined
that the settlements were an obstruction to achieving
peace, and called upon Israel to dismantle them.
Resolution 497 (1981) declared null and void the Israeli
decision to annex the occupied Golan; this was adopted
following the Israeli Government's decision to expand its
settlements in the occupied territories, in particular in the
West Bank, the Arab part of Jerusalem, in Gaza and in
the occupied Syrian Golan.

Likewise, the Foreign Ministers of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, meeting at Jakarta on 14
December 1996, called upon the international community,
the Security Council, the sponsors of the peace process
and the European Union to persuade Israel to abandon its
settlement policies in the occupied Arab territories,
including Al-Quds and the occupied Syrian Golan"
which, it was stressed, are part of the occupied Arab
territories. The Israeli authorities were called upon to end
their settlement policies aimed at changing the
demographic nature of Al-Quds, desecrating its Muslim
and Christian holy places with a View to judaizing it,
sealing it off and isolating it from the rest of the West
Bank.

International reaction to these latest Israeli
Government measures to intensify the settlement policies
has focused on the following points: First, settlement
activities undermine the peace process. Second, the Israeli
decision raises doubts and does not inspire trust. Third, it
could mark a return to violence and tension in the Middle
East. Fourth, it constitutes a declaration of war against the
Arab, Muslim and Christian worlds, against the peace
process, and against efforts to revive that process. Fifth,
the settlement policies foreshadow a new catastrophe in
the region. Sixth, the international community is urged
firmly to condemn past, present and future settlement
policies. Seventh, the question of Al-Quds is extremely
sensitive, and could become explosive,

Some condemnations of the settlement policy have
been moderate. There have been appeals for an urgent
meeting of the Al-Quds Committee presided over by His
Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco, for an Arab summit,
and for meetings of the Security Council. Yesterday and
today in this Chamber, we all listened most attentively to
the reactions of the representatives of many countries.
They all called for prudence in the light of possible
reactions to the Israeli decision.

With great arrogance, the Israeli Government has
asked Arab leaders to shoulder their responsibilities and
"cum, uuuuun gl'uln meeting mesumpuuu I]

Fiftyvsecond year 6 March 1997

 

demonstrate political wisdom -- at a time when the Israeli
Government is doing its best to destroy the peace process,
with no regard for a just and comprehensive peace, while
seeming determined to strike blow after blow against the
peace process, thus to kill that process. We wonder,
therefore, whether it is political wisdom to continue
building settlements in the Holy City in the face of
condemnation from the entire international community. Is
it political wisdom for the Israeli authorities to harden their
policies and attempt to return the peace process to square
one? It seems to me that Israel simply wants the Arabs to
yield, in order to demonstrate what it would call political
wisdom.

True political wisdom dictates that the Arabs view the
peace process as a strategic policy that must exist within a
framework of international legality; this requires a serious
commitment by Israel to continue the peace process and to
restore rights in the occupied territories, in order to
guarantee a balanced peace for all the countries of the
region. This cannot take place if Israel continues to build
settlements and undermine the whole peace process.

In the light of all these facts, and of the fact that Israel
arrogantly continues its settlements and expansion despite
the Arab choice of peace as its strategic option, we are
obliged to ask a number of very important questions,
relating not only to the seriousness of the Israeli
Government, which is not respecting the peace process, but
also to the Israeli intention to undermine that process.

We would recall that the leaders meeting at the Arab
Summit held at Cairo from 21 to 23 June 1996 reaffirmed
their commitment to the United Nations resolutions
requiring non-recognition and non-acceptance of any
situation resulting from Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Arab territories, inasmuch as such activities are
unlawful and create no rights and no obligations. They
considered that the establishment of settlements and the
introduction of settlers violate the Geneva Conventions and
the Madrid framework and represent an impediment to the
peace process. There should thus be a halt to all Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially Jerusalem, and
the settlements should be removed. The leaders affirmed
their rejection of any alteration to the physical
characteristics or legal status of Arab Jerusalem.

We, cannot remain silent about the settlement policy,
because that policy could return the region to the cycle of
violence and tension; this would be the sole responsibility
of the Israeli Government.

Israel's arrogance stands in complete disregard of
internationally binding decisions and of the position of the
international community against the building of
settlements. We have seen many Israeli statements,
including Mr. Netanyahu's recent insistence that
Jerusalem was the eternal, indivisible capital of Israel. In
the face of this assault and in the face of the recent
statement by the Israeli Minister of the Interior, as quoted
in The Washington Post on 25 February, that the "battle
of Jerusalem had begun", the Security Council, which
bears responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace, must succeed in seeing through all this and issue
a presidential statement. It must take action commensurate
with the need to put an end to the occupation of all the
occupied territories, including Al-Quds and the occupied
Syrian Golan.

Yesterday, the representatives of the United
Kingdom and of many other countries addressed the
Security Council; we are grateful to them for their
statements. We also heard the representative of Israel,
who tried to give us a history lesson. We are not here for
history lessons.

I believe that statements by representatives of States
in the Security Council and in the General Assembly are
in themselves a response to the historical, political and
geographic situation of the city of Jerusalem. On this
basis, my country strongly condemns all these measures,
such as Israel's settlement activities, be they the building
of new settlements or the expansion of existing ones.

My country considers that all these measures are in
violation of the principles of the peace process. The
Israeli decisions that constitute provocation violate
international law and internationally binding decisions and
resolutions, and they undermine the foundations of the
peace process This can only undo the efforts that have
been undertaken over the past five years, plunging the
region back into a cycle of instability and conflict.

It is for this reason that we invite the Council and all
the States of the world, and in particular the two sponsor
States of the peace process and the European Union, to
work speedily in order to put an end to the expansion of
Israeli settlements; to dismantle existing settlements and
to put pressure on Israel, the occupying Power, to respect
the Hague Convention of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 - which prohibit any change in the
demographic or urban character of the occupied
territories, including Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian
Golan -- and to invite Israel to respect the resolutions of
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 1 )
6 March 1997

Fifty-second year
the Security Council and of other organs of the United
Nations.

We also invite the two sponsors of the peace
process H the United States and the Russian Federation --
as well as the States of the European Union to play their
role in order to save the peace process, which is at an
impasse and could even be in a state of regression.

Syria is fully prepared to conclude a just and
comprehensive peace. We believe this to be a strategic
choice as long as Israel participates seriously in the
achievement of that goal in a way that ensures justice and
human dignity, because this is in the interest of the peoples
of the region. These are vital interests for the region and for
the world.

If Israel is truly serious, if it wants to pursue the peace
process, if it wants to achieve a just and comprehensive
peace on the basis of Madrid, the principle of land for
peace and Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and other
resolutions, then Israel must continue negotiations from the
point where they were interrupted during the tenure of the
preceding Israeli Government. It must also withdraw to the
line of 4 June 1967, without any attempt to impose
preconditions, because these are the underpinnings and the
frames _ of reference of the peace process -- not
preconditions.

The road to peace is open, and it is known to all. The
security of States cannot be based on occupation, on
expansion and on the refusal to recognize the rights of
others. All those who are trying to convince the world that
peace exists in the region are only lying to themselves,
because a just and comprehensive peace cannot be achieved
except through Israel's total withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories, through the respect for international
legality and the principles of international law, and by
restoring to the Palestinian people their legitimate rights,
including the right to self-detemiination. This is what the
countries of the region and the countries of the world at
large want. This is how we will be able to achieve a just
and comprehensive peace. This is how peace and stability
will be brought to the region and to the world.

Israel cannot build settlements and drive out the Arab
peoples; it can bring in Jewish settlers who have never
before lived in that region and whose ancestors have never
lived in that region. Israel can continue to expand. It can
continue to demolish houses and to kill people in the
occupied Arab territories, but everyone must be aware that
Israel will not be able to stifle the Arab will. Israel's only

choice, therefore, is to work towards a genuine, just and
comprehensive peace.
Today, the eyes of the world are on the Council. We
are waiting for the Council to shoulder its responsibilities
and adopt a resolution that demands that Israel, the
occupying Power, immediately put an end to its
settlement activities in all the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem and the Golan.

