Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): There is a quote by the Russian author Tolstoy
that applies to some people present in this Chamber:
"When judging other people's shortcomings, remember
your own." As to Plato, he had this beautiful quote too:
"The bigger the lie, the easier it is to believe."

I understood from my American representative
colleague that it was the Syrian Government that
committed massacres and crimes of genocide against
humanity on behalf of her country's successive
Governments, in Viet Nam, Korea, Palestine, Iraq,
Libya, Nicaragua, Rwanda, the Great Lakes region,
Grenada, Cuba and Yugoslavia. Therefore, I start my
statement by declaring my Government guiltless of
these massacres. Perhaps we will publish a White Book
to clarify our position on these accusations.

Certain members of the Security Council have,
since the beginning of the terrorist war imposed on
Syria, continually sponsored draft resolutions and
called for emergency meetings, as is the case today, on
the basis of fabricated information, false reports and
false testimony. Such briefings are called every time
the Syrian Army and its allies make headway against
the armed terrorist groups that are supported by the
very Governments of these States. These are terrorist
groups and not civilians.

The situation remains the same today. The highest
official of the Organization, the Secretary-General,
who has only two and a half weeks left before the end
of his mandate, rushed in to make a statement on the
situation in the city of Aleppo on the basis of unverified
information, as noted in his own statement: "The United
Nations is unable to independently verify these reports."
If the Secretary-General is unable to verify these
reports, why then has he published them in an official
statement in order to denigrate the Syrian Government
and its allies in their fight against terrorism?

I think we have every right to also ask how the
United Nations, which is supposedly a source of
credible information, can publish statements and make
judgments on the basis of dubious sources. It can do so
only ifthe goal of some parties in the Organization is to
serve the agendas of certain States by militating against
the Syrian Government and its allies and providing
political and media coverage to the terrorist groups
working under their orders.

I would like to reiterate once again to the President,
the Security Council members and those States that
still uphold and respect international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism, that the actions of
the Syrian Government and its allies in Aleppo and other
Syrian cities are the expression of the constitutional
and legal obligation of every Government to protect
its citizens against terrorism. I deny categorically all
fabricated reports used by the representatives of the
United States, France and Britain, as well as their
partners, to claim that the Syrian Government is
targeting its citizens in Aleppo. I reiterate that all the
actions of the Syrian Government since the start of
operations in Aleppo, whether in opening safe crossing
points - including for armed people - securing shelter
centres, issuing amnesty decisions and providing all
forms of medical assistance and food, have had the
overarching goal of protecting civilians and saving
their lives.

Allow me at this stage to show the Council some
photos. This is what the Syrian army is doing in
Aleppo. Here is a picture of a Syrian soldier turning
his body into a bridge to help a woman get out of the
car that took her out of eastern Aleppo. This is what the
Syrian army does. Here is another soldier carrying on
his shoulders a civilian woman who was trying to flee
from eastern Aleppo, where the terrorists hold sway.
Here are Syrian soldiers arranging the distribution of
humanitarian assistance to civilians emerging from
eastern Aleppo. I have many photos, but I know that
time is short.

It is astounding that all of the reports of the
Security Council have referred to the presence of tens
of thousands of mercenary foreign terrorists in Syria
from more than 100 States, as I thank my colleague
the Permanent Representative of Egypt for mentioning.
However, some, in their effort to protect their terrorists,
typically deny the Syrian Government's obligation to
verify the identity of certain people accompanying
civilians as they leave certain Aleppo neighbourhoods
that had been controlled by terrorists, with a view to
preventing them from sneaking into and resuming their
terrorist acts in Syrian territories and maybe thereafter
the territories of any country represented here. I have
dozens of photos showing these terrorists who chopped
off heads and ate human livers as they sought to flee
eastern Aleppo alongside civilians, dressed as women.
These heroes were wearing women's clothes to flee with
civilians from eastern Aleppo, but they were arrested
by the Syrian army.

It is the height of hypocrisy to pursue allegations
against the Syrian Government based on the reports
and testimony approved only by the representatives of
those who convened this meeting and their intelligence
services, while at the same time they turn a deaf ear
and blind eye to accounts of our people in the city of
Aleppo who were liberated by the Syrian army and its
allies. Their testimony of their suffering at the hands
of armed terrorist groups, led by foreign terrorist who
do not speak Arabic, has been broadcast not only by
Syrian but also by foreign news agencies. It is also
the height of hypocrisy for the representatives of
these States to insist, based on the same reports, that
the Syrian Government is besieging its people and
obstructing their access to food and medicine, whereas
those same States continue to deny the fact that dozens
of warehouses that were under the control of armed
terrorist groups in Aleppo were full of all kinds of
medical and food supplies prohibited to civilians.

Is it reasonable for any reasonable person to believe
for a moment that dozens of thousands of terrorist
fighting the Syrian army in Aleppo could, for more
than four years, maintain their terror - targeting
civilians, the Syrian army and infrastructure - had not
they been continuously supplied with various types of
weapons and protection by the sponsors of terrorism,
some of whom are from States inside the Council? That
is the question.

I strongly and totally reject any fabricated lies,
allegations and hallucinations put forward by certain
Council members in their statements concerning acts
of revenge, summary executions and terror against
civilians. As to pursuing and targeting terrorists, that
lies at the very heart of the constitutional prerogatives
of the Syrian Government and of those Governments
that have acted likewise in the streets of Nice, Paris,
London, Boston, Oklahoma, North Carolina, Cairo,
Sinai, Tunis, Bombay, Nigeria, Kenya and Tanzania.

Finally, I was surprised to hear my colleague, the
British Ambassador, say that he does not believe that the
Syrian Government is resisting terrorism in Aleppo. He
is the same Permanent Representative who, alongside
his colleagues, has participated in the adoption of
16 resolutions on Syria, 8 of them on counter-terrorism.
All of those resolutions were adopted because of the
Syrian crisis, and all of them provide for the right of
the Syrian Government and the participation of other
Member States to fight terrorism in Syria and Iraq. So
how can he then deny the presence of terrorism in Syria
while there are eight resolutions on counter-terrorism
that his own country voted in favour of?

To conclude, if I may make a correction, the
question has been raised to as whether we should have
waited for the fall of Aleppo. Allow me to make a simple
correction. Aleppo did not fall. It is a Syrian city that
has been liberated from terrorism and its sponsors, who
toyed with safety and security of its population. Aleppo
has returned to the bosom of the State and the bosom of
the homeland. It did not fall.

The meeting rose at 1.55 pm.
