Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to
express my sincere thanks to all the briefers - Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev, Ms. Reitano and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) i for their
excellent and very concrete briefings. I think they have
all highlighted different aspects of United Nations
policing that are quite relevant to the discussion today.
I realize that there are other Police Commissioners in
the Chamber who did not speak, and therefore please
allow me to thank them all and their teams for the very
important work they do. They have our full support.

Police officers are key players in the security
architecture and the integrated approach, and they
focus on other security aspects than the military does.
Please allow me to focus on three important aspects of
policing in United Nations peacekeeping operations:
first, the need to strengthen the rule of law through

policing; secondly, the role of United Nations police in
preventing and addressing serious organized crime; and,
thirdly, the importance of gender-responsive policing.

First, strengthening the rule of law through police
reform is one of the key tasks of United Nations police
in post-conflict situations. Individual police officers
play a vital role in capacity-building and contributing to
reforms of the judicial chain. The effective deployment
of United Nations police will have a positive impact
on trust, inclusiveness and sustaining peace, which
strengthens the sovereignty of the host country.
Therefore, United Nations police have a vital role to
play during transitions and in exit strategies. United
Nations police also have a connecting role between the
mission and the population. They help increase trust
between the mission and the population, but also among
the warring parties. We see that, for example, in the role
United Nations police play during the elections-related
activities in big cities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The role of the United Nations police is essential
in a people-centred approach. For that reason, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes that the
Security Council should increase the relative percentage
of United Nations police officers in peacekeeping
operations. In order to strengthen the support of the
United Nations in peace operations, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and C6te d'Ivoire want to work together
with Council members to adopt a draft resolution on
police, justice and corrections.

Secondly, with regard to the need to address
organized crime in conflict, we often talk about the
need to address the root causes of conflict. Financial
gains from organized crime are a source of income
that funds insurgent groups and terrorists, and thereby
perpetuate the cycle of conflict. One way by which
missions can address that is by developing sustainable
host-State capacity to address serious crime and
organized crime. For example, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources directly funds armed groups. In line
with the Action for Peacekeeping declaration, I would
like to stress the importance of predeployment training
of police officers, in accordance with the human
rights due-diligence policy. The right people need to
be deployed in the right place at the right time, while
taking advantage of their specific police specialization.

Thirdly, I want to emphasize the importance of
gender-responsive policing. Gender-responsive policing
increases trust within the population, including in their
national police force. To build trust, both male and
female officers need to be involved in day and night
patrols. Having a good mix of female and male police
officers is essential to addressing sexual and gender-
based violence, support victims and help to ensure that
the perpetrators are held to account. That is especially
relevant in South Sudan, where the deployment of
more female police officers is needed to mitigate the
risk of sexual and gender-based violence in and around
internally displaced-persons camps.

In conclusion, United Nations police have a vital
role to play in establishing long-term stability and
sustaining peace in peacekeeping settings. Therefore,
we look forward to receiving the Secretary-General's
report on policing requested in resolution 2382
(2017), exactly a year ago today. Policing needs to be
mainstreamed in the United Nations system. It is an
indispensable dimension in peacekeeping missions,
as well as its integrated role, together with justice and
corrections, in the broaderjustice chain. That should be
a common interest and responsibility of all. I highlight
the need for the appropriate positioning of United
Nations police, including the Police Adviser, so that it
can be more adequately equipped to fulfil its key role in
prevention and sustaining peace.

Letme express my sincere gratitude to the Secretariat
for its support; the Police Commissioners for their
leadership; UNMISS, MONUSCO and MINUJUSTH
for their invaluable and relentless efforts in supporting
the people of those countries; and all police-contributing
countries for their indispensable contributions.

