Mr. Nunez Mosquera (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish on behalf of my delegation to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. We also convey our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Kenya for the manner in which he
presided over the work of the Council last month.

Barely five months ago, on 27 and 28
September 1996, the Security Council met to discuss the
situation in the occupied Arab territories. At a meeting
with the participation of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of a number of Member States, the Council adopted
resolution 1073 (1996), in which it called for the
immediate cessation by Israel of all acts which had
resulted in the aggravation of the situation in the area and
which had negative implications for the Middle East
peace process.

Today the Council is meeting once again, and we
note that resolution 1073 (1996) has yet to be
implemented; to the contrary, the international community
is witnessing a fresh escalation by the occupying Power,
which is again jeopardizing the entire peace process in the
region.

The decision of the Israeli authorities to establish
new settlements in the southern part of East Jerusalem is
yet another example of the obstacles being placed in the
path of the peace process. These settlements, moreover,
constitute a flagrant violation of the most basic rules of
international law and run counter to the letter and the
spirit of United Nations resolutions, including those of the
Security Council itself, on the Arab-Israeli conflict and
the Palestinian question; these resolutions continue to be
completely ignored.

Once again, the Middle East peace process is in
jeopardy, along with the fate of the occupied Arab
territories. Once again, the United Nations must without
delay take a firm stand against this challenge. The
Security Council must act without delay and with
unmistakable clarity to demand that Israel put an end to
the construction of settlements in the occupied Arab
territories in general and in Jerusalem in particular. The
policy of modifying the legal status, demographic
composition and geographical character of Jerusalem is
unacceptable.
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 2)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

Cuba reiterates its firm position in favour of the return
of all Arab territories occupied by Israel, and hopes that the
Security Council will shoulder the responsibility entrusted
to it under the Charter - and will do so with the same
vigour and alacrity it has displayed with respect to other
items it has considered.

