The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as Secretary of State of the
United States.

First, I appreciate all of the statements that have
been made. I have received those statements in the
constructive spirit in which I know they were offered.

I also want to acknowledge the presence of a large
number of Ambassadors with us today. Their presence
gives strength to the importance of this issue and is a
visible demonstration of the importance of this issue to
the international community. I welcome their presence
and appreciate their being here.

As stressed repeatedly in many of the statements
today, North Korea has failed to honour its commitments
of the past. It has made promises that it has broken.
Had this body fully enforced and stood behind the
resolutions it enacted in the past, vigorously enforcing
sanctions with full compliance, perhaps we would not
have found ourselves confronted with the high level of
tension we face today.

We will not negotiate our way back to the
negotiating table with North Korea. We will not reward
their violations of past resolutions. We will not reward
their bad behaviour with talks. We will engage in talks
with North Korea only when they exhibit a good-faith
commitment to abiding by Security Council resolutions
and their past promises to end their nuclear programmes.

That is why we must have full and complete
compliance by every country with the resolutions
that have been enacted by this body in the past - no
relaxation in the vigorous implementation of sanctions.
And we have called for those sanctions to be extended
to other areas as well, on a voluntary basis, and we
are calling globally for all countries to participate in
exerting pressure on North Korea. That is the way you
make your voice heard, through action. Any failure to
take action diminishes your vote for these resolutions of
the past. It diminishes your vote for future resolutions.
And it devalues your seat at the Council. We must
have full, complete compliance by all members of
the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
