Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Minister Yun
Byung-se, as you preside over the Security Council.
We are grateful for your convening of this meeting
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
ofresolution 1540 (2004), which laid the foundations for
the international community's collective efforts aimed
at preventing weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
their means of delivery from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, especially terrorists.

Russia was a sponsor of the resolution, which
underlines the indisputable fact that the solution to the
problem of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery continues to be
controlled by the leadership of the Russian Federation.
All of us, as responsible members of the international
community, have a shared long-term interest in
non-proliferation. And one of the most important tasks
is achieving the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in every country. In that contex, we note that the
resolution considers all three WMD types - nuclear,
chemical and biological - as a single issue, emphasizing
that the danger of any of them falling into terrorists'
hands is equal. Over the past 10 years, much has been
done to implement this legally binding international
instrument, and 172 United Nations States Members
have submitted their first reports on its implementation.

The work to ensure international cooperation in
providing effective national export control systems to
countries that do not possess those essential resources
continues, and Russia has been actively involved in it.
In particular, in January 2013 we organized a regional
seminar in Minsk on resolution 1540 (2004) for the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS). In Kazan, in June of that year, we held the fifth
meeting of security chiefs on the problem of terrorism
and on preventing WMD from falling into the hands of
non-State subjects. In December 2013, the CIS countries
held consultations in Moscow on export controls, and
this April we conducted a special seminar on export
control for the relevant CIS agencies.

The Russian Federation has been a responsible
party to the founding international legal instruments
in the area of non-proliferation, including the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, the Nuclear Suppliers Group,
the Missile Technology Control Regime, the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and other
international treaties and multilateral mechanisms.
We are constantly improving our own activities for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). and we plan to
submit an updated national report soon. We are also
playing an active role in the destruction of Syria's
chemical weapons.

A number of bottlenecks have appeared recently.
Planned and systematic work by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is
often reduced to activity in such secondary directions
as developing voluntary action plans and industrial
and academic contacts, and in participating in
various outreach measures. We see the basic work
of the resolution being done at the level of regional
and subregional organizations without adequate
non-proliferation expertise. In our opinion, those
trends could eventually weaken the 1540 Committee's
influence on processes linked to the resolution. In that
connection, it is vital that the Committee effectively
carry out its functions as the central coordinator
of global efforts to implement the resolution and in
defining the goals and priorities for those efforts.

In order to do that, we believe it should focus its
main efforts on countries that have not yet submitted
their first national reports. Another important area
of focus is the preparation for the holding in 2016 of
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We believe that further practical
steps for its implementation will be defined following
the review.

We look forward to a constructive and fruitful
cooperation with all partners in the interest of a
more effective implementation the provisions of the
resolution.

