Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
am happy to speak of the concrete achievements of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the field, the experience
obtained thus far, the general links with this Council as
well as the upcoming challenges confronting it.

Permanent peace is an objective that must be
accompanied, from an early stage, by a comprehensive
project on democracy, social inclusion, institutional
foundations and sustainable economic advances.
Security, development and respect for human rights
reinforce each other. The idea of a new structure for
peacebuilding is to strengthen the ability of the United
Nations to assist countries to move from conflict
situations into lasting and sustainable peace. As has
been clearly shown in the case of several countries
included in this Council's agenda, peacebuilding
activities should be integrated even during
peacekeeping operations, that is, once there is an
appropriate level of stabilization.

It is true that the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council have
their own roles in terms of peacebuilding. However,
experience has shown that there is a need for central
coordination in all these roles at the heart of the
system, and this is a task that the Peacebuilding
Commission has taken up with great dynamism.

Even more important than coordination is the
drawing up of integrated, peacebuilding strategies
which need to be adjusted to the specific needs of each
country and which can serve as a guide in that difficult
process of transitioning from a chaotic situation to
tangible achievements in peacebuilding, such as
disarmament, demobilization, integration and
reconciliation, the protection of vulnerable
populations, the reform of key institutions like the
judiciary and the security services, good governance,
the creation of democratic customs and tolerance, and
the building of a viable economy.

The key task of the Commission is identifying the
critical problems related to peacebuilding and
generally linked to the deep-rooted causes of conflict.
They vary according to country. Failing to pay
attention to these problems can lead to a renewal of
Violence.

In this regard, I would like to highlight the task of
identifying specific areas of activity for Burundi and
Sierra Leone, the two countries currently on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The formulation of
the Strategic Framework for Burundi marked a
considerable advance towards outlining an integrated
strategy, and we hope that it will be followed by
something similar for Sierra Leone, a country which
recently held successful elections.

In its first months of activity, besides addressing
its rules of procedure and its organization and methods
of work, the Commission adopted from the outset two
criteria that we feel are crucial; it sought precise
information in the field, and it maintained that the
authorities and the society of the country under
consideration should steer the process and constantly
express their own priorities and opinions. This broad
approach has been behind the tangible advances which
have been achieved so far and which will allow us to
gradually include new countries in the agenda.

Apart from the central role of and the guidance
given by the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we should also point to the
importance of the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, headed by Carolyn
McAskie. With regard to operational challenges, it is
clear that the Commission still has much to do in terms
of the monitoring systems for the planned strategies,
both quantitatively and qualitatively. Now we need to
make the leap towards more solid achievements in the
field, with a more active participation by the respective
countries' civil societies.

The Peacebuilding Commission, a governmental
advisory body, has the difficult task of improving its
links with this Council, with the General Assembly,
with the Economic and Social Council and with the
different agencies and departments of the United
Nations system. An important example of this desire
for interaction, which is very practical, is the letter that
the Chairman of the Burundi configuration in the
Commission sent to the Council, among others, on
25 September, with specific recommendations. The
Commission could have a crucial role in terms of
advising the Council in very difficult and delicate
moments, such as, for example, before the renewal of a
mandate of a peacekeeping operation.

We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate and thank Ambassadors Gaspar Martins of
Angola and Takasu of Japan first and present Chairs of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their work; the representatives of the
Netherlands and Norway, Chairs of the country-
specific meetings on Sierra Leone and Burundi; and
Ambassador Gallardo Hernandez of El Salvador for her
outstanding work in the Working Group on Lessons
Learned. Peru, along with the rest of the international
community, has great hopes for the effective work of
the Peacebuilding Commission. What has been
achieved thus far augurs well for the future.

