Baroness Ashton: Thank you, Madame, for
giving me the opportunity to again address the Council
on the contribution of the European Union (EU) to
international peace and security. As you know, we have
a long-standing commitment to effective
multilateralism, with a strong United Nations at its
core. Regional organizations are building blocks for
global governance, with a dual responsibility, first, to
enhance security, development and human rights in
their own region; and secondly, to support United
Nations efforts to promote those goals around the
world.

When I spoke to the Security Council last year
(see S/PV.6306), I updated members on the progress
regarding the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty and
the promises that it held for strengthening our
contribution to addressing international concerns. I am
pleased to report that, as of 1 January, the European
External Action Service, one of the Lisbon Treaty's
main innovations, is up and running. It operates under
my authority and brings together all our global
instruments. In our view, the Lisbon Treaty and the
External Action Service are not just good for Europe;
they also make us a better partner for the United
Nations, and we are very grateful for the Council's
help in recognizing this.

In many countries today, we are seeing people
demand greater freedoms, democracy and
accountability. In North Africa and the Middle East, we
are seeing demonstrations of people's basic wish to be
guaranteed political participation, fundamental
2

freedoms, social justice and economic development.
Last Friday, the 27 Heads of State and Government of
the European Union saluted the peaceful and dignified
expression by the Tunisian and Egyptian peoples of
their legitimate, democratic, economic and social
aspirations, which are in accord with the values that the
European Union promotes for itself and throughout the
world.

Our position is clear - the democratic
aspirations of citizens must be met through dialogue,
genuine political reform and free and fair elections that
are well prepared. These are not just words. The
European Union will offer practical support to the
transition processes. I have already discussed this with
the new Tunisian Foreign Minister, and I will visit the
region next week to clarify further how we can help.
We know from our own experience how difficult the
establishment of genuine democracy can be. These are
not linear processes. So we will help countries not only
to run free and fair elections, but also to fight
corruption, make local administration more
transparent, ensure the independence of the media and
make the justice system fully independent.

We are witnessing major change in the Middle
East. The contours of what will eventually emerge are
not yet clear - they cannot be - but we do know that
urgent progress on the Middle East peace process is
vital, now more than ever. This weekend, I chaired an
important meeting of the Quartet in Munich to review
the current situation and chart a common plan of
action. The search for a negotiated peace between
Israel and the Palestinians has dominated the region for
decades. Current developments must bring us closer to
that goal, not farther away, and I am pleased that the
Quartet agreed on a specific path to do this, with a
follow-up meeting of our envoys in Brussels. For the
first time, the Quartet will meet separately with
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators to hear their views.
We further agreed to meet again at the ministerial level
in March to ensure that momentum is kept up, and we
confirm our support for having a framework agreement
in place by September 2011.

The parameters for peace as seen by the European
Union are well known: two States, co-existing in peace
and security, with a Palestinian State that is sovereign,
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable, based
on the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States. Our position on this and on
11-22784
related issues, including settlements, remains
unchanged.

We are also active in laying the foundations of a
future Palestinian State through practical measures. We
are at the forefront of providing budgetary support and
assistance on security to the Palestinian Authority.
During my most recent Visit to the region, I confirmed
that we will front-load an initial financial package of
€100 million for the occupied Palestinian territories
under the 2011 budget. I also discussed the new
Palestinian National Plan with Prime Minister Fayyad
in Paris last week, and reconfirmed our support for his
plan. We will also host the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting in Brussels on 13 April to promote efforts on
Palestinian State-building.

The Security Council also knows well the needs
of the people of Gaza, and we are committed to
supporting them. I have proposed a comprehensive
package of EU support for the Gaza crossings,
focusing on infrastructure, equipment and training. Our
objective remains an unconditional opening of those
crossings, while addressing Israel's legitimate security
needs.

There is a third issue that affects the landscape of
the wider Middle East, and indeed global security, and
that is the Iranian nuclear issue. On 20 and 21 January,
I chaired a series of meetings between the E3+3/P5+1
with Iran. Given the well-known difficulties, our aim
was not to look for an immediate agreement but to
focus on building confidence. The fundamental
problem is that we do not have confidence that the
Iranian nuclear programme is purely civilian in nature.
Regrettably, our concrete proposals to build confidence
and transparency were met by an Iranian request that
we first recognize Iran's right to the entire fuel cycle,
including enrichment, and a lifting of sanctions.

That was disappointing. As the Council has
underlined on several occasions, Iran is at present not
complying with various obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. From our
side, we reiterated that we remain committed to the
path of dialogue. Our practical proposals remain on the
table. If Iran were to adopt some of the transparency
measures that most countries already implement, we
would be starting a process that could go far.

As I mentioned, electoral processes are essential
mechanisms for enabling people to enjoy their political
rights, but they are also very delicate. The situation in
11-22784
three countries has shown just how important it is for
electoral processes to be underpinned by
comprehensive political strategies.

Let me first refer to the successful developments
in South Sudan. The preparations and organization of
the referendum went well. I would like to praise the
Sudanese authorities for their willingness to find a
peaceful solution ensuring the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. They should
continue to do so and resolve all outstanding issues. I
also want to commend the United Nations for the
political leadership shown in this process. This
confirms that real progress can be made when the
international community persists with concerted
efforts.

We now have to stay focused so that the region
does not slip back into the violence that has marred it
for decades. The European Union contributed to the
referendum through the deployment of an important
observer mission. We will continue to engage with the
North and South alike - including on the crucial task
of building the Vital democratic institutions - in full
cooperation with the United Nations and other
partners.

Unfortunately, in some cases electoral processes
aimed at helping States move on from conflict and
internal strife have run into difficulties. Here, we have
to remain firm and engaged. In Cote d'Ivoire, the
European Union fully supports the leadership of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States and the key role played by the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. The EU recognizes
President Ouattara as the winner of the elections and
has also adopted targeted sanctions on individuals and
entities closely allied to former President Gbagbo to
step up the pressure and persuade him to heed the
results of the election. Going forward, we all want to
see real results from the process that was launched at
the recent African Union Summit, and which the EU
supports.

In Haiti, the recent electoral crisis proves that
reinforcing democratic institutions is essential. The
Provisional Electoral Council has taken a positive step
in announcing the final results of the first round of the
presidential and legislative elections. Now, all political
forces in Haiti need to contribute responsibly to the
electoral process so that the second round can be
concluded in line with the Constitution and the will of
3
the Haitian people. A transparent democratic transition
and political stability are prerequisites for success with
Haiti's recovery and reconstruction. The EU is
contributing significant resources to both civil
administration and the wider reconstruction of the
country.

The ideals of freedom, democracy and
accountability are universal, but they require the
presence of some forms of State order. As this Council
knows well, the international community also has to
deal with failed States where warlords and criminal
gangs prevent the establishment of the rule of law. In
these situations, we should focus first on ensuring
stability and security as the basis for any economic and
social development. There are several cases around the
world where the international community is working to
build functioning States where current structures fall
short. Somalia is a clear example. The EU has an
important and successful naval operation off shore,
called Atalanta. But there can be no long-term solution
to the problem of piracy without more stability on
shore and greater regional capabilities. Therefore, we
are working hard on these three tracks as part of an
overall regional strategy.

Security, development, democracy, good
governance and respect for human rights are all
interlinked. We must pursue these goals in concert or
none will succeed. That means addressing both the
wider root causes of conflict and developing
appropriate tools to address them. For example, we
know that in some cases the question of politicized
access to natural resources can cause or perpetuate
conflict. Similarly, climate change has a real impact on
vulnerable people and places, and hence on global
peace and security. These issues cannot be tackled by
fragmented approaches.

We should all invest more in conflict prevention,
finding ways to channel grievances through peaceful
means while addressing the underlying causes:
underdevelopment, weak institutions and lack of
democracy and respect for human rights. In this
context, I want to commend the Brazilian presidency of
the Council for convening a special meeting next
Friday on the links between development and security.
The EU is very engaged in making and supporting the
necessary connections between these areas, both at
headquarters and in the field, in full coordination with
the United Nations and other international partners.
I have limited my comments to some of the cases
which are perhaps the most pressing, but there are
many others in which the EU is engaged, with and in
support of the United Nations to protect the vulnerable
and ensure that genuine democracy can take root. Let
me end by acknowledging the great responsibility of
this Council in steering the international community
away from conflict and confrontation. In carrying out
its tasks, it can count on the full commitment and
support of the EU.

