The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2006/248, which contains the text of a
letter dated 18 April 2006 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the third semi-annual report on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).

Members of the Council also have before them
document 5/2006/298, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Denmark, France,
Slovakia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I wish to draw members' attention to document
S/2006/259, containing the text of a letter dated 24
April 2006 from the Syrian Arab Republic addressed to
the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Congo, Denmark, France, Ghana,
Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Slovakia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America

Against:
None

Abstentions:
China, Russian Federation


The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 13 votes in favour, none
against and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution has
therefore been adopted as resolution 1680 (2006).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make a statement following the
voting.


