Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I thank you very much, Sir,
for organizing this public meeting on East Timor. It is
indeed befitting that we gather here under your
presidency. Singapore has always played a central role
in keeping East Timor among the priorities of this
Council.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by Costa Rica this morning on behalf of the Rio
Group.

Today is a day for commemoration and we should
not forget that to commemorate means to honour the
memory of someone. We commemorate all those in
East Timor and abroad who endured years of exile,
deprivation and sacrifice or paid the ultimate price to
attain self-determination.

Today is a day for celebration and festivities and
to express joy for the realization of the right of a
people to statehood. The dream of self-determination
came true after a long and sometimes fierce fight that
mobilized an entire people. Brazil joins the
international community in welcoming East Timor to
the family of nations. This is a warm and wholehearted
welcome that comes from all those whose hearts and
minds were captured by the heroism of a resolute
people.

Today is also a day to pause and to think about
the formidable challenges that lie ahead. In this sense,
it is a moment to renew the hope for a better future.
Independence is a fundamental step, but it is also a new
beginning, the starting point for another long journey.

The historic birth of independent East Timor
would not have been possible without the sacrifice of
many East Timorese and the solidarity of the
international community. The United Nations played a
pivotal role in bringing East Timor to independence.
The example of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) shows that
the United Nations can muster political will and
harness financial and human resources in an effective
way, thus making a difference in the lives of the most
vulnerable.

The tasks and responsibilities of the United
Nations in East Timor are by no means over. The
success of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) will require the same level of
political commitment that characterized the support for
UNTAET. It is important to convey a clear message of
encouragement for the East Timorese people.
Independence Day represents the launching of a new
phase in which our steadfast cooperation in a vast array
of critical areas will be required to underpin the
exercise of sovereignty by the East Timorese. Our
enthusiasm for the independence of East Timor must
not lead to complacency. We should not lose sight of
the huge problems awaiting the new Government just
around the corner.

East Timor is a developing country in need of
international assistance. In that context, it becomes
even more pressing to continue to bring on a stream of
income-generating projects, to maintain the flow of
international aid and to create the conditions for
sustainable development. In other words, the
international community must continue to provide
generous support for the rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development of East Timor, bearing in mind the
continuing need for financial, material and technical
support for that country's development.

As Sergio Vieira de Mello stated recently, with
independence comes great responsibility. The leaders
of East Timor know that the effort to build functioning
economic and political systems does not depend only
on international aid. The political parties and the
leaders also have to undertake a serious effort in order
to make the State of East Timor work for each and
every citizen. Given the political maturity already
demonstrated by the political leaders in East Timor,
Brazil is confident that democracy will continue to
flourish and thrive through the people's vibrant
participation in the affairs of the community. It is
important to maintain and consolidate the institutions
that uphold the rule of law, ensure the peaceful
settlement of disputes, favour accountable and
transparent governance and provide for the basic needs
of the people in areas such as health and education.

Allow me to pay tribute once again to my fellow
countryman, Sergio Vieira de Mello, who served as the
head of the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET). Under his competent and
dependable guidance, UNTAET turned out to be an
unprecedented achievement in the history of the United
Nations. We are grateful for what Mr. Vieira de Mello
was able to accomplish, together with the people and
the leadership of East Timor and the dedicated staff of
UNTAET. The spirit of sacrifice of highly motivated
international civil servants, like Mr. Vieira de Mello
and his staff, provides a vivid example of how to put
into practice the principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter. Brazil welcomes the appointment of
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma of India as the head of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). We wish Ambassador Sharma every
success in his new duties.

Let me conclude by expressing to the East
Timorese people and Government of Brazil's best
wishes for progress, well-being and happiness. It is our
sincere hope that the birth of the new State will
represent the dawn of an era of peace and prosperity in
East Timor. We look forward to working side by side
with East Timor in the United Nations and in the
community of Portuguese-speaking countries.

