Mr. Amil (Pakistan): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Permit me also to congratulate Ambassador Churkin of
the Russian Federation on a successful Council
presidency during the month of January.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on this important issue at this crucial and
delicate time. Since the Council last convened a public
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, notable developments have
taken place in the region, which has long been used to
living in hope and despair, side by side.

While there was hope in the respite from violence
brought about by the ceasefire in Gaza, that proved to
be short-lived when, yet again, the region was thrown
into despair by Israeli actions in and around the Haram
Al-Sharif compound. We fully support the statements
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

Although media reports claim that the
controversial construction work near the Al-Aqsa
masjid is to be put off to allow public consultations,
preparatory excavations still continue, much to the
anguish of Muslims the world over. Those actions are
illegal, they play with the emotions of the Muslim
world and they threaten peace and security in the
region.

The Al-Aqsa masjid is the third-holiest place for
Muslims: the site of the ascension of the Prophet
Mohammed. We are distressed that the historic road
connecting the Bab al-Maghariba with the Al-Aqsa
compound has already been demolished, in addition to
two rooms adjacent to the Al-Buraq wall. The
excavation work undermines the foundations of
Al-Aqsa and could threaten it with collapse.

Since 1968, the Security Council has adopted 16
resolutions - in particular resolution 465 (1980) -
which have repeatedly declared that measures and
arrangements undertaken by Israel with the aim of
changing the legal status, demographic composition
and character of the holy city of Jerusalem - Al-Quds
Al-Sharif - are null and void and without any legal
validity whatsoever. These acts undermine the efforts
that the international community is undertaking to
resume the peace process. They also prejudice the
final-status negotiations by creating new realities on
the ground.

We call on the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities and to take urgent action to end the
Israeli violations against the Al-Aqsa masjid. We call
on Israel to respect the Council's resolutions and
international law, particularly international
humanitarian law. We strongly urge the Israeli side to
halt all work at the site and to take all precautions
necessary for the preservation of the holy places.

While these Israeli actions pose new obstacles to
peace, the Muslim world has been engaged in sincere
endeavours to promote peace in Palestine and
throughout the Middle East through the active
intercession of King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. Fatah
and Hamas have reached an agreement in Mecca to
form a national unity government. The Security
Council and the Quartet should welcome that
development. A Palestinian unity government willing
to negotiate peace with Israel is a positive
development. It should lead to an end to the economic
boycott of the Palestinian Government. It should also
lead to concerted efforts to ensure the stability of the
Palestinian Authority and to enhance its capacity to
preserve peace and promote development.

The Israeli-Palestine issue is at the heart of the
multiple challenges confronting the Middle East. A
comprehensive, just and lasting solution based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet's Road
Map is urgently needed.

In the context of the increasing and multiple
threats to peace and security in the Middle East,
President Musharraf recently visited several Islamic
countries to consult their leaders on ways and means to
address and overcome the threats arising from the
Palestinian problem, the Israeli-Syrian difficulties over

the Golan and the phenomenon of violent resistance to
the injustices suffered by the Muslim world. A core
group of Muslim countries has been constituted to
develop a comprehensive approach to the multiple
crises besieging the Middle East, including by
providing fresh impetus to resolve the long-standing
Arab-Israeli conflict. The President of Pakistan has
explained that new initiative to the leaders of Egypt,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iran, Malaysia, Indonesia
and the United Arab Emirates, and it has found general
support and understanding. We hope that a group of
leading Muslim countries will soon meet at a high level
to bring their collective weight to bear in favour of a
just and fair solution to the Palestinian question and
other problems afflicting the Middle East. The Security
Council should actively support those efforts.

