Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the floor and for organizing this
open debate, which gives us an opportunity to reflect
on our shared history and the principles that guide our
work for international peace and security. My statement
is based on that made of the European Union and that to
be delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Rule of the Law.

As many have already underscored, 2015 is
a special year. We commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi concentration
camps and the end of the Second World War. Beyond
these commemorations, we will also celebrate the
anniversary of the creation of the United Nations and
the institutions and mechanisms that the world created
to safeguard future generations from the scourge of
war. However, conflicts have continued, including
genocides, as in Rwanda or Srebrenica. One look
at the map of the world is enough to see how fragile
international peace and security are, and how important
it is to remain fully engaged in the implementation
of the objectives and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Indeed, the Charter enshrines the
principles that should guide our actions for peace and
international security: respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. Seventy years later, we are still implementing
those principles selectively. For example, while the
European Union was built as a project ofpeace, today it
is witnessing along its borders serious violations of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine.

Yet, for many years, we have been working to
develop the instruments and mechanisms that would
allow us to better prevent and better respond to
atrocity crimes and serious violations of human rights.
We created the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and later the
International Criminal Court. We have strengthened the
mandates of peacekeeping operations for the protection
of civilians, and at the 2005 Summit we unanimously
we reaffirmed our responsibility to protect populations
from the most serious crimes. In that regard, we have
made progress, it is true, in the area of early warning.
Belgium welcomes the Secretary-General's Rights Up
Front initiative, as well as the establishment, through
the Secretary General's Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and for the Responsibility to
Protect, of a framework for analysis for the prevention
of atrocity crimes.

Despite such progress, the very violent conflicts
that we are witnessing today demonstrate the extent to
which we need to operationalize the system that we have
created. These preventive mechanisms will continue to
remain irrelevant if we do not have the political will
to use them and to act before it is too late. That is why
we must strengthen our resolve to implement at the
national, regional and global levels the commitments
that we undertook in 1945 and 2005.

The responsibility to protect is rooted in the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and is based on a very simple core concept.
In the face of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing, all human beings
have the right to be protected. The responsibility
for their own peoples clearly falls first and foremost
to Governments; it is incumbent on them to create
legitimate and accountable national institutions that
serve all citizens, are credible in the eyes of the people,
and respect human rights and the rule of law .

Our Governments must all encourage the creation
of an environment conducive to mutual respect and
resistant to intolerance. Combating hate speech through
education and counter-discourse is essential in that
regard. Belgium, which currently holds the presidency
ofthe Committee ofMinisters ofthe Council ofEurope,
will organize the next high-level conference on the
theme "Tolerance is stronger than hatred" in Brussels
on 8 May. It will highlight how the diversity of our
societies is an asset, rather than a risk. Belgium has
also developed a new strategy to prevent radicalization.
In that context, it is committed to working for the
development of counter-discourse at the national and
international levels.

But when a State does not exercise its responsibility
to protect its population - wither because it does
not want to or because it cannot - the international
community cannot remain indifferent and must take
action. The Security Council has a special responsibility
in that regard, and should be prepared to use all
instruments that the Charter has placed at its disposal.

The use of the veto - for example, to block the
adoption ofresolutions on the situation in Syria - is an
unfortunate illustration of the shortfalls of the system
and a failure of the Council to shoulder its most
fundamental responsibilities. That is why Belgium
fully supports France's initiative in favour of a
voluntary abstention of the use of the veto with respect
to situations involving atrocity crimes. Belgium hopes
that the permanent members of the Security Council
will be able to agree on a modus operandi in that respect,
which we believe would be an important contribution to
the ongoing work on United Nations reform.

