Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Violence againstjournalists is unacceptable and should
be treated as an attack on society as a whole. The right
to the freedom of expression, and by extension freedom
of the media, plays a critical role in any democracy.
State authorities are therefore obliged to respect, and
to ensure respect for, those freedoms as an essential
component of effective governance. I should like briefly
to highlight four points.

First, the protection of journalists should not be
limited to armed conflict. According to Reporters
Without Borders, in 2014, one in three journalists was
killed outside of zones of armed conflict, and more
than 1,800 reporters were threatened or attacked.
The security of journalists must also be guaranteed
outside of armed conflict. Journalists continue to be
systematically targeted for their investigative work. We
need to remind ourselves that the right of journalists
to carry out their work under safe conditions without
fear of being harassed, threatened, attacked, beaten
or killed is of paramount importance to safeguard the
freedom of the media and of expression.

Secondly, Switzerland is convinced that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is essential to improve the implementation of
international norms and standards regarding human
rights, democracy and the rule of law. An example of
successful cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is the Joint Declaration
on Freedom of Expression and Responses to Conflict
Situations, issued earlier this month by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and
Expression, the Organization of American States, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the African Union's African Commission
on Human and Peoples' Rights. The Declaration
recognizes that States have a direct responsibility under
international human rights law to respect the freedom
of expression, including ensuring accountability for
any attacks on those exercising their right to freedom
of expression.

Thirdly, journalists not only need protection but
the perpetrators of violations against journalists must
also be held accountable. Switzerland would like to
remind everyone that journalists are protected as
civilians under international humanitarian law. They
may not be attacked and they have to be protected by all
parties to an armed conflict, which have an obligation
to ensure their safety and security. In situations of
armed conflict, journalists play an important role
in monitoring and prevention. By uncovering and
informing about violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law, they give voice to
victims of such abuses. Thus they play an important
part in ending impunity for such acts.

Moreover, media freedom is of paramount
importance during transition from violent conflict
to peace. It is for those reasons that, through its
development cooperation programmes, Switzerland
has been supporting the establishment of independent
media outlets in conflict-affected countries. Through
its partner organization, the Fondation Hirondelle, it
has contributed to the establishment of credible media
outlets that reach out to local communities in crises
situations, such as in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, the Republic of South Sudan and the Central
African Republic.

Finally, clear legislative and regulatory measures
need to be adopted to enable journalists to do their
work without interference or danger to their personal
safety and security. Switzerland has contributed to the
establishment of regulatory frameworks favourable
to the media and has helped journalists develop their
capacity to perform their vital role - for example, in the
Great Lakes region of Africa and Tunisia. Switzerland
is also helping to strengthen media associations that
advocate the freedom of the media and the safety of
journalists.
