Mr. Salam (Lebanon): As the occupation of the
West Bank and Gaza enters its fiftieth year, the words
of the late Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish resound
more than ever:

"The Palestinians are the only nation in the world
that feels with certainty that today is better than
what the days ahead will hold. Tomorrow always
heralds a worse situation".

For almost half a century now the Palestinians
have had that certainty ingrained in their minds. I need
hardly remind the Council that for the Palestinians the
situation on the ground has continued to deteriorate
for five decades, with daily violations of their basic
rights, including countless killings, arbitrary arrests
and detention, confiscation of their private property,
demolition of their homes and forcible displacement. And
as the days, weeks, months and years pass, more Israeli
settlements are built on occupied Palestinian territory,
thus rendering the prospects for a just, comprehensive
and durable peace, based on the principle of a two-State
solution, less and less attainable.

Amid this grim reality, the latest breakthrough
achieved with the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) must be welcomed.

Regrettably, and in reaction to the adoption of this
resolution, we have also witnessed Israeli inflammatory
rhetoric and hatred towards the United Nations and the
international community, denouncing a so-called bias
and a disproportionate number of resolutions against
Israel.

However, the only disproportionate matter here is
the number of years the Palestinian people have been
waiting for the implementation, yet to come, of dozens
of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
recognizing their legitimate aspirations of ending the
occupation and their right to live, like all other peoples
on the planet, in an independent and viable State of
their own.

There is no bias whatsoever when United Nations
resolutions recall, year after year, Israel's lack of
compliance with its obligations under the Charter and
international law. As a matter of fact, resolution 2334
(2016) mainly reaffirms - and let me stress the word
"reaffirms" - what has emerged for many years as a
consensus within the international community: that
Israeli settlements have no legal basis and constitute a
major impediment to the two-State solution.

If there is any bias in the matter, it would then
be that no concrete measures have yet been taken to
compel Israel to abide by its obligations under Security
Council resolutions, the Charter and international law.

I would also like to commend the Government of
France - and here I wish to say, thank you, France - for
all the efforts it has deployed to ensure the convening
of the Middle East Peace Conference in Paris on
15 January and to welcome its outcome in the form of a
joint declaration that reaffirmed the commitment of all
the participants to a negotiated political solution based
on two States, and

"underscored the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002 as a comprehensive framework
for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict".

Let me now turn to Syria.

Almost six years into the conflict, the time has
come to end this crisis, which has claimed hundreds
of thousands ofinnocent victims, destroyed livelihoods
and laid waste to much of the people's property and
to the country's infrastructure. Here we welcome the
efforts undertaken by Russia and Turkey to facilitate
the establishment of a ceasefire in Syria, and the
resumption of the political process through the meeting
that will be held in Astana later this month. We would
also like to acknowledge the efforts by the Government
of Kazakhstan to organize and host this very important
meeting, and we look forward to the resumption of
negotiations in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations.

Finally, as for Lebanon, despite the extremely
volatile situation in the Middle East, the resumption of
the normal functioning of State institutions is a clear
demonstration yet again of the resilience of my country
and the attachment of its citizens to their democratic
traditions. At the core of the ministerial declaration of
the Government of Lebanon, based on the acceptance
speech of the newly elected President of the Republic,
is the safeguarding of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
its stability. In this regard, my Government reaffirmed
its firm commitment to the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), which helped
to put an end to the 2006 Israeli war on Lebanon.

During this war, Israel bombarded the Jiyyeh power
plant, which resulted in an unprecedented oil spill on
Lebanese shores, with a substantial environmental
impact. And for 10 consecutive years, the General
Assembly has been adopting, by an overwhelming
majority of States from all regional and cross-regional
groups, a resolution requesting Israel to pay prompt
and adequate compensation to Lebanon for the damage
caused by the oil spill, deemed to be in the amount of
$856 million, as per the relevant report ofthe Secretary-
General.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating today what
I said before the Council in July 2016: it is almost
impossible to maintain peace and security if States
are not held responsible for their internationally
wrongful acts. Hence it is our firm belief that it is now
the responsibility of the Council, as the main organ
entrusted under the United Nations Charter with the
maintenance of peace and security, to act without delay
to ensure that Israel compensates Lebanon for the
damage related to the oil spill it has caused.

