Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium thanks the presidency of Sweden for
having provided us with this opportunity to together
undertake strategic reflection on an issue that is of
primordial importance and at the very heart of our
Organization. I also warmly thank the Secretary-
General for his committed words. We are very pleased
that he has chosen to accord significant importance
to this topic during his mandate. We support his
efforts fully, as well as the integrated approach that he
presented to us this morning.

Belgium fully subscribes to the statement of the
European Union, as well as that of Finland, delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation, to which
we belong. I wish to make additional remarks, and will
read out an abbreviated version of my statement.

Even in the absence of conflict, we should focus on
peacebuilding by working on human rights, sustainable
development and the rule of law. Conflicts do not
happen by chance. In that regard, we consider it useful
to continue to consider the establishment of an early-
warning mechanism at the United Nations, like those
in other international organizations. The prerogative
of the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the
Council to a situation posing a risk to peace and security
is fundamental. Regular contacts between the Security
Council and the Secretariat seem to be another way of
proceeding. Existing practices, such as the forward-
looking overview, need to be revitalized.

Investing in sustainable development, education,
human rights and the rule of law is crucial. Particular
attention to fragile and conflict-affected countries is all
the more necessary in order to ensure their inclusive
development through sustained peace. For example,
Belgium has decided to allocate 50 per cent of its
official development assistance to fragile and less-
developed countries. Belgium implores other donors to
do the same.

During a conflict, transitional measures can be taken
to invest in future peace. It is important, for example, to
launch an educational and reconciliation process for the
victims of conflict in order to avoid the perpetuation
of violence by a generation that has lost its standards.
In that regard, the rehabilitation and reintegration of
children affected by armed conflict through appropriate
programmes is crucial to efforts to ensure lasting peace
and security. Specific action in that area helps break the
vicious cycle of violence and can serve as a tremendous
instrument for conflict prevention.

The Security Council is regularly called upon
to review the mandates of peace operations, modify
them or decide to put an end to them. The transitional
phases resulting from those developments can lead to
periods of fragility for the State in question. Belgium
therefore pleads for better articulation of the activities
of peacekeeping operations with the rest of the
United Nations system, particularly during times of
transition. Belgium also advocates that transition and
exit strategies should be adequately articulated around
political processes, which should include the processes
of demobilization, disarmament, reintegration,
security-sector reform, transitional justice and
institution-building, as well as capacity-building.

The Security Council can contribute in several
ways to the goal of peacebuilding. It begins with the
inclusion in the text of its statements and resolutions
of concepts emphasizing the inclusiveness of such a
global approach. Whether it is women, children or
minorities, a specific mention can make a difference.
Moreover, its positions, whether to support a mediation
process or a peace agreement, or to condemn the lack of
progress, have an impact. The example of the Security
Council's support for the Arusha Peace Accords is a
positive illustration of that.

Finally, the use of mediation as an instrument for
the prevention and resolution of conflicts must become
more systematic. Belgium fully supports the Secretary-
General's work on mediation and advocates increasing
the capacity of regional organizations in that field.
Belgium also calls for women to play an active role
in the mediation and conflict-resolution processes in
their countries. I would like to take this opportunity to
point out that Belgium will organize, on 14 February in
Brussels, a high-level international conference on the
subject of mediation.

