Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank the President of
the Security Council, His Excellency Mr. Liu Jieyi, for
kindly inviting me to brief the Security Council today.

The Council will recall that in my most recent
briefing in March (see S/PV.7906), we were confronted
with unprecedented hostilities targeting civilians that
resulted in gross human rights abuses, violations of
international humanitarian law, a dramatic increase
in the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and an appalling humanitarian crisis in
the country. In that context, I posed the following
questions. How do we stop the fighting? How do we
stop people from dying of starvation, and how do we
ensure the inclusion of all parties - communities and
stakeholders - in the peace process so as to allow for
peace, relief and inclusivity?
Immediately after that briefing, my team devised
and drafted the One Voice initiative, which is a
l2-point message from all of us to the South Sudanese
leadership, demanding the cessation of hostilities and
the restoration of the permanent ceasefire. It remains
as pertinent and relevant today as it was when it was
written. With the blessing of the Chairperson of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
His Excellency Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, I engaged in a comprehensive
and constant round of consultations with all the critical
stakeholders, specifically in line with our One Voice
initiative and the pursuit of peace.

I have maintained regular and forthright dialogue
with the President of the Republic of South Sudan, His
Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, and the First Vice
President, General Taban Deng Gai, while constantly
reiterating our message of peace, humanitarian relief
and political inclusivity. I have met and briefed IGAD
Heads of State and Government, the IGAD Council of
Ministers, the African Union Commission Chairperson,
His Excellency Mr. Faki Mahamat, and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. I have also met with
His Excellency Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, President of the
Sudan; His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
President of Uganda, and His Excellency Mr. Uhuru
Kenyatta, President of Kenya, for the purpose of
identifying a way out of the escalating violence and
humanitarian crisis.

I appeal to IGAD, the African Union, the United
Nations and our international partners to adopt One
Voice in our common engagement with the leaders of
South Sudan. I underscore the need for the leaders of
the region to align their messages and actions so as to
prevent the situation in South Sudan from deteriorating
even further. The leaders of the region expressed their
grave concern about the recent escalation of violence,
the ongoing violations of the permanent ceasefire, and
the worsening humanitarian situation in the country.
They emphasized that the conflict in the country
requires a political - not a military - solution. They
demanded wide inclusivity in the dialogue among
the belligerents.

In South Africa, I met with the Vice President of
the Republic of South Africa, His Excellency Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, in his capacity as South Africa's Special
Envoy to South Sudan. I also met with Dr. Riek Machar,
former First Vice President of the Republic of South

Sudan. The message I conveyed to Mr. Machar was to
renounce violence, declare a unilateral ceasefire and
participate in the national dialogue. He declined to do
so. However, he demanded a new political process for
the region outside South Sudan.

I have also taken the time to meet with some of the
key Sudanese stakeholders in opposition and currently
out of the country. I met with Ms. Rebecca Nyandeng
Garang de Mabior and former detainees, Pa'gan Amum,
Kosti Manibe, Mr. Majak D'Agoot and Mr. Cirino
Hiteng. I also met with Mr. Lam Akol, Thomas Cirilo,
James Oryema and others in order to listen to their
grievances. My message to all of them was that those
who are still fighting should stop immediately for the
sake of the country that they claim to love so much, and
that all serious parties should pursue a political path to
return to the peace process.

In principle, most welcomed my message. Like
Mr. Riek Machar, they demanded a negotiated ceasefire
and expressed their willingness to participate in a
credible political process outside South Sudan, which
might lead to their return with the implementation of
the peace agreement. In that regard, they underlined
the importance of the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. I hope that by engaging with such
determination, we will drive a peaceful, open and
transparent dialogue, which is imperative if we are to
achieve an inclusive political process and to silence the
guns

Accordingly, IGAD held an extraordinary Summit
of the Heads of State and Government in Addis Ababa
on 12 June and, following my recommendation, they
decided to convene a high-level revitalization forum
of the parties to the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, including
estranged groups, with a view to discussing concrete
measures aimed at restoring a permanent ceasefire,
returning to the full implementation of the peace
Agreement and developing a revised and realistic
timeline and implementation schedule for democratic
elections at the end of the transition.

We welcome that timely decision of the IGAD
leadership to seize the opportunity to end the senseless
fighting, revitalize the implementation of the peace
Agreement and restore hope to the people of South
Sudan. The revitalization of the implementation of the
peace Agreement is not a renegotiation. The forum
will explore options that can restore dynamism and
prominence to the peace process. It is our hope that
such a revitalization process will be pursued in the
spirit of peace, inclusivity and compromise. I hope
that all reasonable and positive proposals to restore
and reinforce the effective implementation of the
peace Agreement will be put forward, discussed and
considered at the forum. I encourage all parties and
estranged groups to seize this opportunity to put the
country first, make compromises and accommodate
one another for the sake of peace.

Pursuant to its mandate, the IGAD Council of
Ministers met on 2 July and adopted guidelines and
an indicative matrix for the convening of the high-
level revitalization forum within three months. The
revitalization process is intended to ensure the broadest
possible consultation with stakeholders and to generate
proposals that could make the implementation of
the peace Agreement more accommodating, viable
and sustainable.

Ultimately, the success of that process will require
a willingness on the part of the parties to the peace
Agreement, and the estranged groups to compromise
and accommodate one another politically. A window
of opportunity has opened, and we must all seize it.
I believe that, with a resolute and unified approach
on the part of IGAD, the African Union, the United
Nations and the international community - and with
cooperation from the South Sudanese leaders - we can
recover lost ground and restore hope to the people of
South Sudan.

