Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH) is a source of general
satisfaction. It provides a positive indication that the wave
of violence which reached its peak last summer has
subsided, and that the security situation is improving
steadily due to the continued improvement of the
capabilities of the Haitian police and its enhanced
effectiveness in dealing with attempts to breach security and
stability.

Such positive developments furnish practical proof of
the success of UNSMIH in carrying out its mandate. They
also provide further proof of its real value in supporting
stable and secure conditions and in consolidating the newly
born democracy and the rule of law in Haiti.

Based on our solidarity with the Government and
people of Haiti, we would like to enhance their ability to
preserve these achievements and to give State institutions,
the judicial system and the Haitian National Police an
appropriate chance to reach a certain degree of development
that would ensure self-sustainment and Viability after the
United Nations withdrawal. Since the Government of
President Preval considers the continued presence of the
United Nations in Haiti necessary during this period fraught
with danger, the delegation of Egypt supports the
reinforcement of UNSMIH's success by extending its
mandate for an additional period, as noted in the draft
resolution. We also support the Secretary-General's keeping
the force under constant review, in the event that further
reductions in the strength of the mission can be made
without impairing the performance of its tasks.

In this connection, the delegation of Egypt would like
to express its appreciation for the voluntary contributions
made by Canada, the United States of America and other
countries to enable the Support Mission to do its work.

In conclusion, I would express our conviction that the
optimum solution to Haiti's problems will, in the long run,
be found only through social and economic development,
which will bolster the efforts being made by the
Government of Haiti to rebuild the country's infrastructure
and achieve the consolidation of democracy and the rule of

 

law to replace the culture of violence under which the
people of Haiti had suffered for many years of its history.
We therefore strongly support the draft resolution's
request to all States, particularly donor States, and
international financial institutions to provide the necessary
technical and financial support, through bilateral and
multilateral channels, for the realization of Haiti's
objectives in the sphere of development. The delegation
of Egypt will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

