Ms. Nyamudeza (Zimbabwe): I join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on a multidimensional approach to United
Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping represents one of
the most visible, difficult and critical roles played by
the United Nations.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative ongypt on behalfofthe Non-Aligned
Movement.

My delegation shares the view that peacekeeping is
an essential tool for overcoming threats to international
peace and security and supporting complex transitions
from conflict to stability. Over the years, Zimbabwe has
demonstrated its strong commitment to peacekeeping
operations by contributing troops, police and observers.
It currently has a presence in several United Nations
missions. My delegation will continue to contribute to
the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, whose mandate is to review all aspects of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

My delegation is of the View that the legitimacy of
United Nations peacekeeping operations is essential
for their long-term effectiveness. It is of the utmost
importance that peacekeeping missions be conducted
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. In addition,
peacekeeping should adhere to the three basic principles
of peacekeeping operations, that is, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate. They must
also respect the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-intervention in States' domestic
matters. In that regard, it is important to provide clearly
defined mandates, a unified line of command and
efficient use of existing resources.

The complexity and challenges faced by United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and the expectations
they generate, are constantly growing. Nonetheless,
there is now clear recognition that various interlinked
factors must be considered in any peace agenda.
Furthermore, comprehensive actions should be taken
with a view not only to establishing peace but to
ensuring its durable consolidation. My delegation is of
the View that it is therefore necessary to seek solutions
to the root causes of conflicts, since peacekeeping is
no substitute for political action and local conciliation.
It is also important that we improve the effectiveness
of the United Nations in addressing conflict at all
stages, from prevention to settlement and post-conflict
peacebuilding.

United Nations peacekeeping has scored several
successes over the years. However, it faces tremendous
challenges as a result of the growth in both the number
and size of its operations, as well as the complex
and multidimensional nature of their mandates.
Furthermore, the current financial challenges
facing Member States, the differing perspectives on
mandated tasks and, in some instances, the loss of
host Government consent, add to the challenges and
pressures on peacekeeping. It is our firm belief that
United Nations peacekeeping operations must have
the necessary resources - in terms of financing,
equipment and personnel 4 to enable them to achieve
their set mandates and objectives.

It is clear that partnership is the cornerstone of
success in United Nations peacekeeping. The role of
troop-contributing countries in peacekeeping remains
a top priority. We stress the importance of those
countries' full participation in policy formulation
and decision-making in order to achieve the
partnership and effectiveness to which United Nations
peacekeeping aspires. Given the size and dynamism of
peacekeeping operations, it is important to have strong
coordination and communication among troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council, the
Secretariat and host Governments.

Furthermore, it is important to reach consensus
among Member States on developing policies and
ensuring that only approaches that have been adopted
by them collectively will be implemented. It is vital to
avoid changing the mandated tasks of peacekeeping
missions without first consulting with troop
contributors. Additionally, the Security Council must
draft a clear and achievable mandate, based on objective
assessments, without rushing to adopt mandates that
lack a political basis or sufficient resources. It is our
view that unjustified expansions in the capacities of
peacekeeping operations could easily blur the line
between peacekeeping and peace enforcement, or even
jeopardize the impartiality of the mission's military
component. It is also important to have clear exit
strategies for the various missions.

As reflected in Article 52 of the Charter of the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
play a major role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Security Council's cooperation
with regional organizations is no longer an option
but a necessity. Such cooperation must be based
on the principles of comparative advantage and
complementarity of roles. Since regional organizations
are closer to the conflicts and might understand the
dynamics best, they can play key roles in the areas of
preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding, with the timely support of the Security
Council.

In that regard, Zimbabwe applauds the strengthening
of relations between the African Union and the United
Nations, in particular between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. The cooperation between the two
institutions in peacekeeping operations in the Sudan
and Somalia has produced tangible successes. We
commend that level of cooperation and would like to
see it replicated elsewhere as necessary.

Peacekeeping operations play a crucial role in
helping countries to establish the foundations of peace,
reduce the risk of backsliding into conflict and lay the
foundations for recovery and long-term development.
We share the View that there will be no sustainable
peace without efforts to fight hunger, poverty and
inequality.

Zimbabwe supports the enhanced integration of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Itis therefore important
to formulate an integrated and coherent approach to
post-conflict development that builds upon host-country
priorities and that encourages them to get back on their
feet in a sustainable matter. In that regard, we underline
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation in
developing national capacity and mobilizing resources
for institution-building. It is also vital to strengthen the
coordination between peacekeeping operations and the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, including
its agencies, funds and programmes, while acting in
close cooperation with the national authorities of the
State concerned.

The safety and security of peacekeepers is of
paramount importance. We urge the Secretariat and
Security Council to continue to prioritize the issue.
In conclusion, Zimbabwe stresses the value of
partnerships among all stakeholders to ensure the
overall success of United Nations peacekeeping. Only
the international peace and security of all should be our
guide and goal.

