Mr. llkin (Turkey): Let me start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. My warmest thanks
and congratulations go also to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Argentina.

Turkey has aligned itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the European Union. However, I would like to touch
upon a number of points which we deem fundamental,
given the current situation in the region.

It is indeed unfortunate that the window of
opportunity created by Israel's withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank could not be
capitalized upon so as to lead to a genuine political
dialogue and thus to a permanent solution of the
conflict between the Palestinians and the Israelis.

We were, once again, distressed to hear today that
a number of innocent people lost their lives or were
seriously injured by a suicide bomb attack in Tel Aviv.
We condemn that horrendous act. We are equally
saddened to see innocent civilians being killed or
maimed by punitive military operations. Neither resort
to violence leading to such horrendous acts nor resort
to military force is any remedy for political issues and
problems. Resorting to violence and force only breeds
further violence and force.

The lack of confidence between the two sides,
with surging acts of violence on the one hand and the
use of force on the other, is inevitably leading to a
vicious circle, which needs to be broken. We are quite
concerned about the future of this region.

While the outcome of democratic elections
cannot be contested, it is equally important that the
Governments assuming power through such elections
adopt and abide by the well-defined and established
principles of democratic regimes. At this decisive
moment in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, Turkey
strongly encourages both sides to pursue pragmatic
policies.

It is our ardent view that the Palestinian and the
Israeli leaders have responsibilities and obligations for
the well-being of their respective peoples, as well as
for regional peace, security and stability. We urge both
the Palestinian Authority and Israel to take tangible
steps with a view to re-establishing the platform of
dialogue for the resumption of the peace negotiations
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Quartet road map and the vision of two States, as well
as the principle of land for peace. In this context, we
also must emphasize that both parties must refrain
from unilateral actions that might prejudge a final
settlement.

The long-awaited peace, security, socio-economic
development and overall progress in the Middle East
cannot be attained unless the Palestinian question is
resolved through a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement. Turkey attaches great importance and is
ready to contribute to those efforts by the international
community to encourage both sides to adopt more
constructive policies. With this objective in mind,
Turkey stands ready to work with the international
community to facilitate meaningful progress in the
Middle East peace process.

