Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I congratulate you and your entire team,
Madam President, for the way in which you have led
the work of the Security Council during the month
of October. We appreciate the fact that you have kept
the briefing format for the wrap-up session, a working
mechanism that strengthens the transparency of this
body.

We would like to highlight two elements that we
consider positive: the holding of the open debate on
women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) and
the debate on working methods (see S/PV.7285). We
appreciate the approach on the theme of women and
peace and security, focusing on internally displaced
women and women refugees, as an important step
forward on this agenda and that of the protection of
civilians. We believe that focusing on subjects from
new perspectives that correspond to the challenges
faced by the international system is a way of making
the Council's work more effective, as was demonstrated
in the high number of States that participated in the
meetings. We believe that the statements made in
that debate will be used to guide the independent
global study commissioned by the Secretary-General,
pursuant to resolution 2122 (2013), particularly with
respect to identifying the emerging issues linked to
that agenda, such as the challenges raised by non-State
actors, including terrorist groups.

We also welcome the approach followed in the open
debate on working methods that allowed us discuss
the possible expansion of the mandate of the Office of
Ombudsperson to other Sanctions Committees as a way
to strengthen due process in proceedings. Similarly, we
note the initiative to develop a follow-up mechanism for
referrals to the International Criminal Court.

With respect to the situation in Somalia, we are
interesting in seeing how that can be addresed in the
agenda from different points of view, which would
allow the Council to act effectively. In that regard,
we think it crucial that the humanitarian perspective
not be set aside, not only in this case but also in all
the situations on the Council's agenda, in particular
those that are not high profile, such as the case of
Somalia. In that respect, we believe that this organ
has a responsibility to contribute to finding solutions
involving humanitarian crises.

Likewise, we View favourably the measures
adopted to strengthen and control the charcoal and
arms embargoes established by the Council. We
understand that such measures neither affect the rights
and obligations established by the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, nor constitute a
precedent, since they are based on a request made by
the Federal Government of Somalia itself.

We cannot conclude without referring to the
adoption of resolution 2180 (2014) on the situation
in Haiti, which my country supported despite the
apprehensions that we share with other troop-
contributing countries of the region. We maintain that
position in the constructive spirit with which we have
approached our membership on the Security Council,
and as an expression of our ongoing commitment to the
democratic process, the rule of law, the promotion of
human rights, and the socioeconomic development of
Haiti, where the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti has played and continues to play an important
role. As we pointed out when the resolution' was
adopted, it is crucial to take the opinions of troop-
contributing countries into account when we engage
in reconfiguration processes. We believe that helps to
make the Council's decision-making more effective and
more inclusive.

Lastly, we wish Australia a successful presidency,
and assure it of our support.

