The Secretary-General: We meet three days
after the capture by Coalition forces of Saddam
Hussein. His capture is not just a symbol of the
downfall of the former regime in Iraq. It is also an
opportunity for a new beginning in the vital task of
helping Iraqis to take control of their destiny - of
helping them to create a secure, stable and independent
Iraq which can once again take its proper place in the
region and in the international community.

The task of restoring the effective exercise of
sovereignty to Iraqis, in the form of a provisional
Government, is urgent. While there may not be time to
organize free, fair and credible elections for that
purpose, it is essential that the process leading to the
formation of a provisional Government be fully
inclusive and transparent. Every segment of Iraqi
society should feel represented in the nascent
institutions of their country. No one should feel
excluded, pending the subsequent holding of free
elections for a constituent assembly and a parliament.
Iraqis must have real ownership of the process by
which they are governed.

Let me also say that it is right that Hussein should
be held to account for past deeds, through a procedure
that meets the highest international standards of due
process. Accounting for the past will be an important
part of bringing about national reconciliation - a
process that is vital to Iraq and to all Iraqis.

The United Nations is ready to play its full part in
helping Iraqis resume control over their destiny and
build a better future. The report before the Council
(S/2003/1149) sets out my thinking on this in
considerable detail.

The Security Council, in resolution 1511 (2003)
of 16 October 2003, resolved that the United Nations
should strengthen its vital role in Iraq. But the Council
was also mindful of the fact that, owing to persistent
security concerns, few international United Nations
staff could continue to operate inside the country for
the time being. Our challenge, therefore, has been to
find creative ways of intensifying our engagement
despite diminished capacity on the ground. The report
before the Council explains how we have attempted to
meet that challenge and how we propose to do so in the
coming months.

As my report makes clear, despite the temporary
relocation of international staff outside the country, the
United Nations has not disengaged from Iraq - far
from it. Nor does it mean that we will not return in full
force when circumstances permit. Meanwhile,
however, our on-the-ground engagement in important
political and human rights work has suffered
tremendously as a result of the 19 August bombing,
which decimated the Office of the Special
Representative, the core part of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

The Office needs to be reconstituted. I have
started that process with the appointment of Ross
Mountain as my Acting Special Representative. He will
head our efforts to establish a core of UNAMI based
outside the country. He will also lead our planning for
the Mission's eventual and incremental return to Iraq as
soon as circumstances permit.

We cannot say with any certainty when
circumstances will indeed permit the return of
international staff to the country on a permanent basis.
But there is much that we can do, and that we are
already doing, from outside the country. I myself
remain in close contact with heads of State or
Government, Foreign Ministers and ambassadors,
trying to help forge international consensus on the way
forward. To that end, on 1 December I convened a
meeting of members of the Security Council and States
of the region. For its part, the core team of UNAMI
based in the region will keep abreast of key
developments on the political and human rights fronts
and will explore avenues for United Nations assistance
while preparing the ground for United Nations
involvement in the longer term.

Meanwhile, as my report indicates, we need much
greater clarity on what is expected of the United
Nations, by Iraqis and by the Coalition, in terms of
assistance to the political transition. That is not, as
some have concluded, a formula for the United Nations
to stand aloof from the process. The stakes are too high
for the international community just to watch from the
sidelines. Rather, I have called for clarity because, in
taking the difficult decisions that lie ahead, I need to
weigh the degree of risk that the United Nations is
being asked to accept against the substance of the role
we are being asked to fulfil. I therefore need to know
how responsibilities will be allocated and who will be
taking what decisions. Above all, I need to know what
the Iraqis expect of the United Nations, and whether
we will be in a position to meet those expectations.

Iraq is likely to remain a difficult environment.
We should not expect that the end of the occupation
and formation of a provisional Government will
automatically bring about an end to insecurity, even
though we should expect some improvement. Events of
the past three days should remind us that we must
remain prudent in our assessments. There is no
panacea.

But a credible and inclusive transition - one that
broadens the base of support for the provisional Iraqi
Government - offers the best hope of stability, and of
political mobilization by Iraqis against the violence.

At every step along the road, there will be
formidable challenges. But these challenges will not be
insurmountable if a genuinely national Iraqi agenda is
forged, and if it is supported by a united international
community, including Iraq's neighbours and key States
in the region, which have a crucial role to play.

Political, financial and military assistance will be
required for some time to come. As emphasized in my
report, the Iraqi people need to be reassured that the
international community - current Coalition and non-
Coalition members alike - will respond generously to
their requests for help. And they need to be confident
that this commitment will be maintained down the
road, when a provisional Government has been formed
and when the situation in Iraq may no longer dominate
news headlines.

The 26 million people of Iraq have endured
decades of war, sanctions, tyranny and misery. They
are now living through a process that will define the
future of their country, for their sake, and for the
memory of those who have given their lives to help.

