Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing, and to pay tribute to Ms. Sima Samar for her
work and courage as a powerful voice for human rights
and women's rights in Afghanistan. I welcome the fact
that she is the first woman ever to speak in the Security
Council on Afghanistan.

Italy strongly condemns the heinous terrorist attack
that took place two days ago at a Kabul military hospital,
as well as all other attacks that have been carried out in
that country. We extend our deepest condolences to the
families of all of the victims.

We also reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Government of National Unity to combat terrorism and
violent extremism, which continue to represent serious
threats to the security and stability of Afghanistan.
It is essential to have Afghan security and defence
forces that are capable of addressing those persistent
challenges effectively and autonomously.

In the framework of the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission, Italy is committed to providing
tangible support to the Government of Afghanistan's
in its efforts to strengthen the national defence security
force. The members ofthe force deserve to be recognized
for their bravery. We also note the important progress
achieved thus far in improving the capability of the
security forces, also thanks to NATO and its partners
for their assistance. We hope those achievements can
serve as a solid foundation for further progress.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan's (UNAMA) statistics for 2016 consistently
show high levels of violence in the Afghan conflict.
We are deeply concerned about the further increase in
civilian casualties, as outlined in the Secretary-General
report (S/2017/189), as well as the alarming situation
of internally displaced persons and returnees. Our
imperative must be to work together, to renew our efforts
to break the spiral of violence and to lay the foundation
for lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan.

In that context, my country wishes to reiterate its
full support for the commitment of the Government
of National Unity to launch an Afghan-led and
-owned peace process. That objective would require
the constructive involvement of all international and
regional stakeholders capable of making a significant
contribution. In that regard, especially in its capacity as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council, Italy
strongly supports all of those initiatives.

In order to increase opportunities for dialogue
and political understanding in Afghanistan between
the Government and the insurgent movements, it is
essential that there also be a positive climate and true
cooperation among neighbouring countries. It is our
sincere hope that this condition will soon be met on
the basis of enduring common interests, such as the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism, which
is a dangerous destabilizing factor - not only for
Afghanistan but for the region as a whole.

Achieving peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan also requires the consolidation of its
institutions and the transformation of the State through
effective Government action that can meet the needs and
legitimate expectations of its people. The Government
of National Unity is engaged in a fundamental reform
process, most recently as it concerns the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework and the
priority national programmes. We therefore welcome
the determination of the Government of Afghanistan
and the many results already achieved in various sectors.

Together with our partners in the international
community, Italy renewed its tangible support for that
internal reform process at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan last October. Nevertheless, it is crucial that
those reform efforts, for which an internally cohesive
Government is an essential prerequisite, continue
making further progress towards self-reliance. Quick
and decisive action towards further reform is especially
important in order to meet the legitimate aspirations
of the overwhelming majority of the Afghan people.
Should those hopes be dashed, it will inevitably lead to
distrust in the institution of the State.

The fight against corruption must continue to be
a top priority. We therefore appreciate the engagement
and the initial measures adopted by the Government in
that regard, and we urge it to proceed resolutely forward
in that struggle.

Another priority must continue to be the persistent
defence and promotion of the rights of women and their
empowerment at every level of society. We are therefore
concerned about the risk of setbacks in that area, such
as limited access to education for young women and
girls 4 also due to the deteriorating security situation.
We invite the Government of Afghanistan to make
further efforts in that regard. Furthermore, we hope
that the affirmation of the rights of women can also be
achieved with a View to promoting the peace process
through their active participation in the framework of
future negotiations.

In the light of encouraging developments in recent

months in the area of elections, we urge the Government
of Afghanistan to prioritize the completion of the reform
process, so as to allow for the holding of parliamentary
district elections in a democratic, transparent and
inclusive manner.

Afghanistan's Government can count on the
international community's full support, which has
provided an exceptional level of assistance to that end.
But Afghan institutions have to be in the driver's seat, as
the primary responsibility for progress lies with them,
in keeping with the principle of mutual accountability,
which today, more than ever, constitutes a cornerstone
of our partnership.

Lastly, in the difficult and complex circumstances
that Afghanistan is currently facing, UNAMA
continues to play an essential role in coordinating the
international community's support, with the common
goal of achieving peace and sustainable development
for the Afghan people. Italy therefore associates itself
with the expression of warm appreciation for its work
and supports the upcoming renewal of its mandate.

