Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation to attend this open debate of the
Security Council.
At the same time, I wish to align myself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
adopted at its recent Summit held in Margarita Island.

My delegation once again strongly reiterates the
support of the Government and the people of Ecuador
for the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as expressed on
12 July in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7736). I would
also like to renew our historic commitment to the cause
of peace in the Middle East.

We once again express our concern about the ongoing
absence of a decision and the lack of the necessary
political will to implement the relevant Council and
General Assembly resolutions, circumstances that
undermine the international community's initiatives
to resolve continuing conflicts in the region, thereby
encouraging conduct that leads to systematic practices
condemned by international law, including human
rights law, international humanitarian law and even
the Charter of the United Nations, as we have heard
in the briefings presented by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General and by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator in this very forum.

Ecuador co-sponsored General Assembly
resolution 67/19, which granted Palestine the status of
a non-member observer State in November 2012. On
24 December 2010, President Rafael Correa was one
of the first Heads of State to recognize the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders. As recognized in
the Middle East Quarter report (S/2016/595, annex),
we believe that a negotiated two-State solution is the
sole path to achieve a durable peace that addresses
Israel's security needs and the Palestinians' aspirations
for sovereignty and independence and puts an end to
the occupation that began in 1967. Only then will the
Palestinian people be able to enjoy their inalienable
rights. Their cultural and heritage rights have also been
affected, as recognized just recently by the UNESCO
Executive Board.

This legally constituted Organization has a duty
to restore hope - and owes a debt - to the Palestinian
people and to bring about the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, including joining the
United Nations as a fully fledged Member, pursuant
to the 1947 partition resolution (General Assembly resolution 181(II)).

