Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): As this
is my first statement at an open meeting of the Security
Council since Peru assumed the presidency for this
month, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President. I
also congratulate Kuwait on its successful presidency of
the Council in June. I also welcome the new Permanent
Representative of France to the Council.

This is likely to be my last speech in the Security
Council as Permanent Representative of China. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to extend my
respect to all my colleagues. It has been an honour to
have worked so long with the Council, which has yielded
a profound friendship with all of its members. I thank
Council members for their support and assistance to me.
I would also like to express my hope that in future the
Security Council can build on its current momentum to
better maintain international peace and security.

China welcomes this open debate convened by
Peru. We thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
and Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for their briefings. We also listened attentively to the
remarks of Ms. Makarenko.

At present, there is mutual collusion and infiltration
between terrorism and organized crime. Terrorist
organizations using organized crime for financing
and organized criminal groups resorting to extreme
measures or committing terrorist activities, all of
which poses a serious threat to international peace and
security. The international community must strengthen
its results-based cooperation in that area, exchange
intelligence and information, share success stories
and take concerted action so as to effectively fight
terrorism and organized crime and jointly maintain
international peace and security. I would like to stress
the following points.

First, it is important to adhere to a unified counter-
terrorism standard while respecting the primary
responsibilities of Member States and the essential
coordinating role ofthe United Nations. Terrorism is the
public enemy of humankind. Counter-terrorism must
not be subject to double standards, much less selective
approaches. Instead, counter-terrorism must follow the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned.
Countries must strictly implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the resolutions
of the Council and the General Assembly, abiding by
and implementing international law on combating
organized crime. Tangible measures must be taken to
counter collusion and infiltration between terrorist
organizations and organized crime in terms of
personnel, financing, equipment and incitement to
hatred. A comprehensive approach must be taken to
eradicate the root causes of terrorism and organized
crime and prevent their proliferation.

Secondly, it is imperative to strengthen international
and regional cooperation to create synergy, so as to
effectively fight terrorism and organized crime. As
international terrorism, transnational organized crime
and other global security issues become ever more
interlinked and diversified, any weakness on the part
of a single country could trigger a large number of
external threats, give rise to a series of risks and create
a safe haven for terrorists and organized crime.

The international community must actively support
regional and subregional organizations in theirimportant
roles and in conducting effective regional cooperation.

China supports closer coordination between United
Nations agencies on the one hand, including the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
regional organizations on the other hand so as to make
the most of their respective strengths and expertise. We
also applaud the series of regional counter-terrorism
meetings hosted by UNOCT and countries ofthe region.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen Member
States' capacity-building in a targeted manner so as to
address the most prominent challenges. In both counter-
terrorism and the fight against organized crime,
the international community must effectively assist
Member States, especially developing countries, in
areas such as border control, customs, drug enforcement
and the judiciary. We must also proceed on the basis of
the specific security situations and distinctive cultures
and history of various areas in order to effectively
combat the financing of terrorism by means of cross-
border arms and drug trafficking and the illicit trade
in natural resources, combat Internet-based terrorist
and illegal activities by terrorist forces and organized
criminal gangs, and sever the links between terrorism
and organized crime.

It is also important to abide by international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions to
take measures aimed at deradicalization in order to
strengthen prevention and to prevent the perpetrators
of organized crime from resorting to extremist or
terrorist measures.

Like many other countries, China has also
been a victim of terrorism and faces the ongoing
threats of terrorism and extremism. China has taken
decisive measures to carry out counter-terrorism
and deradicalization efforts by legal means and has
effectively contained the high incidence of terrorist
activities at various locations and guaranteed the basic
right to development and life ofpeoples of all ethnicities.

China's counterterrorism and deradicalization
campaign is part and parcel of the global fight against
terrorism. It is fully consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations in fighting terrorism
and protecting basic human rights. China has been
rigorously implementing all United Nations counter-
terrorism resolutions and actively participating in
global and regional counter-terrorism cooperation.

As a State party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, China has
been taking a range of measures, including legislation,
law-enforcement and judicial measures, actively
implementing its obligations under the Convention and
advancing international cooperation in relevant areas.
We support the counter-terrorism efforts of developing
countries and will continue to conduct bilateral
and multilateral exchanges in cooperation with all
Member States, especially developing countries, on
counter-terrorism and the combat against transnational
organized crime. We will do our utmost to provide
material assistance and assistance in capacity-building
to the countries concerned in a joint endeavour aimed
at maintaining regional and global peace and stability.

