Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): Like my colleagues
who spoke before me, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. The timing of
today's meeting, coming as it does immediately after
the release of the Secretary-General's report on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, could not be more
perfect, and my delegation regards it as a privilege to
pronounce itself on an issue of such import before the
Security Council.

My delegation welcomes the open debate on the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Chairperson, Ms. Ba-N'Daw, and her Panel, for the
sterling work they accomplished in such a short period
of time. Ms. Ba-N'Daw and her team can confirm that,
true to its word, Zimbabwe extended its full
cooperation to the Panel when it visited Harare during
the course of the investigation.

The revealing report before us provides insights
into the economics underpinning contemporary armed
conflicts in the Great Lakes subregion. For Zimbabwe,
this report is a vindication of what we have said all
along: the true cause of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is not the loud discourse of
grievance, but the silent force of greed.

Against a backdrop of past failures by the
international community to account for the presence of
economic agendas in conflict situations, which have at
times seriously undermined international efforts to
coordinate fragile peace agreements, this report, an
indictment of those countries that have invaded the
Congo, should impel this body to spare no effort in
ensuring the withdrawal of the uninvited forces from
the Congo, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions.

Let me hasten to point out that, while efforts by
the enterprising aggressor States in the Congo to
benefit materially from war through looting and/or
other forms of Violent accumulation is hardly a new
phenomenon, this has been made possible by the wilful
participation of an international private sector which
must also be shamed for adopting a neutral stance on a
conflict that has cost the lives of 3 million innocent
Congolese. The international private sector,
particularly the extractive and service sectors, must be
engaged to establish how they view the role they have
played in fuelling and sustaining the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the wake of the findings of this report, my
delegation finds it extremely difficult to sustain the
"security concerns" thesis of the aggressor States, on
the one hand, and the "grievance" argument of their
surrogates.

We can argue hither and thither about the
grievance of the rebel groups, but this report shows
beyond any reasonable doubt that what we have in the
Congo is a greed-motivated rebellion.

While it is not my delegation's intention to
belabour this point, let us remember the story of the
two drunks who fought because they were drunk, and
when asked about the altercation, they justified their
drunken behaviour with explanations of grievance,
arguing "He struck me first". The true cause of conflict -
drunkenness - was masked by the discourse of
grievance. In a real-world conflict, such as we are
witnessing in the Congo, this discourse of grievance,
whether along ethnic, political or social lines, also
masks underlying realities about where the origin of
the conflict lies. But thanks to this report, it is now
evident that the prodigious endowment of the Congo
with natural resources is a curse and not a blessing.
The international community has an obligation to
criminalize the primary commodity trade through
which the aggressor States have done well out of war.

My delegation notes with interest that the report
identifies Zimbabwe as a "special case". How
interesting. By the statement of its President of 2 June
2000 (S/PRST/2000/20), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to establish an expert
panel on the illegal exploitation of natural resources of
the Congo with a mandate to collect information on all
activities of illegal exploitation of natural resources
and other forms of wealth of the Congo, including in
violation of the sovereignty of that country. Bearing
that in mind, allow me to remind this esteemed body
that Zimbabwe is in the Congo at the invitation of the
legitimate Government of that country.

On 27 March this year, President Joseph Kabila
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed the
Parliament of Zimbabwe. After expressing appreciation
for the "African solidarity" shown by Zimbabwe,
Angola and Namibia in responding to the request of the
legitimate Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to defend its territorial integrity and
sovereignty, and after inviting and encouraging mutual
beneficial economic cooperation between Zimbabwe
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
referring to "our mutual projects like SENGA MINES,
among others", he had this to say:

"The joint ventures between our two
Governments are not to be confused with the
looting of the mineral resources of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, as is the case in
the occupied zones of my country."

He went on to invite experts from both sides to come
up with "new creative projects that will benefit our two
countries", and said that "we must accelerate the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding,
which includes free-trade circulation of goods and
people between our two countries". President Joseph
Kabila concluded by saying that

"The relationship between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Namibia and
Zimbabwe in particular and the SADC region in
general must be a good example of integration
and southern African cooperation."

Who is better qualified to pronounce himself on
the legality of the economic cooperation between
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
than the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo himself?

The report before us insinuates that my President,
Mr. Robert Gabriel Mugabe, once told unnamed
interlocutors that the late President Kabila had given
him a mine concession. The suggestion here is that my
President derived personal gain from Zimbabwe's
intervention in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the same breath, in paragraph 165, the Panel says
that it "does not draw any conclusions" from
Zimbabwe's economic cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Why then does it
allow this insinuation to be embedded in the report?
My Government dismisses this innuendo with the
contempt that it deserves.

As pointed out by President Joseph Kabila, the
joint ventures and other operations of Zimbabwean
companies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are above board and are carried out under agreements
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in compliance with the laws of that
country.

Allow me to observe that many foreign countries
and companies, the majority from the developed
countries, are operating in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in accordance with international and
domestic laws of that country in the same manner that
Zimbabwe is doing, and yet they are not treated as
"special cases".

President Joseph Kabila's explanation of
Zimbabwe's intervention in the Congo therefore differs
very much from the conclusions drawn by the report
before us, and it is not difficult to see why.

Because the report treats Zimbabwe's
intervention in the Congo from an ahistoric
perspective, it renders the whole exercise a perfunctory
one, whereby the Panel congratulates itself for doing
its job by coming up with conclusions of non-
cooperation, but for the wrong reasons.

To set the record straight, let us go back down
memory lane to 1998. At the Southern African
International Dialogue on smart partnership, held in the
Namibian coastal town of Swakopmund at the end of
July 1998, President Museveni of Uganda asked
President Mugabe, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security of the
Southern African Development Community, to convene
a meeting to discuss the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Museveni told President
Mugabe of Zimbabwe, President Mkapa of Tanzania
and President Nujoma of Namibia that trouble was
brewing in the eastern Congo, and that Mugabe and his
colleagues needed to call Kabila of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Bizimungu of Rwanda to
ascertain what was happening.

Pursuant to President Museveni's request,
President Mugabe called a summit meeting of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda,
Zambia, Tanzania and Zimbabwe at Victoria Falls on
7 and 8 August 1998. The disagreement at the Victoria
Falls Summit regarding the nature of conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - whether it was
an internal rebellion against Kabila, as claimed by
Rwanda and Uganda, or a foreign invasion - resulted
in the setting up of a committee comprising Namibia,
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe that had a dual
mandate. The mandate was as follows: to verify
whether the fighting in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was the result of an internal rebellion or an
aggression by neighbouring countries and to
recommend a way forward, depending on the findings.

In pursuance of the above, the Foreign Ministers
of Namibia, Tanzania and Zambia, headed by
Zimbabwe's Foreign Minister, visited Uganda, Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
Goma, from 11 to 18 August. During their trip, the
team held extensive discussions with Presidents
Museveni, Bizimungu, Kabila and Kagame and the
rebel leadership in Goma, as well as the people of the
eastern Congo, regarding the war situation.

The ministerial team concluded that while there
were rebels in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there was very clear and irrefutable evidence of a
foreign invasion, that propped up the rebellion. In
addition to eyewitness reports of Rwandese troops
passing through the war front, there was also the
interesting coincidence that the rebellion started only
after Kabila had dismissed Rwandese officers from the
army of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

After realizing that he could not contain the
foreign invaders alone, the late President Kabila
appealed for assistance from the member countries of
the SADC. The request was made at a meeting of the
Inter-State Defence and Security Committee that was
held in Harare on 18 August to consider the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The military
intervention by Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe came
as a result of this appeal by the internationally
recognized Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, a member of SADC. Furthermore, the
request of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
SADC was in line with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter regarding the right of a State to ask for
military assistance when its security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity are threatened. The decision was
also in line with a resolution of the Inter-State Defence
and Security Committee at a meeting held in Cape
Town, South Africa, in 1995, at which SADC countries
agreed to take collective action in the case of attempted
coups to remove Governments by military means. It
was in this spirit that troops from Botswana and South
Africa intervened in Lesotho to suppress an armed
mutiny against the Government in 1998.

In line with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
Zimbabwe has started withdrawing its forces form the
Congo and my delegation would like to take this
occasion to reaffirm that Zimbabwe has no hidden
agenda in the Congo and seeks only to safeguard its
territorial integrity and sovereignty.
I would also like to bring to memory the role
Zimbabwe has played in the cause of African liberation
and dignity. Zimbabwe deployed its forces in
Mozambique in 1995 to fight alongside their
Mozambican counterparts against RENAMO, a
surrogate of apartheid South Africa. Those same troops
were to remain in Mozambique for seven years and
effectively contributed to ending the war in
Mozambique with only one purpose: to help
Mozambique regain peace, stability and development.

My delegation supports the Panel's
recommendations around the outlined broad themes of
sanctions against countries and individuals involved in
the illegal activities; preventive measures to avoid a
recurrence of the current situation; reparations to the
victims of the illegal exploitation of natural resources;
improvement of international mechanisms and
regulations governing some natural resources; and
security issues.

In conclusion, let me quote David Keen, who has
observed:

"Conflict can create war economies, often in
the regions controlled by rebels or warlords and
linked to international trading networks where
members of armed gangs can benefit from looting.
Under these circumstances, ending civil wars
becomes difficult. Winning may not be desirable;
the point of war may be precisely the legitimacy
which it confers on actions that in peacetime would
be punishable as crimes."

The adoption of the report's recommendations
will act as a disincentive to those forces that have
unleashed violence on the Congolese people,
purportedly in search of security.

