Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor. On behalf
of the Government and people of Haiti, I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the members of the
Council, who have voted in favour of this resolution.

As the Council knows, the resolution is extremely
important to us. At the most recent meeting of the
Security Council on Haiti (see S/PV.6303), following
the submission by the Secretary-General of his report
(S/ZOlO/ZOO), our Prime Minister, Jean-Max Bellerive,
strongly emphasized the importance that Haiti attaches
to the issues covered in today's resolution. Haiti
therefore welcomes the unanimous adoption of the
resolution, which will certainly help the Government in
the current difficult phase.

As the Council knows - and as is noted in the
resolution i the country is now engaged in an
electoral process. It is clear that, given the enormous
losses we suffered following the earthquake of
12 January, including losses in the national police, the
additional support provided for in the resolution will
certainly enable the police to better ensure the security
of the population during the electoral period.

As also indicated, we are now squarely in the
rainy season in Haiti, which has created further
difficulties for those still living in makeshift camps.
Thus, the appeal to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to support the efforts of
the Government to take better control of the situation
both in the capital and in the provincial cities that have
taken in internally displaced persons is very important.
The Government would like to express its gratitude to
the Council, which has shown great sympathy and
understanding for Haiti's trials over the past six years.

Having said this, I would like to emphasize to the
Council that the Government is resolutely committed
to the electoral process, as was reiterated by our Head
of State. Legislative and the presidential elections are
planned for the end of November. Provisions have been
made and are now being finalized with the support of
the Organization of American States, the Caribbean
10-38889

Community and, of course, the United Nations system.
We have every reason to believe that these elections
will take place in the best possible conditions thanks to
the additional resources provided for in the resolution
adopted today, thus ensuring the effective transfer of
power in early February, as provided for in the Haitian
Constitution.

With your permission, Sir, I would like to express
to the Council once again, on behalf of the Government
and people of Haiti, our gratitude for this resolution,
which certainly represents an additional step in the
assistance that we have received from the United
Nations with a view to ensuring the stability and
development of the country.
10-38889

In this respect, I would like to note the successful
outcome of the summit held this week in Punta Cana,
in the Dominican Republic. On behalf of the
Government, I thank the host country, the Dominican
Republic, and all the other Member States that
responded positively to the invitation of President
Leonel F ernandez and that once again reiterated their
assistance and support for Haiti during the
reconstruction phase.

