Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we
thank Ambassador Aboulatta, in his capacity as Chair
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Ms. Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization, for their briefings.

Once again, Bolivia reiterates its categorical
condemnation of all terrorist acts in all forms and
manifestations, as they are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever or whenever
they may be and whoever commits them. Terrorism
constitutes one of the most serious threats to peace,
social coexistence and international security. Terrorist
acts that are related to civil aviation security are not
only a threat to the safety and confidence of people, but
also to the economy and trade between States.

The need for cooperation among States is clear, so
as to avoid any attempt by terrorist groups to capitalize
on possible safety deficiencies at airports. We therefore
reaffirm the need to evaluate whether or not current
international standards are effective when it comes
to their implementation. At the same time, due to the
nature of terrorist acts, those standards must evolve and
adapt to current situations.

We highlight the progress made to date since the
adoption of the Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation, through various international
instruments, such as the 1988 Protocol to the Montreal
Convention Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, which expands
its provisions to include terrorist acts committed
in airports providing services to international civil
aviation, the 2010 Protocol to the Beijing Convention
on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to
International Civil Aviation, as well as resolution 2309
(2016), which encourages further coordination with the
International Civil Aviation Organization.

As set out in resolution 2309 (2016), Bolivia, in
coordination with the International Civil Aviation
Organization, is implementing effective national
mechanisms to adequately enforce aviation safety
measures to counter such threats. Our national criminal
code categorizes terrorism as any act that aims to
provoke a state of alert or collective panic among the
population. It also stipulates that appropriating an
aircraft or vessel through violence, threat or any other
form ofintimidation is an act of terrorism.

In that vein, we have worked on implementing
the national civil aviation safety programme, which is
intended to establish the various responsibilities and
levels of coordination among different institutions,
public or private companies and State security bodies
regarding anything related to the permanent safety
of civil aviation, in order to prevent acts of illicit
interference, crimes and violations that infringe upon
the normal development of aviation activities.
The contexts in which terrorism arises, both locally
and globally, are the challenge that the international
community faces. In order to overcome that challenge,
we call on the Security Council to join forces in the
fight against the scourge of terrorism through greater
international coordination, while respecting the
Charter of the United Nations and the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States within
the framework of international law.

Finally, we express our support for the ongoing
work being done by both the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, as well as the International Civil
Aviation Organization.

It is a fact that there are still challenges for States,
but we are sure that besides holding dialogue on aviation
security and cooperation with respect to information
exchange, only through capacity-building will we be
able to guarantee the well-being of the population with
respect to the use of civil aviation services.

