Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2312
(2016), which renews the mandate of the European
Union's Operation SOPHIA for an additional 12
months. I am proud of the United Kingdom's role as
penholder, and I am grateful to those Security Council
delegations that supported the resolution today.

It is a vital renewal. The migration crisis remains
one of our greatest shared challenges. Thousands have
perished crossing the Mediterranean and thousands
more continue to risk their lives to find a safer future.
So many, perhaps all ofthem, have been exploited - by
gangs, at the darkest points in their lives, with no regard
for their safety, with no respect for anything other
than profit.

In October last year, we took a stand against these
traffickers. We authorized all European Union member
States contributing to the Operation to interdict these
gangsters and their boats on the high seas. Since that
adoption, the brave men and women of Operation
SOPHIA have directly apprehended 90 suspected
smugglers and have put over 300 smuggling vessels
beyond use. In doing so, we have sent a clear signal
that smugglers can no longer operate with impunity in
international waters.

The European Union's efforts have also saved
lives - over 26,000 are estimated to have been rescued.
But the smuggling networks have not been defeated.
Therefore, through this renewal today, let us recommit
our support to Operation SOPHIA as it continues its
vital work to arrest smugglers and seize their boats.
And let us be clear in this open meeting that Operation
SOPHIA is only targeting smugglers and empty boats.
Migrants encountered as part of the Operation will be
taken to Europe as part of existing procedures. The
European Union will do all that it can to protect the
rights of those who need that protection.

Action against smugglers on the high seas is a key
part, but only part, of the solution to addressing the
mass movement ofpeople. We need to do more to tackle
the root causes, including poverty, conflict and human
rights violations and abuses. We must also do more
to support countries that are hosting refugees from
neighbouring countries and help reduce the secondary
movements, which pose so many dangers for migrants
and refugees.

While we recognize the benefits of migration
to source and destination countries, as well as to the
migrants themselves, the process must be managed.
All States have the right to control their own borders
in line with international law, but also in line with the
obligation to accept the return of their nationals. We
therefore need a comprehensive approach to the mass
movement of people. Resolution 2312 (2016) is one
part of that effort and an important part of the wider
solution to the crisis.

