Mr. Reuben (Israel): 1 thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Amos, Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy, High Commissioner Pillay
and Director-General Daccord for their informative
briefings.

Today's debate raises some of the most complex
and challenging issues facing the international
community. Israel's deep commitment to protecting
civilians in armed conflict is reflected by our extensive
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the United Nations in this area and at all
levels. It is also shown by the extraordinary efforts that
we take to avoid causing civilians harm during combat
operations.

Israel is encouraged by the continued efforts of
the Security Council and the Secretariat in this area
since July's briefing (see S/PV.6354) and welcomes the
latest report of the Secretary-General (8/2010/579). We
note the considerable progress on this issue. However,
it remains clear that the international community
continues to face major challenges and difficult
operational, humanitarian and moral dilemmas in
ensuring that civilians are protected in armed conflict.

Foremost among these challenges is the new and
complex phenomenon of asymmetric warfare, which
blurs the important distinction between combatants and
civilians under the laws of armed conflict. In our
region and in many other corners of the world, regular
armies are increasingly finding themselves fighting
terrorists or guerrilla organizations that deliberately
operate within the vicinity of civilian populations.

This phenomenon produces a horrific
transformation of the civilian landscape: religious
institutions becoming launching pads for rockets and
artillery; schools and hospitals becoming storage
facilities for weapons and terrorist infrastructure; and
residential neighbourhoods becoming combat zones.

Recognizing that there are no simple solutions,
the Security Council must seriously consider the many
dilemmas inherent in asymmetric warfare. While
upholding the central value of protecting civilians in
conflict, the Council and other international bodies
cannot ignore the tragic reality in which terrorists
deliberately put innocents in harm's way.

Israel's experience illustrates that terrorists'
blatant disregard for protecting human life is not
restricted to the civilians of their adversary; it often
extends to their own people. In the Gaza Strip, Hamas
launches rockets and mortars at Israeli towns from
densely populated areas and cynically places its arms
and munitions in installations inside and adjacent to
mosques, hospitals and schools. Only last week, we
witnessed yet another series of rocket attacks from
Gaza designed to target and terrorize Israeli civilians.
In Lebanon, Hizbollah deploys weapons and
builds its military infrastructure within the fabric of
civilian life, endangering the Lebanese population. For
example, within the past 16 months, three Hizbollah
weapons caches have exploded in the villages of
southern Lebanon. The last such explosion took place
in the Lebanese village of Shehabiyya on 3 September,
causing the injury of five individuals.

Given the threats it faces on its borders, Israel *
in full conformity with its international obligations -
has sought to protect civilians while it pursues the
terrorists who hide among them. Israel's Supreme
Court has addressed the significant challenges inherent
in balancing these two objectives during active warfare
and at times has suspended military operations to this
end. In pursuit of this goal, my country also employs
many independent oversight mechanisms and places a
humanitarian affairs officer in every combat unit above
the battalion level with the goal of minimizing
casualties and damage to civilian property.

Israel also wishes to express its continued support
for the work of humanitarian agencies that provide
essential services on the ground. In considering the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we all must
remember that, under international humanitarian law,
the right to free movement of humanitarian personnel
is subject to military necessities and security
considerations. These considerations include the safety
of the humanitarian personnel themselves and the need
to prevent the abuse of humanitarian channels. We
cannot ignore the fact that terrorists such as Hamas
often abuse such access privileges, which can endanger
humanitarian workers and obstruct the movement of
aid.

The subject of today's debate calls for careful
consideration about how to best protect civilians in the
face of terrorism and within the complex reality of
asymmetric warfare. For its part, Israel will continue to
share its experience in this critical debate as part of our
nation's commitment to the rule of law and to the
fundamental value of protecting civilians.

