Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
both Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
their briefings. Unfortunately, both briefings were
extremely alarming.

For the past two weeks, we have been following
with great concern the intensification of hostilities
in the de-escalation zone of north-western Syria. The
current fighting involves Syrian Government forces
and their allies, as well as armed opposition forces and
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham.

Let me be crystal clear: it is again civilians who are
paying the highest price. We have already encountered
similar escalations in Aleppo and eastern Ghouta. A
repetition of those scenarios is simply unacceptable.
Growing human suffering in north-western Syria only
adds to the tragedy of the Syrian people, and that is the
main reason why we have called for today's meeting.

As already mentioned in the Chamber today, we
have been observing an increase in air strikes over
the Idlib province and in northern Hama for the past
weeks. I have to insist and underline that it is the
civilian population in the region that has been under
heavy shelling on a daily basis. I also want to be clear
that the United Nations-designated terrorist groups
have intensified their attacks. As there is no military
solution to the Syrian conflict, this situation must stop.

Over the past two weeks, the violence has resulted
in the death of more than 160 civilians. Air strikes
on population centres, bombardments and the use of
barrel bombs, as well as the targeting of civilian and
humanitarian infrastructure, notably schools and health
facilities, are violations of international humanitarian
law. It is unacceptable, particularly taking into
consideration the fact that in some cases attacks on
civilian and medical infrastructure happened even
though the GPS coordinates were communicated to the
parties to ensure their safety.

Poland condemns those atrocities in the strongest
possible terms and reiterates its call on all parties
affecting the situation on the ground, especially the
Astana guarantors, to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and spare no effort to
protect civilians.

In that regard, Astana guarantors have a special role

to play and should therefore take all necessary actions
to arrive at a full cessation of hostilities, especially
while taking into consideration the crucial importance
of the memorandum of understanding between Russia
and Turkey signed in September 2018, which has been
already recalled at this meeting. It is our moral and
legal duty to do our utmost to alleviate the suffering of
civilians in Syria.

Let me conclude by underlining that any
military operation - even those aimed at countering
terrorism - should be fully in line with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Not only is it
a legal, but also a moral, obligation to prevent harm to
thousands of civilians trapped in the middle of fighting.
Those who do not comply should be held accountable.

There can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict and a political agreement in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), and the Geneva communique
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) remains the only way
towards peace. We look forward to the establishment
of a constitutional committee - the first step towards
a genuine political process under United Nations
supervision. In that context, United Nations Special
Envoy Pedersen has our full support.

