Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Lebanon
was among the first countries to accede to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It
is therefore important for Lebanon to reaffirm that the
Treaty is extremely important in terms of the balance
among and interdependence of its three pillars:
disarmament, non-proliferation and the right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. For both Lebanon and
the Arab States in general, the Treaty is the cornerstone
of our response to the expectation of our peoples for a
world free of nuclear weapons.

On behalf of the Arab Group, Lebanon reaffirmed
this principle during last month's NPT Review
Conference in New York. There, the need to attain the
universality of the Treaty was included among the core
priorities of the international community. In line with
our endeavour to attain the noble objective of freeing
the entire world of nuclear weapons, our Arab peoples
dream of the day when the people of the Middle East
can enjoy living in a region free of nuclear weapons, as
is the case with other regions and other peoples of the
world.

In this regard, we stress the importance of the
final document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference,
which reaffirms the call to transform the Middle East
into a zone free of nuclear weapons on the basis of the
decision of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
and to develop a mechanism for its implementation.

Israel is the only country in our region that
possesses nuclear weapons. Israel should adhere to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear State and
subject all of its nuclear facilities to the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

It is very important for Lebanon to say that the
approach to non-proliferation issues should be
comprehensive and non-selective. However, a focus on
nuclear non-proliferation should not overshadow the
need to reaffirm the inherent and inalienable right of
all States parties to the NPT, including the Islamic
Republic of Iran, to the peaceful use of nuclear energy
in accordance with the rules and criteria established by
the International Atomic Energy Agency as well as its
comprehensive safeguards regime.

Thus, Lebanon believes that the understanding
reflected in the Tehran declaration on enriched uranium -
reached in May at the excellent initiative of Brazil and
Turkey - is a significant step towards a diplomatic
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. My delegation has
reaffirmed several times before the Council that the
Tehran understanding provides an important
opportunity that we should all seize and deal with in a
positive manner.

Although that understanding did not have the
necessary support and was not given enough time to
yield the expected results, its elements still provide a
gateway for the required process of confidence
building. Even if the understanding does not dispel the
doubts and respond to the questions of many Council
members, the most effective response to any concerns
or questions about the Iranian nuclear issue will come
through further dialogue, not through sanctions. That is
Lebanon's firm and well-known position of principle.

My Government has studied the issue of today's
vote, and we have not at this time reached a final
position. For that reason, Lebanon abstained. However,
Lebanon believes, on the basis of its unwavering
positions, which I have just recalled, that today's new
sanctions resolution is a sad setback for diplomatic
efforts.

We refuse to give up in the face of this situation,
and we call on all States, despite all the difficulties of
this situation, to immediately resume and intensify

international efforts, especially those of the E3+3. We
appreciate all the efforts made by the E3+3 in recent
years to reach, through responsible dialogue and due
flexibility, a solution to all pending issues with regard
to the Iranian nuclear programme on the basis of
mutual respect, constructive cooperation and the right
of all States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy, to have access to nuclear energy
and to develop the relevant technologies in accordance
with the IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreement.

