Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I, too, would like to express our deep
gratitude to you and to your delegation for having
convened this wrap-up meeting. You have discharged
your duties very well during this busy and eventful
month, during which we considered in open meetings
many important subjects, particularly for Africa.

Despite all of the difficulties, you were able to
resolve all of the specific problems raised during the
month of November. We believe also that you have
achieved the objectives that Jamaica set out in the note
you circulated at the beginning of your presidency. You
have also succeeded in improving our relations with
our partners, as borne out by African ministerial week,
with the Lusaka signatories, the Regional Peace
Initiative on Burundi, the memorable meeting with
Madiba Mandela, and meetings on Angola and Ethiopia
and Eritrea.
We have no definite position on the formalization
of the ministerial meetings. However, we believe that
these meetings should be well prepared and that the
decisions emanating therefrom should be followed up
and implemented properly. In this respect, we urge that
the necessary pressure be brought to bear in order to
implement the various decisions taken during African
ministerial week.

You have succeeded in enhancing transparency in
the work of the Council, particularly by organizing a
drawing of lots for the list of speakers. You have also
improved relations with Member States, the troop-
contributing countries and countries that are interested
in a particular situation, as well as agencies within the
United Nations family. You have also made progress on
the question of parity and on the protection of civilians,
particularly that of women and children in armed
conflict.

Finally, you have introduced an innovation by
including thematic debates during the consideration of
conflict situations. This is all very good and totally in
keeping with the evolution of the means available to
the Security Council to carry out its Charter-mandated
responsibilities.

I cannot conclude without reiterating heartfelt
congratulations to Ambassador Ward of Jamaica, who
so ably conducted the work of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and whose excellent work
made possible the adoption of resolution 1353 (2001).
We eagerly await the submission of the upcoming
report of that Working Group during Mali's presidency
of the Security Council.

I thank you, Madam President, for having made
us work so hard this month, and I thank you especially
for having made us work so effectively.

