Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): I have the honour of speaking
on behalf of the European Union. Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Malta, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia associate themselves with this statement.

As the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) prepares to leave Rwanda, we must first of all
recognize the great dedication of the Secretary-General; of
his Special Representative, Ambassador Shaharyar Khan; of
the Force Commander; of all the troop-contributing
countries, and of the Blue Helmets themselves. Their
devotion in carrying out, under trying circumstances, the
tasks they were assigned deserves our utmost praise.

The report of the Secretary-General tells us that
relative calm and stability prevail throughout Rwanda and
that the country has made significant progress towards a
return of normal living conditions. However, a number of
serious outstanding issues remain unresolved: the return of
refugees, the rehabilitation of the judicial system - and the
related issue of overcrowding in the prisons - should be
addressed as a matter of priority, in order to achieve
national reconciliation and thus the necessary future
stability.

The European Union wishes to underline once again
the importance of the International Tribunal, which is
fundamental to restoring a climate of trust and confidence
in Rwanda. In this respect, we underline the need to assure
protection for its personnel and its premises.

The European Union has supported the United Nations
peace-keeping operation in Rwanda from the outset, and we
agree with the assessment made by the Secretary-General
in his report that Rwanda could have greatly benefited
from a further phase of United Nations involvement in
helping to consolidate peace and security. The Rwandan
authorities, though, have decided that the time has come
to address the problems differently. In this respect, we
welcome Kigali's agreement to maintain a United Nations
office, to be headed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We strongly believe that the
international community will continue to contribute to
Rwanda's efforts towards full normalization. As in the
past, the European Union - which is the largest donor,
in terms both of humanitarian and of development
assistance - is ready to offer its concrete contributions
towards this end.

One of the main priorities of the future United
Nations presence in Rwanda will remain supporting the
efforts of the Kigali Government to promote national
reconciliation. The draft resolution on which the Security
Council is about to vote clearly addresses this concern.
The office - which will rightly include the present
United Nations communications system and radio
station - will serve the purpose of supporting the
Government's efforts to promote national reconciliation,
strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the return of
refugees and rehabilitate the country's infrastructure. The
office will also play a useful role in coordinating all
United Nations efforts towards this end.

We note with satisfaction the continuation of the
United Nations human rights operation in Rwanda, which
has the full support of the Kigali authorities. The
European Union attaches fundamental importance to this
activity, as is made manifest by the fact that it is
currently contributing most of the funding of the
operation.

I shall conclude by stressing, once again, the
importance the European Union attaches to the
continuation of efforts for the careful preparation and
convening of a Regional Conference for Peace, Security
and Development in the Great Lakes Region, of which
mention is made in the draft resolution. I wish to recall,
in this regard, the recent appointment of Mr. Aldo Ajello
as special envoy of the European Union for the Great
Lakes region.

The travails that Rwanda has undergone over the
past two years cannot be overstated, but massive
challenges still remain, of which the greatest is the safe
return of refugees. We believe that the United Nations

 

must continue to play its part in addressing these
challenges. We therefore welcome the draft resolution.

