Let me start by conveying my appreciation to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Process, for his insightful briefing. As the Security Council, we have regularly met to discuss the situation in Palestine. But for Indonesia, Palestine is never just a regular meeting. The constant suffering and pain of Palestinians, caused by decades of illegal occupation, displacement, violence, conflict and blockades, are not things that one can treat as a regular matter. It is our solemn duty to find a solution and ensure that Palestinians achieve their inalienable right to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty, and the right of return. On that note, let me share my views on three key points. First, concerning the status of the annexation plan, Indonesia expresses its concern about the statement made by Israel, as, instead of abandoning the annexation plan, it has merely suspended it. We need to be clear that any form of annexation - today or tomorrow - remains illegal. It is against international law and various United Nations resolutions, and a direct challenge to the Council and to the international order. That suspension does not address the root causes of the conflict. We need to remind ourselves that the creeping annexation and illegal occupation were going on long before Israel decided to formally annex the West Bank. Through its resolution 2334 (2016), the Council underlined, inter alia, that it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations. As such, we need to continue to reject the plan of annexation. I should like to remind the Security Council that voices firmly expressing concern and rejection of annexation have been heard from various corners of the world, including national parliaments, civil society and The Elders. Secondly, on the human aspects of the conflict, let me say that, beyond the politics, the conflict has a profound effect on the people on the ground. Decades of illegal occupation, expanding settlements and an increase in demolitions and displacement have resulted in a severe deterioration in the living conditions of millions of Palestinians, especially women and children. In an informal briefing by Palestinian children, we directly heard of their fears and sorrows in their daily efforts to pursue education and lead a normal life. The drastic increase in the number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease in the occupied Palestinian territory over the past two months adds a significant burden to the already severe conditions facing Palestinians in their quest to meet their basic needs. We need to strengthen our commitment in ensuring the needed humanitarian support, particularly through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which continues to strive to fulfil the basic needs of Palestinians, including by providing schools and health care. Thirdly, we must ensure a comprehensive solution. The suspension of the Israeli annexation plan is merely a stop-gap response. What we need and what the Palestinians really need is a comprehensive solution that is just and sustainable. Without addressing the root causes, we only prolong the suffering of millions of Palestinians, including refugees. Indonesia therefore urges the relevant parties to commit to a credible multilateral peace process based on internationally agreed parameters, including the two-State solution, to find a fair and sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is Indonesia's principled position that the settlement of the Palestinian question must be based on and fully respect all relevant United Nations resolutions and internationally agreed parameters. All efforts and initiatives should seek to ensure Palestinian rights and implement a two-State solution. We need to remain committed and stand united in our efforts against all illegal acts of the Israeli Government in order to end the occupation and the conflict in the Middle East. I would like to say a few words about the President's response to questions posed by some delegations. With regard to the Russian Federation's question, as well as others, after having consulted with members and receiving letters from many member countries, it is clear to me that one member has a particular position on the issue, while a significant number of members have differing views. In my view, there is no consensus in the Council and the President is therefore not in the position to take further action.
