Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank you
very much, Mr. President, for having organizing this
important meeting. We would also like to pay tribute
to all journalists who have lost their lives in the context
of the circumstances mentioned in the invitation to this
meeting.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela hopes and is
working for a world of peace free of violence, which is
the only real way to avoid such tragic events, So long
as war persists, we will continue to regret such events.
We are therefore working towards a world of justice
and peace, both of which are mutually reinforcing. We
need such a world so that we need not regret not just
the killing ofjournalists, but also the loss of so many
innocent lives. All death is regrettable. My statement
is aimed primarily at finding ways of ensuring peace.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its support for the need to protect civilians in armed
conflict, includingjournalists and all media personnnel.
We also reiterate that responsibility to protect lies
primarily with sovereign States, which need to abide by
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

The best way to protect civilians, including
journalists and media personnel, is through diplomacy
and dialogue, not by using force. It is also the best way
to attain peace. We must strive to protect civilians in
armed conflict without resorting to the use of force.
In that regard, the role of the United Nations must be
to serve as an honest, objective, neutral and impartial
mediator between the parties to a conflict, paving the
path for a durable, peaceful solution. That is the only
way not just to avoid the loss ofinnocent lives, but any
loss of life. Peacekeeping operations must focus on
using their political influence and their role ofproviding
comprehensive support for parties to a conflict in the
search for a peaceful solution. Peacekeeping operations
must be a part of political solutions to conflicts, not an
alternative to them.

In that connection, my delegation expresses its
concern at the Security Council's adoption of resolution
2098 (201 3), last March, which refers to the establishment
of an intervention brigade responsible for neutralizing
certain armed groups and reducing the threat they
pose to the authority of the State and to security in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, thereby creating some scope for stabilization
activities. Venezuela stands by the Government and
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
also recognize the imminent need to protect civilians
affected by the conflict, and we reject the atrocities
committed by certain armed groups. However, we also
fear that the establishment of that intervention brigade
might set a negative precedent for how peacekeeping
operations are carried out. For the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, it is important to emphatically reiterate
that the establishment of the brigade cannot and must
not, under any circumstances, set a precedent for how
the Council conducts itself.

We are also deeply concerned that unmanned aerial
systems - drones - are being used in the context of
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. While such aircraft are currently being used
to protect civilians, United Nations staff and facilities,
we have very few assurances that in the near future
they will not be used as instruments of war. Judging by
the establishment of the intervention brigade, the trend
seems to be that the protection of civilians justifies
anything.

Before I conclude, I would like to clarify that when
we speak of journalists and media personnel we are
not just referring to the reporters and columnists of the
major media conglomerates. We are also referring to all
of those who from their communities or places of work
reveal to the their societies and the world at large the
abuses and violations that are taking place on a day to
day basis.

Let us not forget to mention that, on more than a
few ocassions, some information outlets appear to act
as instruments for inciting violence and war. We should
therefore take note of the fact that such networks are
also responsible for the deaths ofjournalists in armed
conflict; for, whether deliberately or not, they expose
them to dangers for which they are not prepared.

This is therefore about journalists in general,

working within their own communities and workplaces.
With all due respect to them, however, reporting is not
carried out just by them. We are also speaking about
people such as Julian Assange and Edward Snowden,
who, acting for truth and justice, while putting their
lives in danger, have exposed the enormous reach of
one of the greatest threats to international peace and
security: cyberwar. Those reporters also deserve the
protection of the international community.

