Mr. Patterson (Caribbean Community):
Colombia deserves the highest commendation for its
timely initiative to promote this open debate of the
Security Council on the question concerning Haiti. I
regard it as a singular privilege to have been invited by
the President of the Security Council to participate in
this debate and to share insights as the Special
Representative of the Heads of Government of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) - a community
of 14 sovereign nations, including Haiti.

We gather here 15 months after an earthquake
that killed, maimed and dislocated unprecedented
numbers of the population of Haiti, decimated the
economy and destroyed large sections of the natural
and built assets of that country. And yet, two days ago,
despite the formidable challenges of holding elections
during the turmoil and turbulence associated with such
severe catastrophe, the Provincial Electoral Council
was still able to announce the preliminary results of the
national elections. The outcome is a testament to what
can be achieved through partnership. President Preval
is to be applauded for his steadfast position and
courage to ensure that there has been no interruption of
the democratic chain.

The incumbent leadership of Haiti, the operators
of the electoral system and political contestants,
working together with an array of external support
from international and regional organizations and a
number of committed nations, all combined to
overcome formidable odds. This represents a victory
for democracy that must not fail to be rewarded with a
premium to enhance the success of reconstruction
efforts during this phase of democratic transition and
throughout the tenure of the new political
Administration.

When the action plan for the reconstruction of
Haiti was adopted by the international community here
at United Nations Headquarters in March 2010, we
proclaimed with great fanfare that it was to be led,

steered and driven by Haiti. The action plan was
posited on four main pillars: territorial, economic,
social and institutional. No one can question that these
four sectors are mutually reinforcing and vital to
optimum development. But if Haiti is really to exercise
leadership in the process of reconstruction and the
development of its people, we only delude ourselves if
we expect the Government of Haiti to deliver its full
share in the absence of adequate administrative
capacity.

Before the earthquake, Haiti's institutional
capacity was admittedly weak, and it was further
decapitated by the disaster. The restructuring,
strengthening and building of Haiti's institutional
capacity are the lynchpins that lie at the heart of any
plan for national recovery and sustainable
development. CARICOM. regards strong, robust and
flexible institutional capacity as a sine qua non for
sustainable development, good governance and
security.

The reinforcement of the capacity of the Haitian
State is therefore now of the utmost urgency. The pace
of progress will be retarded and the most immediate
priorities of Haiti will remain at the bottom of the
ranking unless the State has the requisite administrative
and technical capacity, as well as access to the
necessary financial resources, to provide the public
with goods and services that are unquestionably the
responsibility of all States.

The Caribbean Community has decided to
concentrate its direct support to Haiti in the area of
institutional development and augmentation by making
available experienced personnel in different areas of
governmental administration, providing opportunities
for training in areas of high need, and helping to
establish regional standards in such areas as the
establishment of a building code, as well as regional
standards for goods and professional services. We seek
to work with United Nations agencies and hemispheric
groupings that have expressed an interest in working
with us in these areas.

We will need to avoid duplication. Our ultimate
goal must ensure that, when the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission's mandate expires, the Haitians have the
tools and the capacity to continue on their own. Now
more than ever, the people of Haiti are entitled to see
tangible democratic dividends that have a significant
impact on the quality of their lives, in particular
durable shelter for the internally displaced and access
to basic services, which include water and sanitation,
as well as the provision ofjobs.

Throughout its existence, CARICOM. has
maintained the inseparable links between governance,
security and development. Social and economic
development are tightly interconnected with security,
stability and the rule of law. The recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/183*) is a useful document
that highlights the important role played by the United
Nations and the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) so far. Within that context, the
Community endorses the view that we have reached the
juncture where MINUSTAH must be guided in order to
become even more actively engaged with the United
Nations agencies in supporting and strengthening the
core structures and capacities of Haiti. This should
extend beyond security and stability to embrace
support for strengthening the institutions of that State
in order to accelerate economic, social and territorial
rebuilding.

We believe that the current MINUSTAH mandate
is sufficiently wide and flexible to permit, without
requiring any change at this time, a better coordination
of resources with those from other sections of the
United Nations system and to allow it to be the key
development partner in assisting the Government to
address the critical areas of reconstruction and
development.

The time has come to turn all our weapons into
ploughshares and to contribute to the realization of the
bold strategy approved 15 months ago, which will
result in the economic, social, political and institutional
development of Haiti. The mission statement must be
to enable Haiti to stand firmly on its own two feet and
to move forward to fulfil its manifest destiny.

While we recognize and appreciate the
accomplishments so far, we are concerned that the
pledges made by the international community have
fallen short and that the inflows to the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund have been insufficient to make a
visible impression on the ordinary Haitian as another
hurricane season draws nigh. We contend that there is a
compelling need for greater coordination between the
multilaterals, the bilaterals and the non-governmental
organizations in order to fulfil the urgent needs and
priorities of the Government of Haiti and its people. If
11-29077
nothing else, the presidential statement
(S/PRST/200l/7) will, we hope, serve to that end.

Members may rest assured that CARICOM
remains determined to work for Haiti as we seek, with
the help and support of the international community, to
rebuild and develop the most populous State within the
single Caribbean Community to which we belong.

