Mr. Nesho (Albania): First of all, Mr. President,
let me thank you for the excellent work that the
Security Council has undertaken under your leadership
and for the commitment that your country has shown in
the issues of the Balkan region.

My delegation warmly welcomes the
participation in this meeting of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Hans Haekkerup. We appreciate his observations
and suggestions, and we are grateful for his
engagement and efforts in the democratization of
Kosovo and the establishment of necessary democratic
institutions there.

The municipal elections, the first democratic
elections in the history of Kosovo, showed once again
the full capabilities and capacities of the Albanians in
Kosovo to create institutions and to govern a multi-
ethnic and democratic State. The holding of the
upcoming general elections will be as important and
imperative for completing the whole institutional
framework and for taking over the necessary self-
governance and full control of the situation, in
cooperation with international actors. We think that this
important step forward will serve to improve
understanding and to achieve the process of
coexistence and integration of all minorities in a free
and multi-ethnic democratic society.

The preparation of a legal framework for the new
elections must define well and clearly the institutional
responsibilities and must implement the demand of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) for the
substantial self-governance of the Albanians in
Kosovo. The fuller and more meaningful the self-
governance of the Albanians in Kosovo is, the greater
will be their responsibility for achieving the integration
of Kosovo in the democratic European family.

We regret the withdrawal of the representative of
the Serb community in Kosovo from the Working
Group on the legal framework for Kosovo-wide
elections, thus impeding the advance of the democratic
process in Kosovo.

The Serbs of Kosovo are an inseparable part of
the process for building a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo. The Albanian Government calls on the new
authorities in Belgrade to encourage the Serbs of
Kosovo, in particular the Serbs of Mitrovica, not to
boycott and sabotage the building of new democratic
institutions and not to be used as a factor of tension,
but, on the contrary, to be integrated and to take part in
the establishment of j oint democratic institutions there.

We welcome the start of the release of the
Albanian political prisoners, and we encourage the
Belgrade authorities to release all the rest of the
Albanian political prisoners still being kept behind bars
and to make possible the release of information on
people who disappeared during the war in Kosovo. We
believe that a new and real democracy cannot be based
on holding the political prisoners hostage, and it must
have the courage to publicly condemn the monstrous
crimes of the previous regime.

In the future, the international community will be
faced with the crucial issue of Kosovo - its political
status. We think that the solution will come naturally
when the necessary conditions defined in resolution
1244 (1999) have been achieved.

The Government of Albania is of the view that
the irreversible democratic processes that have been
developed in Kosovo under the care of the international
community, as well as the fulfilment of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) for substantial self-
governance of the Albanians in the province, will be
important factors for the integration of the Albanians of
Kosovo into the European Union, under the supervision
of the United Nations.

Recently, there have been some proposals in the
United Nations from concerned parties regarding the
status of Kosovo; their true intention has not been to
find a realistic solution but to find one that conforms to
their interests. Any proposals that seek solutions within
the old, conflicted, traditional Balkan schemes that
serve the irrelevant national-domination interests and
pride of States that, unfortunately, could not cut
themselves off from the old nationalistic philosophy
are very dangerous, provocative and unacceptable for
the democratic reality that is taking shape today in
Kosovo.

The Albanian Government is pleased with the
agreement achieved on Presevo and highly appreciates
this act as a sign of the goodwill of the Albanians with
regard to entering a new peaceful process towards
achieving a political agreement that will bring
affirmation of and respect for the rights of the
Albanians, in conformity with international standards.

We understand that the recent developments in
Presevo are a continuation of the previous
developments there and of the resistance of the
Albanians against the persecution and genocide that the
Milosevic regime carried out, not only in Kosovo but
also in the whole area of Presevo. We do not agree that
the use of violence is an answer to these grievances; on
the contrary, we think that the only solution is political
dialogue between the parties concerned.

The Albanian Government believes that the
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization are the prime organizations for bringing
peace and stability to the region, and it strongly
supports them. We ask the Albanian actors there also to
support these organizations and to work for a peaceful
solution.

At the same time, we would like to see the
international community engaged in the same objective
manner in evaluating the factors that give rise to or
provoke violence.

Condemning the violence and extremism
exercised recently, we have to understand that in the
Presevo Valley there is a reality that creates fear for the
future - a point of view that regards with reservation
the new changes in Serbia and considers that a solution
involving enclaves and cantons for Kosovo as one that
reflects conflict and instability. Furthermore, the lack
of confidence on the part of all the Albanians, when
they see that military commanders and generals who
carried out genocide before in Kosovo are the same
people who are today used to make peace.

May I briefly quote part of an article that
appeared in Time magazine dated 19 March 2001,
entitled "Red Berets":
"In fact, the new government has shown few
pangs of conscience about Serbia's wartime past.
Prime Minister Djindic recently appointed to the
critical post of Chief of Public Security Sreten
Lukic, the man who presided over the Serbian
police during massacres in Kosovo prior to the
NATO bombing. Now, Lukic, among his new
responsibilities, is obliged to arrest and extradite
two close relatives, Milan and Sredoje Lukic,
wanted by The Hague for 'wilfully killing a
significant number of Bosnian Muslim civilians'
in the Eastern town of Visegrad between May
1992 and October 1994. The men are accused of
herding 135 women and children into two houses
in June 1992 and burning them alive."

Recently, there have been some very disturbing
acts of violence and extremism in Macedonia. We
would like to emphasize that the use of violence to
achieve political aims is not only unacceptable but also
condemnable.

The Albanian Government thinks that the
democratization process in Macedonia will continue
through the participation of the Albanian Macedonians
there and through the better functioning of institutions,
as well as through recognition of the rights of the
Albanians in Macedonia, which they should be allowed
to enjoy, in accordance with all internationally
recognized norms.

The Albanian Government believes that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Macedonia
should be preserved in the interest not only of the
stability of Macedonia itself, but also of the stability of
the entire region.

We believe that the acts of violence in Macedonia
will be isolated and that the political process will have
the advantage in the treatment of issues that have been
raised by the Albanians of Macedonia.

We commend last night's decision of the
Macedonian Government to provide, in cooperation
with the international community, financial means for
construction of the Southeastern Europe University, to
start the third programme in the Albanian language on
Macedonian television and to provide financial support
for the enhancement of self-government in Macedonia.

We think that recognition of all the rights of the
Albanians in Macedonia as equal citizens will bring
peace and put an end to this tense situation.

I would like to conclude by underlining that the
difficult situation that has been created should not be
regarded as an attempt by certain groups or forces in
the Balkans to create a greater nationalist State. The
Balkan region has suffered from this illness and from
domination by Serbian nationalism, which led to a real
humanitarian catastrophe in the heart of Europe.
Albanians are part of those nations that suffered the
most. Unfortunately, this idea is still alive in some pro-
nationalist circles which want to realize their ideas by
using a democratic language.

The new aspiration of Albanian democracy is its
full integration into the structures of the European
Union and NATO, and this objective has enabled
Albania to work for the implementation and protection
of the fundamental principles of democracy and the
protection of human rights and of minorities.

By sharing the same goals with other Balkan
countries, Albania believes that this realistic policy
will find roots in neighbouring countries, which should
respect and implement the institutional rights of
Albanians, whether they are in Macedonia, Presevo or
Montenegro.

