Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): Two and a
half months ago this Council voted to continue the
presence of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in Bosnia. At that time I said that my
Government was increasingly concerned by the slide
towards an intensified war, that this would increase the
difficulties that UNPROFOR faced and that it might even
call into question its ability to remain.

The events of the last few weeks have shown all too
clearly how easy it is for matters to escalate rapidly.
UNPROFOR has been blocked at every turn from
pursuing its mandate - the mandate which both parties
had previously accepted. It has been intimidated and
attacked; its personnel have been taken hostage. It is even

 

being denied the ability to resupply its own troops in the
eastern enclaves. We strongly condemn the taking of
hostages and other actions against UNPROFOR personnel
which obstruct it from doing its job. We demand the
immediate and unconditional release of all remaining
hostages and call for UNPROFOR to be given full freedom
of movement throughout its area of operations.

It is against this background that my Government and
those of France, the Netherlands and other countries have
decided to offer reinforcements to UNPROFOR. We
therefore welcome the adoption of this resolution, of which
my country was a sponsor, authorizing the necessary
increase in the UNPROFOR force ceiling to allow those
reinforcements to deploy. The adoption of this resolution is
a clear demonstration of international resolve and
commitment to the work of the United Nations in Bosnia.
These reinforcements mean that for the first time the United
Nations commanders will have at their disposal a credible
rapid reaction capability. It will strengthen UNPROFOR'S
ability to defend itself, increase the range of options open
to the United Nations commanders to respond robustly
against attacks on UNPROFOR, and facilitate
UNPROFOR's ability to carry out its mandate effectively,
including to resupply its own troops.

These reinforcements will be an integral part of the
existing United Nations peace-keeping operation and will be
under the existing United Nations chain of command,
functioning within the existing mandate. But let me make
it clear that UNPROFOR'S mission remains one of peace-
keeping. It is there to assist the delivery of humanitarian
aid, to assist the parties in developing and implementing
cease-fire agreements on the ground and to help provide a
breathing space for the political process. It is not there to
go to war with either side.

Some have suggested that the decision by my
Government and others to send reinforcements reflects a
hidden agenda: to bring about the withdrawal of
UNPROFOR. Withdrawal is not our objective. We are
determined to do everything possible to ensure that
UNPROFOR is able to remain in Bosnia. But, ultimately,
whether it does so is up to the parties themselves.
UNPROFOR can only be successful if it has the continued
consent and cooperation of all sides. If the parties instead
insist on embracing the military option, if UNPROFOR is
prevented from carrying out its tasks or if it faces
unacceptable risks, then there may be no choice but to
withdraw UNPROFOR.

But let us be very clear: UNPROFOR's withdrawal
will not be an easy or a pain-free option. Those who
contemplate withdrawal must think very carefully about
the humanitarian consequences and the wider implications
for the security of the region.

We applaud the efforts of the United Nations
commanders on the ground and their troops in
maintaining a firm line throughout the current crisis. We
also salute the fortitude of those peace-keepers who have
been detained.

I must now refer to the amendment to paragraph 10
of the resolution. My delegation has been able to accept
the addition of the words at the end of that paragraph
both because it understands the domestic political
difficulties which the delegation of the United States is
facing at this moment and also in order to avoid any
conceivable interpretation that today's decision has in
itself imposed an exact and specific financial obligation
on any State.

But it must be clear to all of us that the Security
Council has no locus to take decisions in financial
questions. The Charter reserves to the General Assembly
the responsibility for budgetary and financial matters. In
our view, therefore, the amendment of paragraph 10 does
not and cannot change the financial procedures followed
by this Organization. The Secretary-General said in
paragraph 3 of the financial addendum to his letter of 9
June that he will recommend to the General Assembly
that the costs relating to the reinforcement of
UNPROFOR should be considered an expense of the
Organization to be borne by Member States, in
accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter.

It is the understanding of my delegation that the
Secretary-General will proceed in the well-established
manner and present to the General Assembly at the
earliest opportunity, in accordance with his statement in
the financial addendum, estimates for the cost of the
activities of the reinforcement which we are approving in
today's resolution. Indeed, paragraph 9 of the resolution
makes it clear that we are approving this reinforcement on
the terms set out in the Secretary-General's letter. The
General Assembly will then exercise its Charter
responsibilities under Article 17, paragraph 2, in the
normal way.

UNPROFOR is a means to an end, not an end in
itself. The overriding objective must remain a political
settlement to the conflict in Bosnia. UNPROFOR, even

 

with its increased rapid reaction capability, cannot impose
peace against the parties' will if they are determined to
pursue war. There are alarming reports of a build-up of
Bosnian Government troops to the north of Sarajevo. We
acknowledge the Bosnian Government's frustration. For
months progress towards a political settlement has been
blocked by the intransigence of the Bosnian Serbs and their
refusal to accept the Contact Group plan as a starting point
for negotiations. But we are convinced that neither side will
ultimately be able to impose a military settlement. That is
why it is essential to reinvigorate diplomatic efforts, to
inject new momentum into the search for a negotiated
settlement and to bring about the Bosnian Serb acceptance
of the Contact Group plan as a starting point. We call upon
Belgrade to take further steps to promote the peace process.
We welcome the recent appointment of Mr. Bildt as
European Union Co-Chairman of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, and we call upon all
parties to cooperate unreservedly with him and with Mr.
Stoltenberg in their efforts to reach a settlement.
