Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin my statement by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council at such an important time for international
peace and security.

I have the honour of addressing the Council on
behalf of the 19 member States of the Rio Group in my
capacity as pro tempore Secretary.

The member States of the Rio Group note with
deep concern the recent developments in the Middle
East. In this regard, the Group that I represent, firmly
convinced that peace between the Palestinian and the
Israeli peoples can be attained only through the
peaceful means for the settlement of disputes enshrined
in international law, has declared, first, that it
welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), in which,
recalling all previous relevant resolutions, the Council
reaffirms its vision of the Middle East as a region
where two States, Israel and Palestine, will live
peacefully side by side within safe and recognized
borders.

Secondly, the Rio Group has expressed its
satisfaction with the peace initiative of His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Abdullah Bin Abdul Aziz,
which provides fresh hopes for peace and signals the
advisability of all the countries in the region
normalizing relations.

Thirdly, it has called vehemently upon the States
involved in the process for a lasting peace in the
Middle East to make the greatest political efforts
possible to implement the Security Council proposal.

Fourthly, it has appealed to the parties in conflict
to cease immediately all acts of violence and
harassment, whatever their origin, including all
terrorist acts and all types of provocation, incitement to
violence and destruction.

Under the present circumstances, it is
indispensable that the parties to the conflict
immediately and unconditionally comply with the
recent Security Council resolutions, that they take the
first steps to stop the spiral of Violence and destruction,
that they take concrete measures to re-establish
confidence and that they cooperate fully with the
efforts of the Secretary-General and the four special
envoys responsible for reactivating the peace process.

As the Secretary-General wisely said: Today it is
indispensable that the parties forgo the logic of war and
destruction and embrace the logic of peace and
progress.

