Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Thailand
appreciates France's initiative to convene this timely
debate, as we are shocked and alarmed by the growing
number of brutal attacks in recent months and of abuses
of people simply because they belong to different ethnic
groups, religions, faiths or civilizations. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Patriarch Sako and Mrs. Vian Dakhil
for their valuable and insightful briefings.

During the past six or more decades, chronic
conflicts in the Middle East have claimed too many
lives and deprived peoples of their right to live in
dignity. That horrific situation is now exacerbated by
the increasing, widespread and systematic persecution
of innocent people based on ethnic groups or religious
grounds. In the process, many historical and cultural
objects and sites have also been destroyed. Nothing can
justify such acts.
Peace can prevail only when the principles of human
rights and justice are fully observed. Thailand strongly
supports the rights-based approach to intercultural and
interreligious dialogue. We believe that all religions
and faiths can coexist peacefully because, in essence,
they are based on common values, in particular, love,
kindness and compassion. It is therefore possible and
desirable to promote and strengthen understanding,
mutual respect and tolerance among people of different
religions and faiths, and thus to bridge any gap that might
exist. Solely in that way can we ensure harmonious and
inclusive societies based on cultural diversity, freedom
of religion or belief, equality and human dignity.

From that perspective, we strongly believe that the
international community must take concerted measures
to promote the peaceful coexistence of cultures,
religions, beliefs and faiths and to stop terrorism and
violent extremism. Together, we must send a strong
message to the effect that disrespect for or intolerance
of religious, cultural or ethnic differences, no matter
what the motivations are, must end. The necessary
steps must also be taken to ensure that those who
perpetrate brutal and deliberate persecutions of people
based on such disrespect and intolerance must be held
accountable for their acts.

Diversity among cultures, ethnic groups, religions
and civilizations constitutes a blessing and the common
heritage of humankind. The Middle East is endowed
with the beauty of diversity, which should be inherited
by the next generation. The international community
must not turn a blind eye to the ongoing brutality in
the Middle East. We must take effective action together
and now.

