The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

Let me start by thanking Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/34l) on measuring the effectiveness of
the United Nations rule-of-law activities and for his
insightful briefing today. We appreciate the Secretary-
General's personal leadership and commitment to
mainstreaming the rule of law in United Nations
activities.

Dwight Eisenhower once said,

"The clearest way to show what the rule of law
means to us in everyday life is to recall what has
happened when there is no rule of law."

The events in the Central African Republic and Syria
offer a shocking example of what happens when there
is no rule of law. In the Central African Republic, a
total collapse of law and order has led to unspeakable
atrocities and fears of ethnic cleansing and genocide. In
Syria, siege and starvation are being used as a weapon
of war. The civilian population is subjected to aerial
bombings, Scud missiles and mortar attacks. In gross
violation of international law, humanitarian access
continues to be denied, and humanitarian workers are
targeted. The savagery of Al-Shabaab in Somalia, the
barbaric brutality of radical extremists in the north of
Mali, the hundreds of thousands of displaced people
in South Sudan - those and other situations highlight
the critical importance of restoring the rule of law and
institution-building for protecting civilian populations
and tackling the root causes of conflicts.

At present, nearly 20 United Nations missions have
a rule-of-law mandate. As technical as those mandates
may be, the rule of law is a lot more than the mere
sum of specific activities carried out by peacekeepers
and special political missions on the ground. It is the
underlying framework of rules and rights that make
safe, secure and fair societies possible. It informs
good governance, ensures accountaility and enables
the discharge ofjustice for all without discrimination.
In countries emerging out of conflict, the rule of
law provides a framework to address the legitimate
grievances and concerns of affected populations and
allows the taking of action against perpetrators in a
peaceful manner.

The Council's focus on holistic rule-of-law
assistance in conflict-affected countries is therefore
critical to conflict prevention as well as to breaking
the cycle of relapse into violence. Rule-of-law
activities as mandated by the Council range from
constitution-making, ensuring inclusive political
processes and building police, corrections and law-
enforcement services, to designing transitional justice
mechanisms and tackling sexual violence in conflict. In
all cases the principle of national ownership is key, as it
alone can guarantee that the rule of law will continue to
prevail long after the departure of peacekeepers.

Countries emerging out of conflict usually face
a legacy of widespread and systematic human rights
abuses and grievances that, if unaddressed, may
reignite the cycle of violence. A well-functioning
and credible police force is a key element in building
security and lasting peace in a post-conflict setting.
Often, however, law-enforcement services have to
incorporate elements that participated in the conflict.
That can easily undercut a population's trust in justice,
especially if they see their former abusers in uniform.

Therefore, the stringent vetting of personnel, the
establishment of internal accountability mechanisms
and training on human rights and gender awareness are
essential and have been supported by United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions within the
framework of rule-of-law mandates.

Accountability for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes is key to progress on the
path of reconciliation and peace. It is the primary
responsibility of national justice systems to investigate
and prosecute such crimes.

United Nations missions play an important role
in supporting the efforts of national authorities,
through assistance in the establishment of truth and
reconciliation commissions as well as transitional
justice mechanisms, the development of investigative
capacities, and the reform of legal and judicial
institutions.

However, where national judicial systems fail
to tackle impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern, the Security Council should
be ready to use the full range of tools at its disposal,
including targeted sanctions and referrals to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). As a founding
member of the ICC, Lithuania would welcome the
development of a more consistent framework for
referrals to the Court.

Discrimination, oppression, exclusion, lingering
grievances, unresolved disputes, abuses of power and
a deficit of democratic governance - all of this, if
unaddressed, will, sooner or later, erupt into violence
and conflict. We see this all over the world, and sadly
close to home, in the middle of Europe today. Ukraine is
burning with protests. Clashes between the Government
and protesters have led to injuries and deaths. We must
use all means at our disposal to stop the bloodshed
immediately and to hold the perpetrators to account.
Restoring the rule of law is essential to beginning a
genuine dialogue on constitutional reform, an inclusive
Government and preventing further violence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to members ofthe Council.

