Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, confident of
the United States' skilled guidance of the Council's
important work. I also express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom for its leadership of the Council in the
month of March.

I thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his briefing to the Council.
Before making my national statement, I wish to
note that, while the State of Palestine is Chair of the
Group of Arab States for April, the Council of Arab
Ambassadors has decided that Jordan, in its capacity
as host and president of the 2017 Arab Summit, shall
deliver today's statement on behalf of the Arab Group.
We align ourselves with that statement, as well as with
the statements to be delivered on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

We meet at a time of simmering crises, rising
tensions, and declining optimism about prospects
for Middle East peace. At the heart of the instability
in our region remains the Palestine question, a grave
injustice that continues without remedy, causing
misery to millions, and that continues to pose a threat
to international peace and security. The persistence of
that injustice also continues to fuel perceptions of bias
and double-standards and to be exploited by extremist
elements as justification for their vile actions and
as a recruitment tool. There can be no discussion of
countering extremist terror and stabilizing the region
without recognizing that fact, as well as the imperative
of addressing the root causes of our region's conflicts,
in order to fully resolve them and allow us to enter a
new era in the Middle East.

That said, it is beyond clear that the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict is about the denial of a people's
inalienable rights and a prolonged foreign occupation;
it is not a conflict arising from incitement or terror. A
territorial solution and fulfilment of rights are what will
resolve the conflict, ending the Israeli occupation of
our land and realizing Palestinian national aspirations
and rights, including to self-determination and freedom
and a just solution for the Palestine refugees, in
conformity with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

The Security Council has a role and responsibility to
foster such a just and peaceful solution, consistent with
its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 2334 (2016) is the most recent articulation of
the Council's positions, decisions and determination in
that regard and reflects the long-standing international
consensus on the issue. We reiterate that resolution
2334 (2016) is not anti-Israel; it is anti-settlements,

anti-violence and anti-violation of international law,
and is therefore actually and clearly pro-peace and pro-
two-State solution - Palestine and Israel - and was
globally welcomed as such. The resolution provides the
most viable path to preserving the two-State solution
on the 1967 lines and creating the conditions necessary
to end the occupation, justly resolve the conflict in all
aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and security
a reality.

Once again, we call for full respect of resolution
2334 (2016). In that connection, we welcome the
Secretary-General's report pursuant to the resolution,
as orally delivered on 24 March 2017. Yet, we reiterate
the expectation for written reports to ensure proper
documentation of the implementation of the resolution's
provisions and of the developments promoting or
obstructing its objectives.

In addition, while the report rightly reiterated
the call for the complete cessation of illegal Israeli
settlement activities, it echoed the call for a cessation
of violence and incitement, reaffirmed the global
consensus on the two-State solution, noted ongoing
international efforts to promote it, and reflected on the
worrying reality on the ground. We believe that further
analysis, based on international law and the context of
the occupation, and recommendations to rectify the
negative trends are required in future reports to assist
the Council in upholding its duties. We await the next
report in June, which will coincide with the marking of
50 years of the occupation.

We condemn Israel's disrespect of Security Council
decisions, as evidenced in its flagrant violations
of resolution 2334 (2016). Thousands of violations
have been deliberately carried out, including the
advancement of at least 6,000 more settlement units
in the months since the resolution's adoption - even
the establishment of a new settlement - along with
other violations in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Settlement activities are
eroding the two-State solution, based on the 1967
lines, and must stop immediately in all manifestations,
as demanded by the Council. The colonization,
fragmentation, and annexation of our land will never
bring peace. Here, we also recall the clear affirmations
by the Council that

"it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem,
other than those agreed by the parties through
negotiations" (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 3);

and reiterate as well the call upon all States

"to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967" (ibid., para. 5).

Actions consistent with these provisions are more
urgent than ever.

Each day, as more violations entrench the occupation,
hope and potential for a solution are considerably
diminished. At the same time, Israel's contempt
diminishes the Council's own stature and credibility,
seriously compromising its ability - that is, of the
Council - to act with authority in other crises around
the world.

How can this situation be acceptable to anyone, least
of all Council members? Security Council resolutions
must be implemented without exception. As in any
other case, Israel must comply with Council demands
and its legal obligations, or be held accountable. It
cannot continue to be absolved of responsibility for its
crimes and violations, its perpetuation of the conflict,
and its obstruction of peace.

I must turn now to the human dimension of this
conflict and the endless suffering being caused to the
Palestinian people, young and old, by this illegal and
brutal occupation at the hands of the Israeli occupying
forces and extremist Israeli settlers.

As we meet today, more than 1,000 Palestinians are
on hunger strike in non-violent protest of their captivity,
inhumane treatment and torture by Israel. This hunger
strike, led by Marwan Barghouti, a Palestinian
parliamentarian and political leader who has been jailed
for 15 years now, aims to call attention to the plight of
the over 6,500 Palestinians imprisoned or arbitrarily
detained, including men, women, youth, Children and
elected officials, and to secure the legitimate rights
being denied to them by Israel, in grave breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

We call for international solidarity with our
prisoners - whom we salute from the Chamber - in
this peaceful effort to compel Israeli compliance with
the law and respect for their human rights and to avert
the dangerous consequences of deterioration of this
situation. We believe that the International Committee
of the Red Cross can play a positive, facilitating role,
and urge all necessary efforts in this regard. Moreover,
we stress that the release of our prisoners and detainees
is indispensable for peace, one of the most important
indicators of the readiness to end the oppression and
occupation and to create peace and coexistence.

Today, we must also remind the Council of the
appalling situation of captivity of2 million Palestinians
in the Gaza Strip, under Israel's illegal blockade, in an
act ofmassive collective punishment and a crime against
humanity. For nearly 10 years, an entire population has
been imprisoned, denied freedom of movement, access
to livelihoods, access to basic supplies, even vital
medicines, deprived of clean water and energy, and
forced to live in the ruins ofwar, as even reconstruction
continues to be obstructed and at least 40,000 people
remain displaced from the destruction caused by the
2014 Israeli aggression. We caution that hope is fading
and despair rising in Gaza, and reiterate our call for
an end to the blockade and for respect by Israel of its
obligations as an occupying Power under international
humanitarian law.

Our calls for respect of international law go hand
in hand with our readiness to engage in negotiations
to achieve peace. The Palestinian leadership has
clearly committed itself to negotiations and has acted
in good faith in over two decades of peace processes.
We are insistent, however, on international law as
the foundation and guarantor of peace. Resolution
2334 (2016) fully recognized this and the Palestinian
leadership is committed to the respect ofthat resolution.

We are engaging with all efforts to advance a just
solution. This includes engagement with the new United
States Administration of President Trump. Several
Arab leaders have met with the President since the
Arab Summit, reaffirming their commitment to peace,
in line with the Arab Peace Initiative, which marked
its fifteenth anniversary last month. That Initiative was
remarkably renewed again, and still awaits reciprocation
by Israel. President Abbas will also soon travel to
Washington, DC. My understanding is that he will be
meeting with President Trump on 3 May. He is ready to
engage in political dialogue with the United States and
all other concerned partners, including the Quartet, to
launch a credible political horizon, on a clear basis and
in a set time frame, that will lead to a solution that ends
the Israeli occupation and achieves the independence of
the State of Palestine, with its capital in East Jerusalem,
based on the two-State solution on the 1967 lines,
whereby the Palestinian and Israeli peoples can live
side by side in peace and security.

At the same time, internally, we continue to pursue
the development and strengthening of our national
institutions and to also seek to heal the divisions in
the Palestinian political system. We hope that ongoing
reconciliation efforts will come to fruition, recognizing
the imperative of unity for the achievement of our
legitimate national aspirations.
Failure to justly resolve the Palestine question,
the crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict, has brought
us to several regrettable milestones in this year: the
fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation of the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and other Arab
territories since June 1967; 100 years since the Balfour
Declaration; 70 years since the General Assembly's
decision to mandate the partition of Palestine by its
resolution 181 (II), which led to the Al-Nakba of the
Palestinian people, which continues to this day; and 10
years of Israel's inhumane blockade of Gaza.

The status quo is far beyond unsustainable. This
is shown starkly by the prisoners' hunger strike; the
immense despair in Gaza; the high tensions in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, as Israel's settlement
and wall construction, demolition of Palestinian homes,
violent military raids and arrest campaigns, and Israeli
settler terror and provocations against our civilians
continue unabated; and the painful tragedies being
endured by our refugees throughout the region.

It is an explosive situation requiring immediate
action to uphold the law, reverse the deterioration on
the ground, and avert further crises. We thus call again
for responsible, collective efforts to advance a genuine
peace process to achieve, without delay, the end of
the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the just,
lasting and comprehensive peace we have long sought.

We appeal to the international community, with the
Security Council at the forefront, to heed our appeals
and to act urgently on their obligations in order to
restore hope in the possibility of peace and to actually
make it a reality.

