Ms. Odera (Kenya): Mr. President, Kenya warmly
applauds the presence of a great son of Africa here today.
Your country's courageous struggle for freedom, which you
actively reinforced here in the United Nations as the South
West Africa People's Organization's representative is well
known. We are therefore delighted to see you preside over
a discussion which we hope can contribute towards the
freedom of children from participation in armed conflict.

Allow me to join other delegations in thanking you for
taking the initiative to convene this debate on a subject with
which, alas, we are all too familiar in our continent. I also
wish to express my delegation's deep appreciation for the
tireless efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, not only in familiarizing himself first-hand with the
situation of these special children, but also in trying to
publicize their plight to the world at large, logistical and
administrative constraints notwithstanding. We encourage
Mr. Otunnu and his team to continue their good work.
I recall that a little over a year ago, in a similar
debate, delegation after delegation expressed outrage at the
sheer numbers involved and the extent of the atrocities in
situations of conflict, where children were the primary
Victims. Unfortunately, despite widespread condemnation of
the senseless targeting of innocent children in armed
conflicts, the international community is still witnessing
repeated accounts of such horrors in many parts of the
world. We also know that for every child whose life is
brutalized, there is a likelihood that unless dramatic changes
occur for the better, that child will in turn one day abuse or
attack another vulnerable human being. A vicious cycle of
Violence is created, which leads to the type of revenge
attacks and massacres which have sadly become a common
feature of our news broadcasts and newspaper columns.

The media have helped highlight unspeakable crimes
which are committed against the voiceless - against
children in armed conflict. Who has not tried to blot out the
image of raped, maimed or malnourished victims from their
minds? Most often, they are Victims who have been robbed
of their childhood. Having been robbed of that precious gift
which we take for granted in times of peace, how do we
reintegrate them into society? How do we help heal not
only the physical wounds of chopped limbs, but also the
emotional ones of violent sexual crimes? How, indeed, do
we restore their confidence in humanity when that
humanity itself is absent?

Only decisive action can arrest this pattern and cycle
of violence. The Security Council has the capacity to take
a lead not only in preventing the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, but also in ensuring the protection of their
rights as children. In fact, since the Security Council's
presidential statement on the involvement of children in
armed conflict was issued on 29 June 1998, some
progress has been made in defining elements of crimes
under the Statute of the International Criminal Court,
including crimes which affect children in armed conflict
situations. My delegation considers this a positive
development intended to reaffirm the obligation of
Member States to prosecute those responsible for grave
breaches of international humanitarian law.

Increasingly, we need to look beyond disarmament
and demobilization of child soldiers. We need to consider
how to establish and encourage training and capacity-
building in trauma counselling and rehabilitation at local
levels for those who deal with children in post-conflict
situations. We must be able to assess and address the
impact of the emotional damage resulting from the
Violation of children's rights. To paraphrase a nursery
rhyme, let me add that Humpty Dumpty has had a great
fall, but we must put him together again. A holistic,
integrated, action-oriented approach which combines the
elements of social policy, political will and economic and
financial commitment is one way the international
community can make a positive difference in dealing with
this complex problem.

Finally, it is well known that the road to hell is
paved with good intentions. So unless we support the
initiatives and activities of the Special Representative as
he continues to work closely with the relevant
programmes, funds and agencies of the United Nations
system, our best intentions will not translate into action.
In this regard, every effort needs to be made to mobilize
adequate funds to support his efforts on behalf of this
special category of children. On our part, we will
continue to lend all the support we can, especially in the
context of the group of Friends. For which of us, when
asked for a fish, would offer a child a serpent? Let us
give them fish to eat. We owe it to them.

