Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): It is
a pleasure to welcome Mr. Zebari back to the Council,
this time in his capacity as the Foreign Minister of the
Iraqi interim Government.

Iraq is poised to take a momentous step in its
modern history. The new Government named earlier
this week will assume full sovereignty this month, and
in coming months it will have the responsibility and
the authority for leading the people of Iraq to national
elections by early next year. The work that lies ahead
for Minister Zebari's Government is exhilarating in its
promise for the future, but we are sure that that work
will not be easy. He and his colleagues will be called
on to demonstrate their commitment to the people of
Iraq at a difficult and dangerous time. Those who
deploy terror in an attempt to snatch hopes for the
future from the Iraqi people will continue, and perhaps
even redouble, their insidious and vicious attacks. We
are sadly but acutely aware that Mr. Zebari and his
colleagues face personal risks by serving their country.

The United States warmly welcomes the
formation of a Cabinet of distinguished Iraqi men and
women who represent the breadth, talent and diversity
of Iraqi society. As President Bush said on Tuesday,
"The Government has the talent, the commitment and
the resolve to guide Iraq through the challenges that lie
ahead". The United States stands ready to assist the
Government of Iraq in achieving the goal of a secure,
democratic Iraq at peace with its neighbours. We look
to Member States of the United Nations to join us in
helping the people of Iraq to realize that vision.

We pay tribute to Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his
tireless work in setting the stage for a new Prime
Minister's leadership of the Iraqi people. Ambassador
Brahimi engaged in a vibrant consultation with
hundreds, and even thousands, of Iraqis representing
the diversity of Iraq. We expect to see that process
continue through the formation of a national council
next month to advise and assist the interim
Government.

Today, as Minister Zebari joins us, the Security
Council is considering a draft text circulated by my
delegation and that of the United Kingdom. The draft
salutes the new moment that we are facing in Iraq's
history: the occupation of Iraq will end, and the Iraqi
people will assume full responsibility and authority for
governing a proud and rich nation. The Council's
timely adoption of that draft resolution will bear
witness to a fundamental change in the relationship
between the Security Council and Iraq after nearly 14
years since Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait.

We welcome Minister Zebari's presence here in
New York, and we welcome Iraq's contribution to the
exchange of views on the draft resolution under
discussion. In the days ahead, my Government and our
Multinational Force partners will engage the incoming
Iraqi Government on a broad range of issues, and in
particular on the nature of the security partnership
between the Multinational Force and the Iraqi people.
The United States is committed to supporting the new
Iraqi Government in its work to bring lasting stability
to Iraq and to allow for free national elections by the
end of January 2005. This will be a true partnership
founded on shared goals and tangible cooperation at all
levels, from the soldiers on foot patrols to the highest
levels of two sovereign Governments.

Our work in the Security Council to support the
Iraqi people will not end with the adoption of this draft
resolution or with the end of the occupation. We must
confront with resolve and determination those who
seek to deny the Iraqi people the opportunity for
democratic self-government and those who seek to sow
instability, fear and terror in Iraq. The United States
will not flinch in this task. This is work that demands a
shared effort from the international community,
standing shoulder to shoulder with the Iraqi people and
with the interim Iraqi Government as they move along
the path to elections and to the development of capable
institutions for governance and as they work to create a
stable, peaceful and democratic future for their country.

