Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like
to extend thanks to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for the briefing he presented at the beginning
of this meeting on his recent visit to a number of
countries, including Tunisia, and the most recent
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Once again we meet, as we have done for
decades, while the Israeli settlers and the forces of the
occupation continue their daily acts of aggression and
violations against the unarmed Palestinian people and
their Christian and Islamic holy sites in Jerusalem,
in particular Al-Aqsa Mosque, in blatant violation of
international legitimacy, charters and laws.

The occupation authorities continue their settlement
campaign despite the growing rejection of it by the
international community. We are all in agreement that
such a campaign constitutes a violation of international
law. There is no longer any doubt that Israel continues
to impose a policy of fait accompli in order to gain
more time to change the status quo by force and impede
any attempts or initiatives aimed at achieving peace
based on the two-State solution. That solution has
been undermined by the settler colonialist expansion.
It is therefore time for the international community, in
particular the Council, to assume full responsibility
for bringing an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territory and the Israeli practices against
the Palestinian people.

We are all in agreement that both the occupation
and the practices are illegal and illegitimate. It is time
to effect a genuine change with regard to how the

Council deals with the question of Palestine. Today,
there is no option for diffusing the tension and ending
the continued turbulence other than to put an end to
the unprecedented settler colonialism and occupation,
which is the crux of the problem. There must be a serious
and responsible movement, before it is too late, with the
goal of arriving at a peaceful, just and comprehensive
solution that guarantees the Palestinian people their
right to establish a sovereign viable, independent and
contiguous State on their territory - which has been
occupied since 1967 - with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

My delegation supports any genuine effort that
would contribute to achieving that goal, and therefore
welcomes the initiative mentioned this morning by
the representative of France. Tunisia also supports the
Palestinian request that the United Nations provide
international protection for Palestinian civilians within
the occupied Palestinian territories in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and international humanitarian law.
We also reiterate our goal to have the embargo imposed
on the Gaza Strip lifted and to secure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. The success of the
process to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East depends on the full withdrawal of Israel
from all occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Arab Golan, as well as
the territories still occupied in south Lebanon.

Before concluding, I must express Tunisia's
satisfaction at the resumption of negotiations under the
auspices of the United Nations in Geneva for the political
settlement of the Syrian crisis and at the cessation of
hostilities, which was achieved thanks to the laudable
efforts of the United States and the Russian Federation.
Tunisia hopes that our Syrian brothers will seize this
important and historic opportunity and take advantage
of the support of the international community, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, and the International Syria Support Group,
in order to achieve a political settlement that puts an
end to the crisis and violence, preserves the territorial
integrity of Syria and promotes societal cohesion in
accordance with the aspirations of the Syrian people.

