Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important debate and for preparing an
excellent concept note (S/2015/306, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his biennial report on
the issue (S/2015/289).

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union. I
would now like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

In our view, the proliferation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons represents a grave threat to
global and regional peace and security. We commend
the Council's sustained attention on this matter. We
hope that the Council will continue to build on the
momentum achieved with the adoption of the resolution
2117 (2013) and, in that context, we warmly welcome
the new draft resolution proposed by the presidency on
this topic.

The issue of the control of small arms and light
weapons (SALW) is of great importance. Our own
conflict and post-conflict experience have made
us aware of the grave threat posed by the excessive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons in both
legal and illegal possession. For Croatia, the issue of
SALW control is not merely one of safety; we see it in
the wider context of human security, development and
human rights. Over the years, Croatia has led the Less
Arms, Less Tragedies campaign to raise awareness and
collect arms, which is conducted jointly by the United
Nations Development Programme Office in Croatia
and our Ministry of Interior. The campaign is aimed at
raising public awareness about the dangers of weapons,
especially those illegally owned by citizens. It also
seeks to inform people about ways to return weapons
anonymously and without legal consequences, and
thereby to encourage citizens to voluntarily surrender
their weapons. The United Nations has rated this
campaign as one of the most successful of its kind
globally, based on the criteria of citizen participation
and the final number of small arms and light weapons
collected.

We believe that national efforts are of the utmost
importance in tackling the issue of SALW. However,
some problems cannot be dealt with by countries alone
and need to be addressed at the regional and global
levels. Croatia attaches great importance to regional
cooperation in this field and strongly supports and
participates in regional efforts. We have played an
active, pioneering role in the Stability Pact for Southeast
Europe. As a result of those efforts, our region has
developed and implemented innovative solutions
for tackling that issue through information-sharing,
knowledge transfers and the harmonization of
approaches.

A telling example of such regional cooperation is the
Regional Arms Control Verification, Implementation
and Assistance Centre for Security Cooperation, which
is located in Zagreb and fully operational. Regional
cooperation was crucial in achieving significant
progress in reducing the number of unwanted and
surplus light weapons and ammunition in the countries
of South-East Europe. We believe that this success in
our region can set a good example for other regions of
the world.

At the global level, Croatia is a State party to all
relevant existing mechanisms, including the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT). We recognize the ATT as a major
milestone in controlling the use of conventional arms
and small arms and light weapons, which cause the death
of hundreds of thousands of people every year. Croatia
was among the first countries to ratify the Arms Trade
Treaty, thereby demonstrating our firm commitment
to arms control in a wider context. We attach the
highest priority to the Treaty's full implementation,
both regionally and globally. Our experts, who have
extensive national and regional experience in post-
conflict arms control efforts, will actively participate
in European Union outreach activities.

Croatia also attaches great importance to applying
a gender perspective to the matter of small arms. The
illicit transfer, misuse and accumulation of SALW can
have a disproportionate effect on women and girls. We
stress the role that women can and should play in peace
processes. The political empowerment of women and
their full, equal and effective participation in all stages
of peace processes are crucial for building sustainable
peace and security, ensuring gender equality and
protecting human rights. Finally, Croatia would also
like to recognize and welcome the role of civil society
in dealing with that issue.

Every day we see the human costs of the
widespread availability and misuse of small arms and
light weapons. We therefore hope that today's debate
will provide further impetus to our collective efforts to
strengthen the fight against the illicit transfer, misuse
and accumulation of small arms and light weapons.

