At the outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and on convening this meeting. The concept note (S/2020/1064, annex) raises an important question as to what can be done to strengthen and mainstream an integrated approach to promote solutions. Over the 75 years since the establishment of the United Nations, a great deal has been accomplished to settle international disputes, resolve conflicts, eradicate colonialism and restore hope in those affected by war, violence and instability. However, conflicts, prolonged foreign occupation and the lack of accountability continue to endanger peace and security. Racist ideologies and the incitement of ethnic and religious hatred, often coupled with fake historical narratives, have an undermining effect on the eruption or protraction of conflict. The coronavirus disease pandemic and the hazards of climate change aggravate and exacerbate the challenging security environment. Coherent global responses and common efforts are the most effective ways to address conflicts, fight climate change and the coronavirus disease, combat terrorism, manage forced displacements and migratory flows and achieve the goals of peace, inclusive sustainable development and human rights for all. The United Nations is a critical pillar of multilateralism, and the purposes and principles of its Charter constitute the foundational normative framework in international relations. First and foremost, all States must strictly comply with their international obligations, particularly those relating to respect for each other's sovereignty, territorial integrity and internationally recognized borders. Effective solutions necessitate the implementation of the decisions adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations. Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations is clear about the obligations of Member States in that regard. It is also important to work on addressing all the root causes of conflict, taking into account that peace, security, development, human rights and the rule of law are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Azerbaijan's consistent position with regard to the issue under consideration is well known and stems, among other factors, from its experience of facing armed aggression and its devastating consequences. In its resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), the Security Council acknowledged the fact that acts of military force were committed against Azerbaijan, that those acts were incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations and that they constituted a violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. However, the Security Council demands for the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of the Armenian occupying forces from all the occupied territories of Azerbaijan have not been unimplemented. On the contrary, Armenia has continued to enjoy impunity, which, as an immediate corollary, has generated a sense of permissiveness among its authorities, freed their hands for new acts of aggression and hate crimes and led to the situation that we are now facing. Peace, security and development are achievable only if the consequences of Armenia's aggression are removed, thereby ensuring that its armed forces are completely withdrawn from the occupied territories, the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan is restored and the right of internally displaced Azerbaijanis to return is implemented.
