The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of South Africa.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his insightful briefing on the developments
in Mali pertaining to the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also
thank Ambassador Jose Singer Weisinger for his update
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali. We pay tribute
to our peacekeepers and the members of the Malian
armed forces who have sacrificed their lives so that
Malians can enjoy peace in their homeland.

My statement this morning will focus on the
political process and the security and humanitarian
situation in Mali. It will also reflect on the support
provided by MINUSMA to the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and on the sanctions
imposed on Mali.

With regard to the political process, South Africa
welcomes the launch, in September, of the inclusive
national dialogue. We urge stakeholders to participate
in the national dialogue, which is aimed at contributing
to the creation of political and institutional reforms that
will characterize the future State of Mali and address
the situation in the north and centre of Mali with a view
to maintaining the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the country.

In that regard, we emphasize that the full
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali is vital for the establishment of
peace, security and stability in northern Mali. It is also
important that all Malians, including women, actively
participate in the political processes in their country.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the efforts being
made to establish an independent women's observatory
to enable women to participate in the monitoring of
the implementation of the Agreement, which is an
important step towards improving the participation of
women in the political process in Mali.

With regard to the security situation, South Africa
remains concerned about the continued instability in the
north and centre of Mali, as evidenced by the sustained
attacks against MINUSMA peacekeepers and national
and international forces. We condemn the recent
attacks in September and early October that resulted
in the loss of many lives, including 38 Malian soldiers
and a peacekeeper from Chad. It is important that the
perpetrators of those attacks be held accountable and
brought to justice.

The cessation of hostilities between the Fulani
and Dogon communities in central Mali with a view
to reducing intercommunal violence is a positive
development that must be commended. Despite that
overture, however, the persistent intercommunal attacks
that result in casualties among civilians, including
women and children, have the potential to undermine
the positive gains that have been made to date. The
protection of civilians, particularly the vulnerable
groups in the conflict, must be a priority for all those
concerned. The Security Council should encourage,
support and provide the capacity for community-
based conflict resolution and mediation and sustained
intercommunal, inter-ethnic and interreligious
dialogue throughout Mali. Such grass-roots efforts
should include women, young people and religious and
tribal leaders.

We note the progress that has been made to date
on the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes, which could contribute
to the redeployment of the reformed and reconstituted
Malian defence and security forces throughout the
country, especially in northern and central Mali. All
possible measures must be taken by Malian authorities
to address concerns regarding the DDR processes.

Asweheardinthebriefingby SpecialRepresentative
Annadif, MINUSMA continues to help the authorities
in Mali to restore State presence and State authority
in northern and central Mali, primarily by ensuring
the provision of basic services to its people, which is
particularly important to ensure the normalization of
the living conditions and the improvement of the lives
of the ordinary citizens of Mali.

However, such an undertaking requires sufficient
resources. The international community should
therefore redouble its efforts to mobilize the requisite
funds for the 2019 humanitarian response plan for Mali.
South Africa would like to also reiterate the importance
of a comprehensive and holistic approach to the multiple
challenges facing Mali, particularly with regard to
improving economic growth and socioeconomic
development. In that regard, we are encouraged by the
reports of the adoption of legislation to support the
establishment of the northern development zone.

We reiterate the importance of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force in Mali and the Sahel region. Every possible effort
should thus be made by the United Nations and its States
Members to ensure that the continued challenges facing
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are addressed and that it has
its full capacity and is able to efficiently implement
its mandate. That is in addition to the life-support
consumables that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is already
receiving from MINUSMA. There is an urgent need to
resolve the root causes of instability, intercommunal
clashes, terrorism and violent extremism.

In that regard, the decision taken by the leaders of
the Economic Community of West African States at
its recently concluded Extraordinary Summit, which
pledged resources for fighting terrorism in the region, is
an indication of the willingness of African countries to
resolve their own problems and should be commended.

Regarding the sanctions imposed on Mali, allow
me to reiterate my country's position that any sanctions
regime should aim to support political processes and
peace efforts, and not undermine them. The work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, should
therefore ensure that the Mali sanctions regime is
effective in supporting the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
does not hinder it in any way.

In conclusion, South Africa is encouraged by the
continued commitment of the international community,
through the United Nations, to supporting efforts
towards the establishment of peace, security and
stability in Mali, all of which are precursors to the
achievement of sustainable peace. As we have seen time
and again, Mali is like a wall that acts as a dam blocking
water from the north. If that wall breaks - and we can
see the cracks - the countries downstream will suffer
the most. Mali is a friend in the fight against terrorism.
If those terrorists find their way out of Mali, the rest of
Africa will suffer.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Mali

