Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We deeply regret the loss of life among innocent
Palestinian civilians today in Gaza. While we believe
that Israel has the right to act to defend itself and its
citizens, we do not see that its operations in Gaza in the
past few days serve the purposes of peace and security.
They have worsened the humanitarian situation and
have resulted in confrontations between Israeli forces
and Palestinians, and have not, we believe, enhanced
Israel's security.
We note that the Government of Israel has
expressed its deep regret for what it called a tragic
event. These events, in fact, serve as a grim reminder
of the wisdom of Israel disengaging from Gaza and
having its security presence replaced by reformed
Palestinian security forces that will and must
themselves act to stop smuggling and halt terrorism.
The road map calls upon the Palestinian Authority to
"declare an unequivocal end to violence and terrorism
and undertake visible efforts on the ground to arrest,
disrupt, and restrain individuals and groups conducting
and planning violent acts on Israelis anywhere"
(5/2003/529, annex, p. 3), and to begin "sustained,
targeted, and effective operations aimed at confronting
all those engaged in terror and dismantlement of
terrorist capabilities and infrastructure" (ibid.).

We have urged the Israeli Government to exercise
maximum restraint now. All parties should find a
reason to calm the situation. We intend to consult
immediately with the relevant parties, which include
Israel, the Palestinians and the Government of Egypt,
about effective ways to move forward against the
smuggling of arms into Gaza and terrorist activities
there, so as to create the best possible conditions on the
ground, leading toward the disengagement that we
continue to favour.

While we are clearly concerned about Israel's
operations in Gaza, including the demolition of homes
of innocent Palestinians and the deaths of Palestinian
civilians, we could not vote in favour of this resolution
because we do not believe it addresses sufficiently the
context of the recent events in Gaza. It is clear that
Palestinian terrorists have been smuggling weapons
into Gaza through tunnels in Rafah. It is clear that the
Palestinian Authority has not taken serious action to
address this threat or to put an end to terrorist acts, as it
is obligated to do under the road map. Because these
issues are not addressed in the resolution, the United
States abstained.

