Major General Pearce: I thank Council members
for their kind words regarding our peacekeeping efforts.
They are much appreciated. I shall answer all questions
as I heard them, and ask members to correct me ifI
captured them incorrectly. Some will be practically
aligned to myself as Force Commander, but there are
a couple that are more politically aligned. My Special

Representative of the Secretary-General will be here in
a month and I will make some comments and defer to
her those that I sense she is better able to answer.

In regard to the question posed by the representative
of Poland with respect to whether the current mandate
is working well and what our approach is, under the
current mandate we are able to support the mission
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's political outcome. We are proactive in the
buffer zone. We have a small force now of only just
over 800 personnel. We are fully committed, through a
strong patrolling and engagement liaison programme,
to achieving the mission to de-escalate tensions within
the buffer zone.

The obstacles for us are actually twofold. As
I indicated in my statement, it is about the lack of
respect for our mandated authority in the buffer zone
and the fact that neither side acknowledges or accepts
the 2018 aide-memoire. It is a very loose and difficult
environment in which to communicate and engage
when we do not have a base level from which to operate.

In response to the question on migration, we have
a whole-of-United-Nations approach to migration in
Cyprus. The past six months have seen a continual
increase in arrivals of asylum-seekers and applications
to Cyprus. Cyprus remains in first place among
European Union members in terms of applicants per
capita. New arrivals from the north of the island are
mostly Syrian nationals arriving from Turkey and
Lebanon, while persons of African origin are entering
as students or to seek employment and crossing south in
steadily increasing numbers.

We recorded fewer actual arrivals in the buffer zone,
as there is a small area on the west of the island where it
is possible to enter by boat. However, smuggling routes
across the island are increasingly being used. The buffer
zone is porous and there are insufficient forces to be
able to take on the responsibility ofirregular migration.
Having said that, we are working closely with both
sides to address the issue and identify opportunities to
support those that are coming through, as well as those
who will have to return to their home countries.

I thank the representative of the United Kingdom
for his questions. Regarding impact on the ground and
the peace and security architecture, I wholeheartedly
welcomed the directed architecture, which allows for the
synchronization of the work that we are currently doing
within Cyprus. Through the performance measures,
the mission concept that we now have operating and
the comprehensive performance assessment system
that we are developing and trialling this year, we can
monitor the performance of our troops; ensure that our
resources are expended in the best way possible; and
ensure that the training we are conducting is aligned
with the outcomes of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative (A4P) and, where there are gaps, allows us to
focus on them.

In terms of performance, we certainly engage
through our sectors in addition to a top-down approach.
We have long-standing troop-contributing country
commitments and that national line with the troop-
contributing countries ensures a short feedback loop
in terms of training; that we see optimal performance
and training in our individuals when they first arrive;
and that we have the opportunity, where gaps exist, to
conduct mission training and address those gaps.

Mandate mechanisms, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will speak
about in more detail, have certainly been a work in
progress. The concept of mechanisms within Cyprus
has been uncharted and so we are attempting a cold
start. Some are working at a faster pace than others, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has done a lot of work with both sides to identify
mechanisms that we can move forward with. She will
indicate that rapport when she comes here next month,
so I will leave this matter for her to expand on then.

In response to the representative of Peru, we have
been working on confidence-building mechanisms
politically at the civilian, military and police levels.
Many of these measures are therefore stemming into
the military and the policing components. For us, this
involves demining and suspected hazardous areas,
where we are certainly making progress and looking to
complete early next year.

With regard to working at the community level,
we believe that a bottom-up approach and bicommunal
engagement across the island to build the confidence of
the communities - the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek
Cypriots - will help us to successfully identify a way
forward. That is a whole-of-mission approach and we,
as a military, work closely with the civil affairs section,
the United Nations police and the political component
to address that on a number of levels.

In response to the representative of Russia, as I
have already mentioned and touched on with regard
to the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, we take performance seriously.
Training and safety are certainly my primary priority
in everything we do within the mission. It is articulated
in our mission concept; we have our work force plans,
our comprehensive performance assessment system
and the A4P outcomes, as well as my own concept of
operations and my priorities for the Force. We have
continual evaluations and, as I said, a close feedback
loop, which we continue to review, analyse and
implement going forward.

I thank the representative of the United States for
his questions. Regarding freedom of action around
the island, we do have, and are very fortunate to have,
freedom of action around Cyprus. We have a couple of
areas that are disputed on the northern ceasefire line,
where that freedom of action is challenged at times. I
am currently working closely with my opposing force
commanders on those areas of challenge with the
intention of de-escalating the situation to support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
achieve the political outcomes. I keep an eye on that
what we have done as a United Nations over time and
there are certainly some cyclic approaches that we
have taken. In order to understand the opposing force's
position, aligning to what the political outcomes are is
really important.

As for the second question of the United States
representative regarding host country consent and their
View of the buffer zone, both sides have completely
separate views. The Greek Cypriots see the buffer
zone as Republic of Cyprus territory, despite us having
mandated authority, and they encourage Greek Cypriot
civilians to pursue activities there, whereas the Turkish
forces see it as an area that should remain sterile until its
status is determined as an agreed part of the settlement
and those territorial adjustments. That creates a tension
in itself, in terms of their own understanding of what
their position on the buffer zone is. Without accepting
or even reading and acknowledging the aide-memoire,
it is really difficult. We do not have rules of the road on
which way to operate, so it certainly creates tensions
near and close to the northern ceasefire line, between
us and the Turkish forces; the farmers and the Turkish
forces; and us and the farmers.

I thank the representative of France for her
questions. In regard to the internal and external
strategic and operational feedback, as a small mission
we are very fortunate that we can work in a really
integrated approach, and the political nuances and what
I do as a military force have political implications. It
is probably the first time for me as a Commander that
small and what I would consider to be very tactical
incidents on the ground have political implications. I
was surprised but now, having a better understanding
of the environment in which I work, I can understand
those tensions tactically at the small level on the ground
and what that means to both sides. The Council has
seen that through some of the reporting that we have
done in the past six months.

In regard to the representative of France's second
question concerning freedom of movement with respect
to the status of forces agreement, as I indicated we have
no concerns about that. We do have the freedom of
action for that.

We do not have protection of civilians within
our mandate, so I will not respond to those questions
directly, but in regard to the behaviour of peacekeepers
I have zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse and for any unacceptable behaviour by my
peacekeepers. I will hold every individual accountable
for his or her actions in the mission. The reputational
risk, not only to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP) but to the United Nations as a
whole, is sometimes disproportionate to the incident
but is also unacceptable to the United Nations when
they are serving under the flag, and I know that they
are also held to the highest standard by the troop-
contributing countries.

With respect to the question from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire regarding reconciliation
among communities, we work closely with a lot of
non-governmental organizations working with the
communities in the bicommunal space. We have a civil
affairs unit, and across the board we are all working
together to engage not only along the buffer zone and
the communities that straddle it, but across the island
more broadly. It is becoming a bit of an issue just along
the buffer zone, and there are a lot of areas outside of
that where it is business as usual. They are not really
focused on or aware of the Cyprus problem as it
certainly does not connect to them individually.

Again, we have zero tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have just had an evaluation
team come through, and we are always looking for
continuous improvement in that space.

As to the question posed by the representative of
China in regard to performance improvement, I am on a
continuous improvement programme, whether it be with
the Force, with our training, with our safety or with our
engagement and liaison. It is a constant evaluation of
what we are doing. How can we improve? How can we
engage better? One issue of having troop-contributing
nations that have contributed to UNFICYP for decades
is that complacency can creep in. It is therefore really
important that we remain focused to ensure that training
remains relevant for the mission. I will not address the
question concerning which areas of the mandate require
adjustment directly. There is a situation of tension with
UNFICYP. The mandate was established in 1964. The
current environment is one in which the two sides
differ in opinion as to what is in the buffer zone. We
now have tension in terms of maintaining stability
and calm within the buffer zone and maintaining the
normal conditions of the buffer zone. What do I mean
by normal conditions? To the Greek Cypriots, that
means opening the zone up to farming, which actually
has an effect on security. So, we are seeing tensions
between different components of the mandate, but we
are currently working through them.

Regarding the question on engagement with the host
countries, we recognize that we have a status of forces
agreement with the Republic of Cyprus. For myself as
Force Commander, I need to have engagement with both
the opposing forces and I need to be impartial. I need
to demonstrate impartiality. I need to have proactive,
honest and direct conversations in a respectful way
with both my counterparts to ensure that we can find
measures and that we can find ways to tackle the issues
of concern with a View to de-escalating those areas
of tension.

Turning to the representative of Germany, who
referred to the hardening of positions, there were
reports in 2018 concerning this. CCTV captured the
hardening of positions, as well as construction, at the
northern ceasefire line. We had a lot of violations in
that area, although there was a slight decrease in 2018.
They are still there and they are still manned. However,
where we are seeing the violations now is actually in
the disputed areas, where we have a difference in what
the United Nations and the Turkish forces recognize as
the ceasefire line. It is those areas of dispute that are
creating many of the violations. There are also farmers

who choose to farm close to the position of the Turkish
forces, and that is also creating some tension, prompting
some moves of the Turkish forces from the north.

Regarding what support the Security Council could
provide, acknowledgement of the aide-memoire and the
continued support of our mandated authority, allowing
us to continue to work towards progress with both sides
will give us a baseline on which to communicate and
on which to make progress in terms of de-escalating
the environment.

In regard to the question asked by the representative
of the Dominican Republic on collaboration with the
communities and strengthening the mandate, we have
a really strong programme with women and youth.
We are taking a bottom-up, bicommunal approach, as
I indicated. We actively engage with the diplomatic
community within Cyprus, and they are all on board to
support and empower the women and youth in Cyprus to
have a voice, both in the educational and in the political
environments. We have a gender adviser who is focused
solely on that area. It is still sometimes disappointing
to see the lack of results, but we will continue to persist
in that area.

In regard to peacekeeping staff dealing with gender
issues, we do have gender advisers. I would also like to
say that we have strong female leadership within the
mission, and we continue to focus on that area. I would
say, though, that an inclusive and diverse environment
in which females feel that they can thrive and operate
on an equal footing with their male counterparts is one
that must be created. They will then spread the word.
We are very fortunate with our troop-contributing
countries from both Slovakia and Argentina, which do
not send formed units. They send individuals who are
volunteers. We therefore have the opportunity within
UNFICYP to target, engage and try to increase the
number of females within the mission.

It is about the voice. I know through my own
experiences that word of mouth and understanding of
the working environment can encourage people to want
to go there. People will want to come to UNFICYP
if the right environment is created. On top of that
we have a gender parity action plan that allows us to
provide a voice to the sectors. That is led by our female
peacekeepers, who inform headquarters on what is
working and what is not, and what resources should be
provided in order to create that right environment.

I have covered the question concerning incursions
in the buffer zone. That is really about the farmers
working close to the northern ceasefire line. They will
continue to be problematic because the issue pertains
to European Union subsidies. They will continue to
seek the use of more land. Permits account for perhaps
20 per cent usage of the buffer zone. They have our
approval to be there. Unauthorized personnel account
for 80 per cent ofthe buffer zone. There are also Turkish
Cypriots who are not authorized to farm there, creating
farmer-on-farmer tension, which can escalate and
become violent. We target that issue through hotspot
targeting and try to de-escalate the situation by using
civilian mukhtars and mayors and by working through
Civil Affairs back to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
With regard to the issue of opposing force on opposing
force, that has not been as problematic in my time as
Force Commander.

With respect to the question from the representative
of South Africa about the communities, we have
continued to focus on our bicommunal, bizonal
approach. We work along the buffer zone, within the
communities, to find opportunities going forward. It is
a long process in achieving even few gains concerning
ownership by both sides to work together and be
bottom-up driven. It continues to be a priority focus for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
In the absence of political dialogue, our focus is on
community-led opportunities at the moment, which
will become significant in trying to achieve a positive
environment on which we can build going forward.

The question regarding women in leadership is in
line with comments Ihave already made. The challenges
are about creating, as I said, an inclusive and diverse
environment in which both men and women can thrive,
allowing everyone to have a voice. In my own career,
I recognized that in 1995 when I first joined, it was
the first year that we had integrated training. In sum, it
is a generational change in which women can come to
fill some of the senior leadership. Those opportunities
must be grown. They are not opportunities that you can
bring in in the military generally at different ranks.
It is something you have to nurture from the start. If
you create the right framework, open up the trades and
employment opportunities for females and provide
initiatives and policies to allow periods of part-time
work for those who choose to have families so that they
can enter and exit the service, you can create some really
great leaders. Fifty per cent of society can be targeted
and, in that there are many very talented individuals
who can really be a capability force multiplier if the
approach is right.

For me, it is not about females advocating for other
females. It is he for she. It is the male champions of
change approach that must be emphasized. I know
that the Military Adviser sitting behind me is a great
champion of change on that issue and is focused on
it. Certainly, I think there is great opportunity going
forward for the United Nations, especially in the
military force, where we can remain focused on it. In
time and through targets, I believe that we will continue
to improve. It will not happen quickly but it will happen.

We all understand at the higher level, but at the
lower level my priority is not to disenfranchise our
young males or our males within the units. Females
do not want to be singled out, in the main. They just
want to get in and do the job. Whatever we do as we
go forward, we must create an environment that allows
everyone to thrive and grow within that framework.

With regard to the question from the representative
of Indonesia about concrete methods in the mandate for
host countries and understanding their interpretation of
those methods, for us that is about the aide-memoire and
that mandated authority. Without that, it will remain
difficult for us to make progress. It is crucial for us to
de-escalate and reduce tensions. At the moment - and
it is a very colloquial term - we are playing whack-a-
mole. We are taking on every issue. We are proactive.
We know where the hot issues will be and we target
them. They are the same every year. We really need to
get at the cause and not purely treat the symptoms of
what we are dealing with. What should be improved in
the current mandate? I spoke about the tension between
the normal conditions and security in the buffer zone.

Regarding the question from the representative of
Equatorial Guinea about the most serious challenges
with the two different communities, we started with a
group of Cypriots. We had the Turkish Cypriots and the
Greek Cypriots. Over time, the longer we take to come
up with a solution, the more culturally diverse the two
communities become. We are now seeing permanent
residents from Turkey establishing themselves in
the north. There is a whole community in the south.
If they are not along the buffer zone, they have little
relevance to what is occurring. The education systems
for both have a different narrative, as Council members
are aware. As time goes on, both groups become
increasingly culturally diverse.

It is really is about trying to encourage those
communities to want to come together to create a
bicommunal, bizonal federation. For that, we have to
work really hard to bring the groups together, develop
initiatives and determine how to communicate with
them. Creating the outreach programmes and building
confidence within the community is significant in that
regard, but we have to keep thinking about more than
just the same groups that we deal with now, because
they are already on board. It is about finding new
communities and encouraging and engaging with the
broader community to work together.

The representative of Belgium asked how the
Council could further improve the appropriate
resources. As Council members are aware, we had our
strategic review in 2017. We have implemented all those
recommendations. As a Force Commander, I would say
that I have the minimum number of troops I need to be
able to carry out my component of the mandate. The
strength of UNFICYP lies in the number of troops on
the ground. It is the patrol and engagement activities,
day in and day out. It is our liaison and engagement. We
are porous and stretched. Any reduction in resources
for UNFICYP would require consideration of a change
of mandate or change of what the Force would look like.

With regard to the performance of the missions and
acceptance by the communities, because of our normal
day-to-day activities, we are always actively engaged
with the communities through our active patrolling.
That relationship is being built over time. As a long-
established mission, we have been actively involved
with both communities and have established very
strong relationships with all of them.

With respect to the integration of the mission, we
are a small mission and we work closely together as
the three components. There are still challenges but
we often have solid approaches. My assessment is that
through the comprehensive performance assessment
system mission concept and a focus by the current
leadership on conducting an integrated approach, we
will continue to improve in that area.

Concerning the question from you, Mr. President,
about our challenges, there is confliction of the
mandate with regard to normal conditions and security
and stability within the buffer zone. We must also
work to ensure that we do not have a recurrence of
fighting. The void when we are not there could lead
to farmer-on-farmer conflict, which would be backed
by opposing forces or it would certainly be between a
Greek Cypriot farmer and one of the Turkish forces,
which would also create tensions. For us it means being
in the buffer zone and continually engaging with our
counterparts through the very strong engagement plan
that we have implemented.

