Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We are deeply troubled by ongoing violence in the
Middle East, including most recently Tuesday's suicide
bombing in Herzliya, which killed an Israeli girl, and
yesterday's shooting death of a Palestinian boy in Gaza
in an exchange of gunfire between Palestinian gunmen
and the Israeli army. The conflict is exacting a
devastating daily toll on Israelis and Palestinians.

Our message to both parties has been clear and
consistent. It is essential that both sides, Israel and the
Palestinians, consider the repercussions of any action
they take today for the broader goal of achieving peace
tomorrow.

Chairman Arafat and other Palestinian leaders
must speak clearly to their people and tell them that
terror and violence cannot help the Palestinians achieve
their national aspirations. They must move decisively
to confront terror and violence, as demanded in
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).
Condemnations of terror with caveats are not enough.
These do not ease the fears of ordinary Israelis, nor do
they dissuade the misguided would-be bombers from
their deadly missions.

In 2002 alone, there have been at least 23 suicide
bombings, in which 130 Israelis were killed and more
than 1,000 wounded. There can be no defence for the
intentional killing of civilians or support for those who
engage in terrorist bombings, which are proscribed by
international humanitarian law, including recent United
Nations conventions and Security Council decisions.
These attacks in reality set back the Palestinian
people's effort to attain their national aspirations and
create security conditions that make it much more
difficult for Israel to ease its policy of tight closures
around Palestinian areas.

We need to speak plainly. Safe haven for those
who finance, plan, support or commit terrorist acts
must end. That is a Chapter-VII decision of the
Security Council in resolution 1373 (2001). Only last
week, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, from its
headquarters in Damascus, claimed credit for the
horrific car-bomb attack on a public bus in Israel that
killed 17 and wounded 30. This was an act of terror. It
was not resistance. It was not martyrdom. It must be
condemned, and those responsible must be brought to
justice. Those who harbour the people ordering such
acts of terror, wherever they are, are under an
obligation from the Council to take action against
them.

We continue to recognize Israel's right to self-
defence, but both Israel and the Palestinian Authority
have to do all they can to create and sustain an
environment for political progress. That means
following the path set out in the recent resolutions of
the Council. For Israel, that includes easing of closures
and lifting restrictions that impede the access of United
Nations and humanitarian organizations to the
Palestinian civilian population in need of assistance, as
called for in Security Council resolution 1405 (2002).

We believe that there is an opportunity to turn the
current situation around, and we call on both parties to
build on the diplomatic momentum President Bush has
generated. President Bush has met with key regional
leaders, most recently with Egyptian President
Mubarak and Israeli Prime Minister Sharon. President
Bush raised with Prime Minister Sharon the need to
ease the lives of ordinary Palestinians, who have seen
their economic prospects plummet over the course of
the conflict. Today, President Bush met with Saudi
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal, and tomorrow
Secretary of State Powell and National Security
Adviser Rice will meet with Mr. Nabil Shaath of the
Palestinian Authority. On Friday, the United States will
also host a meeting of the "quartet" envoys. We are
using these intensive discussions to try to open the
door to movement away from terror and violence and
back to the negotiating table. That includes the holding
of a ministerial-level meeting this summer.

President Bush has outlined the main elements of
our strategy. The first is establishing effective
Palestinian security performance. The second is
renewing a serious political process that aims at a two-
State solution and that brings hope to Palestinians and
Israelis alike. The third is responding to humanitarian
needs and building strong, responsible Palestinian
Authority institutions in preparations for statehood. On
this last point, we have seen some positive steps. More
important, we see a strong Palestinian voice calling for
reform. This is their initiative.

The three-part strategy that I just laid out has
been endorsed by the "quartet" and many other
members of the international community. It is as clear
to us now as ever that progress must be made on all of
these three tracks concurrently if there is to be hope for
a truly lasting peace. That peace must include two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within recognized borders.

At what can hopefully become a turning point in
this conflict, all the members ofthe Council and indeed
the entire international community must look for
constructive things to do and say that will help the
parties get back on the path that ends in a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. That is our goal.

