Mr. Effendi (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to extend its sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. We have every
confidence that, under your wise and able guidance, the
issues before the Council will be brought to a successful
conclusion. Allow me also to extend felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Jagne, the Permanent
Representative of the Gambia, for his skilful stewardship
of the Council's activities last month.

Mr. President, my delegation wishes to commend
your delegation for its excellent initiative on considering

 

in the Security Council the issue of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants. We
believe that it is timely and that it will be beneficial to the
international community.

The role of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants is admittedly not only
complex for the parties involved; it is also complex because
of its international ramifications. It calls for the factions
concerned to agree to the terms of a peace agreement and
to give up the use of force, which is essential for the
successful launching of this three-pronged approach which,
as experience has shown, is interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. Meanwhile, the international dimensions of
these activities must focus on the role of the United Nations
and of regional organizations in their respective spheres of
competence. Their involvement at various stages of these
complex operations has had a salutary impact in bringing a
measure of stability, which has eventually led in some
instances to the restoration of normalcy in troubled areas.

Moreover, the handing over of weapons to competent
authorities and the ensuing demobilization have positive
implications for security in post-conflict situations,
especially in ensuring and advancing the peace process. We
all recognize that in endeavours to create an atmosphere
conducive to security, it will be necessary to disarm
combatants and to collect armaments from civilians within
the framework of an overall weapons-collection programme
in order to promote an environment where weapons are no
longer perceived as necessary.

A further step that must be taken is to address the
question of adequate financing, which is a sina qua non for
ensuring the implementation of comprehensive programmes
of reintegration and the reconstruction of the damaged
economy. The distribution of financial assistance on a fair
basis between the ex-combatants and the general
population, many of whom also face extreme economic
hardship, will in turn prevent another conflict caused by the
disgruntled parties.

In this context, it is important to note that during the
brief period of only two years, from 1995 to 1997, 300,000
children under the age of 18 were used as soldiers in
conflicts around the world. Their future is at stake,
especially when adequate opportunities in education to
prepare them for careers and counselling to overcome the
trauma of hostilities are limited. It is self-evident that more
needs to be done to alleviate their suffering and to ensure
them a rightful place in their societies through adequate
support programmes.

Another important issue to confront is the problem
of curbing the flow of arms through clandestine means
after disarmament is achieved, as they will have a
profoundly negative impact on security and portend a
potentially explosive situation, leading ultimately to
destabilization. This calls for determined and coordinated
efforts at the national, regional and global levels to curb
illicit transfers of arms. The need to accommodate
approaches in response to changes is also a welcome step.
At the same time, care should be taken to conform to the
basic principles enshrined in the Charter.

By way of concluding, Sir, I wish to reiterate my
delegation's appreciation for your excellent initiative on
this matter, which is very important to the international
community.

