Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to start by congratulating you, Sir,
your country, Argentina, and its delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Allow me to begin with a number of
questions.

How long are we going to continue meeting here
simply to make statements that express concern about
and the condemnation of Israel's continued occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine, the Golan and southern
Lebanon? That occupation, unprecedented in its
duration, violation of international law and settlement
policies, has destroyed any glimmer of hope for the
establishment of a Palestinian State, for which we all
yearn, and for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

The occupying Power has always flouted all the
meetings of this international Organization and the
resolutions adopted, even though Israel itself was
established as a result of a United Nations resolution.
Everyone knows that such Israeli disregard for
the United Nations, its ongoing persecution of the
Palestinian people and its occupation of Arab lands,
including the Syrian Golan, are primarily due to a
number of influential States that are Council members
irresponsibly supporting Israel at the political, military,
economic and media levels.

Some people claim day and night that they are
concerned about preserving the rights of the Syrian
people. However, their true intentions and misleading
words are now known to all, in particular with regard to

the condemnation of the Israeli occupation of the Syrian
Golan since 1967. That almost leads us to believe that
reacquiring the Syrian Golan is not a natural right of the
Syrian people, that the Golan is not an occupied Syrian
land or that Syrian citizens who suffer under the Israeli
occupation are not a part of the Syrian population.
Where are those representatives who laud human rights
and international humanitarian law when it comes to
putting an end to the Israeli settlement campaigns and
the suffering of Syrian citizens, which has continued for
nearly half a century. Where are their noble words and
intentions when those citizens suffer from policies of
repression, racial discrimination and torture, and when
they are deprived of their natural resources, including
oil, gas and water?

The most recent developments in the region,
which have pushed the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) to temporarily evacuate
some of its positions, are not jut coincidence. They
have come at the right time to reaffirm what we had
warned against, that the support led by certain regimes,
including Israel, to Al-Qaida-related groups in the
area of separation is not only a flagrant violation of
the Disengagement Agreement, international law and
all Security Council resolutions, but it also exposes
the United Nations forces to danger, thereby making
them unable to discharge their mandate. That is what
happened when these terrorist groups repeatedly
kidnapped peacekeepers, members of UNDOF, and
fired against those soldiers or their positions, which
prompted them to evacuate some of those positions
under threat of fire. That occurred under a process of
coordination with a regime that sponsors terrorism and
claims that it is a mediator, but it does that to cover
up the fact that it pays bribes and ransom money to
terrorists. That is inadmissible.

What we cannot understand is that every single
warning, all the information that we have communicated
repeatedly to all the parties - the United Nations and
others - including about Israeli support to terrorist
groups and about the fact that Syrian positions were
being directly targeted, was all disregarded. That is
done to help those groups to achieve their ends. What
about the request we officially submitteed calling for an
investigation of the possible collusion between Qatari
intelligence services and the kidnapping of UNDOF
peacekeepers, especially members of the Filippino
contingents?

Those terrorist groups continue to act on the basis
of their conviction that the United Nations is not even
going to lift a little finger to intervene, that Israel will
continue to lend them all logistical military support
and that Qatar will keep paying millions of dollars in
ransom money to release those who have been detained.
That is taking place in the framework of what is nothing
more than a masquerade to justify the financing of
the Nusra Front, after the adoption of resolution 2170
(2014), regarding the prohibition on the financing of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the Nusra
Front, caused new constraints and limitations to be
imposed upon them. That does not, however, exempt
Qatar of its legal responsibility it is a flagrant
violation of resolution 2133 (2014), which bans the
payment of ransoms to terrorist outfits. It is high time
for the United Nations to come into play, to end the
Turko-Saudi collusion aimed at shedding Syrian blood
and that promotes the Judaization of Jerusalem.

 

We would like to reaffirm our ongoing position in
support of the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, and the building of an independent
State throughout its whole territory, with Jerusalem as
its capital, while guaranteeing the right of refugees to
return to their lands, to their homes, in keeping with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. That
is a non-negotiable right. It is a right that will never
disappear or evaporate. It is reaffirmed by international
law and United Nations resolutions and all the relevant
international instruments.

Syria condemns the Israeli violence against the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. That is yet another
new chapter in the overall plot and the overall aggression
against the Palestinian people. Israel's continuation of
such acts of aggression has exacerbated tension in the
region. They have reached an unprecedented level, one
that will have very heavy consequences and will not be
limited to the region alone. That is why we call upon
the United Nations, including the Security Council,
to bear its responsibilities by putting an end to the
Israeli occupation and the barbaric policy of continued
aggression and by forcing Israel to withdraw from
all occupied Arab lands to the line of 4 June 1967, in
keeping with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981).

We are again today witnessing repeated attempts
by the United States of America and its allies aimed
at killing off the very hope embedded in the agenda
item under consideration, "The situation in the Middle
East". That is being done to cover up Israel's crimes and
its ongoing violations of international law by deflecting
attention from those very facts. The policies of those
States - headed by the United States, the United
Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and others - violate
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the rules of international law by resorting to the use of
terrorism and defamation as tools to combat the Syrian
State, including through the building - or should I
say, the creation - of training camps for terrorists and
mercenaries by claiming that they are the moderate
opposition. Then they send them into the Syrian interior,
crossing our borders with neighbouring countries, in
violation of all the Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism.

The statements made by delegations have revealed
that the very same States that back terrorism in my
country, Syria, are also working to protect Israel,
attempting to ensure that it never faces embarrassment
and covering up its crimes. The United States ofAmerica
has not just used the right of veto 61 times to protect
Israel, to prolong its occupation of our territories that
suffer under its occupation. No, the United States has
even disregarded Security Council resolutions in the
past to forge illegal alliances targeting the sovereignty
of a great many States Members of this Organization.
Those are illegitimate alliances that were forged by
the United States and the United Kingdom outside
the confines of the Security Council, and they have
resulted in nothing but violence, destruction, anarchy
and terrorism throughout the world, and that came at
the cost of respect for the rules of international law and
human rights.

