Ms. Sison (United States of America): First, I want
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his leadership in building strong partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations. I thank
the Secretary-General of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, Mr. Bordyuzha; the Secretary-General of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, Mr. Alimov;
and the Vice-Chair of the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, Mr. Ivanov, for
joining us here today.

Our discussion today is a timely one. The work
of anticipating and effectively responding to armed
conflict, transnational terrorism, refugee and migrant
flows, cyberthreats, drug trafficking and organized
crimes goes beyond the capacity of any one State. One
way we can address those capacity gaps is through
strong and coordinated action by the United Nations
and regional organizations. Such cooperation has the
potential to strengthen the responsiveness, agility and
breadth of the international community's approach
to our many challenges. But in order to realize this
potential, regional organizations must prioritize the
interests of all of their members. They must respect
international obligations and commitments and act in
accordance with the decisions of the Security Council
and the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Above all, States must maintain their sovereign right
to make their own decisions, without coercion from
other States - decisions about the organizations and
alliances in which they choose to participate.

As we consider strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and specific regional organizations,
it is imperative that we ensure that these shared
principles and obligations are also respected and
strengthened, not undermined or eroded. Strong and
coordinated actions by the United Nations, regional
organization and partner States have brought peace,
prevented and mitigated conflict and helped coordinate
reconstruction and development after conflicts have
ended. Such actions have contributed to humanitarian
response efforts, fought terrorism and cyberthreats and
strengthened efforts to combat illegal trafficking and
organized crime.

From the Balkans to the shipping routes off the
Horn of Africa to Afghanistan, regional organizations
are a force multiplier. Where these kinds of legitimate
joint efforts between the United Nations and regional
organizations are consistent with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and applicable
conventions, covenants and treaties, they will find
a strong supporter in the United States. But regional
organizations are strongest when they reflect the goals
and aspirations of all of their members, rather than
the dominance of a few. When one or two States set
the agenda and determine the positions of the entire
group, they are no longer truly regional, and the
diversity that they can bring to partnerships with the
United Nations system is impaired. As with Russia's
involvement in both Georgia and Ukraine, we have
seen that the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization were
unable to defend, or even advocate for, the principle of
territorial integrity.

The organizations we endorse must also ensure that
they respect international obligations and commitments,
particularly with regard to counter-terrorism efforts. As
we see across our agenda, States sometimes struggle
to safeguard both security and individual liberty.
Emergent security threats from terrorist organizations
and from those advocating for violent extremism are
real. And effectively countering the exploitation of
porous borders and misuse of technologies like the
Internet is not easy. In the rush to respond effectively,
however, States and regional organizations must resist
the temptation to criminalize the freedom of expression,
limit the freedom of association or bar legitimate
political opposition. We saw such overreach in the
recently introduced draft resolution on countering
extremist ideology and propaganda.

We are concerned that the counter-terrorism
policies proposed by these regional organizations
at times also excessively infringe upon individual
liberties and political freedoms. Restrictions on the
freedom of expression and on the activities of civil
society, especially restrictions that target minority
groups, inevitably backfire. Such restrictive policies
are counter-productive to a State's ability to engage
with communities that are the greatest terrorist
recruitment targets. Such isolation and persecution can
indeed foment grievances that are drivers of violent
extremism.

The freedom of expression and the free flow
of information are in fact reliable defenses against
violence and conflict. A free and Vigorous civil
society is one of the most effective means to address
radicalization and Violent extremism online and offline.
Civil society organizations are vital in developing and
sharing credible counter-narratives that disrupt the
radicalization process and counter violent extremism.

The United States record of promoting strong and
increasing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations around the world - including
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the African Union, the European Union and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, among
many others - is clear and unwavering. As we consider
strengthening cooperation with additional regional
organizations, it is imperative that we ask ourselves
whether the activities of those organizations advance
the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
whether their decision-making represents the diversity
of their States members and whether they exhibit the
capacity to respond quickly and effectively to regional
crises. Those are the standards that the United States
expects from the regional organizations of which we
are a member, and they are the standards that we should
expect from them all.

