We would like to start by welcoming Foreign Minister Maas and all the ministers joining us today. We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. The Dominican Republic has continuously expressed to the Council its deep concern in relation to the deteriorating human rights and humanitarian situation in Libya, stressing that all members must commit to saving lives and ending civilian suffering. It is in this regard that we strongly value and welcome the establishment of an international fact-finding mission to Libya. We urge the designated experts to independently and impartially implement the mandate, which includes establishing the facts and circumstances of the human rights situation throughout Libya and documenting alleged violations and abuses of international human rights law and international humanitarian law by all parties in Libya since the beginning of 2016. As a concrete example of the need for a fact-finding mission, we highlight the shocking recent discovery of at least eight mass graves in June, the majority of them in and around the city of Tarhouna. Such atrocities requires a thorough and transparent investigation if we are to hold accountable and bring to justice the perpetrators of these and other human rights violations. Despite the call for a global ceasefire, violence and attacks against civilians are on the rise, and thousands of Libyans continue to be displaced. We remain concerned about the prevalence of the killing and maiming of children and acts of torture and sexual violence committed against them, in addition to the flagrant abuses perpetrated against migrants and refugees. Furthermore, we call for women human rights defenders, peacebuilders and political leaders to be able to carry out their work without restriction or fear of retaliation. The Dominican Republic welcomes all recent national and international efforts aimed at bringing about peace and stability in Libya, particularly, the holding of the third meeting of the international follow-up committee on Libya and the first meeting of the international humanitarian law and human rights working group, and the resumption of the work of the intra-Libyan 5+5 Joint Military Commission. With respect to the latter, we urge all parties to work tirelessly under United Nations auspices to reach a formal, comprehensive and permanent ceasefire agreement. In parallel with the moving forward of the intra-Libyan process on the different tracks, members of the Security Council must prioritize and support a durable and peaceful Libyan-led resolution, preserving the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. In relation to the arms embargo, the constant violations of the embargo remain deplorable and, together with the persistent interference of external actors, create the perfect storm for a perpetuation of the Libyan conflict. We reiterate the need for all States Members of the United Nations to strictly adhere to their commitments made to ceasing all forms of foreign military intervention in Libya and desisting from any destabilizing activities that exacerbate the conflict. With regard to the oil blockade, we remind members that the embargo has needlessly cost the Libyan people over $6 billion in lost oil revenue, as well as millions of dollars in indirect losses owing to the shutdown of domestic refineries and to the damage caused by the oil infrastructure remaining idle. For the benefit of all Libyans, who have already suffered unimaginable economic hardship, we encourage the full lifting of the blockade across the country, In conclusion, we urge the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative for Libya as soon as possible.
