Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Michel Kafando for his briefing on the political situation
in Burundi. We have always valued the contribution of
the Special Envoy. We also commend Mr. Jiirg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
and appreciate his briefing. It once again demonstrated
how useful the work of the PBC is to the Security
Council, and how, when it is handled in an effective
manner, as Ambassador Lauber has done, the advisory
capacity of the PBC is critical to making the Council
more effective and, I might add, wiser.

We were able to closely follow the constitutional
referendum, which took place on 17 May. We note the
generally calm environment during the campaign and
the conduct of the referendum, despite reports about
allegations of intimidation and repression against
opponents of the constitutional changes, which were
referred to us both by the Special Envoy and by the Chair
of the Burundi configuration. We believe any grievance
with regard to the process of the referendum and its
outcome should be addressed through the established
legal mechanisms in a more transparent manner.

We are also encouraged to note that the security
situation in Burundi still continues to be stable. As
the country prepares to embrace the outcome of the
referendum, the pressing issue now is how to avoid any
erosion in the relatively calm situation that prevails now.
As we have been repeatedly stating, the political
impasse in the country can be addressed only through
peaceful, inclusive and consensual dialogue. The lack
of progress in that regard in the mediation led by the
East African Community (EAC)has been of a matter
of serious concern. Hence, the rapid re-launching of
genuine and inclusive dialogue, under the auspices of
the EAC and with the support of the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations on the basis of the spirit
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
for Burundi and the Constitution of Burundi, is all the
more urgent to ensure lasting peace and stability, as
well as a better future for Burundi.

We believe, as was also stressed by Ambassador
Lauber, that strong coordination and coherence among
the EAC, the African Union and the United Nations
is key to making progress on the peace process. We
urge the Government of Burundi to recommit itself to
participatinginthedialogueprocess.Allthe stakeholders
in the crisis in Burundi should also cooperate fully
with the facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue and
participate in that process in good faith.

The engagement between the international
community and the Government of Burundi has to
be based on a realistic strategy aimed at supporting
strong institutions and creating a conducive climate in
which political differences can be addressed without
backsliding into the violence of the past. In that
regard, the Council should explore new avenues for
re-engagement with Burundi in order to address the
political impasse. While we welcome and encourage
the work of the Chair of the Burundi configuration
in serving as a bridge for dialogue between Burundi
and the international community, we also recommend
exploring discreet diplomacy, in close coordination
with the AU and the EAC, to engage the Burundian
Government. The cultivation of trust in all of that
is critical.

As the political impasse coupled with the continued
reduction of international financial assistance has put
huge socioeconomic pressure on Burundi, we believe
that alleviating the socioeconomic difficulties of the
population, as well as addressing the humanitarian
situation, should also be an integral part of the
re-engagement. Ambassador Lauber's proposals made
a while ago are worth looking at carefully and seriously.

On the side of the Government of Burundi, too,
we believe that it is important for there to be open-
minded engagement with the international community
to explain the constitutional reform process and its
outcome, the plan for the election in 2020, as well as the
commitments to the spirit of the Arusha Agreement.

The Government might also look seriously at the
situation with regard to the three human rights experts,
mandated by Human Rights Council resolution 36/2,
which was presented on 28 September 2017 by African
countries, including Burundi, in Geneva, and gather
the information so that it would be able to garner
the necessary assistance to address the capacity gap
critically needed in the area.

In conclusion, sustainable peace can be achieved
only through a comprehensive solution on the basis
of the Arusha Agreements and the Constitution of
Burundi. Now that the referendum has passed, we can
only hope that there will be readiness on the part of
all the relevant stakeholders for frank and genuine
dialogue to chart the best way forward.

Burundi is a country that continues to contribute
in a significant manner to the peace and security of
Somalia, which has huge significance for peace in the
Horn of Africa and Africa in general. It is also from
that perspective that we look at the need for improved
relations between Burundi and the international
community. It is our hope that Ambassador Lauber will
continue with the very encouraging approach he has
adopted and the process he has embarked upon.

