Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank Belgium for organizing this very important briefing. We would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Foreign Minister of Germany, to the Council. I would also like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary- General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, President- designate of the 2020 Review Conference for the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), for their insightful and comprehensive briefings. Indonesia fully supports the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and an integral instrument to advance efforts for denuclearization and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The collapse of the arms control architecture, increased tensions between some States and the continued existence of nuclear weapons, with their doctrines, underscore the imperative for a successful 2020 Review Conference. As a long-standing proponent for a world without nuclear weapons, Indonesia is participating actively in the preparations for the Review Conference. While non-nuclear-weapon States must play an effective role, nuclear-weapon States must also step forward credibly to uphold the NPT in its entirety. In that context, allow me to underline three points. First is the balanced, comprehensive and non-discriminatory implementation of the three pillars of the NPT. Those three pillars - disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy - must be fully implemented in a mutually reinforcing manner. To single out any one pillar and relegate the other two not only dilutes the Treaty's aims and credibility but also undermines support for the Treaty, which is essential to sustain it. The NPT enjoyed wide support because it also provided a legal commitment regarding nuclear disarmament and enabled the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Secondly, nuclear disarmament must be complete, verifiable and irreversible. We urge nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their commitments under article VI of the NPT. That is an explicit legal obligation of all parties and its implementation is not optional or conditional. Indonesia is seriously concerned about the increased prominence being given by some States to nuclear weapons in their security doctrines, including through modernization programmes. Non-proliferation derives its legitimacy from the absence of nuclear weapons. Their total elimination remains the only guarantee to translate our common desire to maintain international peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, into reality. The universalization of the NPT is of vital importance. Thirdly, an effective non-proliferation regime is necessary for the creation of a world free of nuclear weapons. All nuclear-weapon States, as well as all States non-parties to the Treaty, should place all their nuclear facilities under the full scope of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards. Indonesia also underscores nuclear-weapon-free zones as critical mechanisms against nuclear weapons. In that regard, Indonesia welcomes the first conference to establish a Middle East zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. It must be underlined that the establishment of such a zone in the Middle East is an integral part of the indefinite extension of the Treaty. Furthermore, we call for the early accession of nuclear- weapon States to the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone.Reiterating the responsibilities of States parties under the NPT, we urge everyone to work together to help attain a befitting Review Conference. The world cannot afford any backtracking from commitments that were agreed at previous Review Conferences. Council members have certain responsibilities to ensure that the Conference decidedly contributes to global peace and security. At the national level, Indonesia, as the coordinator of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries States parties to the NPT, will continue to play its role and contribute actively to a successful 2020 Review Conference.
