Mr. Garcia Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by highlighting the timeliness and
relevance of convening this meeting at a particularly
complex moment. I would also like to underscore that,
in combating the phenomenon of terrorism, it is crucial
that there be leadership, perseverance, determination
and, above all, unity. Without unity, they will defeat us.

Spain has a long and painful experience in
combatting domestic and foreign terror. With regard to
combatting domestic, separatist terrorism, it is worth
recalling that 55 years ago the first victim - a 22-month-
old baby girl - died as a result of a bomb explosion in
a railway station. Since then, Spain has suffered more
than 800 deaths at the hands of the terrorists of Euskadi
Ta Askatasuna. With respect to foreign terror, we have
suffered many attacks. Particularly memorable was the
Madrid attack of 11 March 2004, in which 190 people,
the majority of whom were people of humble origins
going to work on local trains, were killed.

There are five lessons that we can learn from this
experience and that can be useful to the international
community. First, as I said yesterday, we do not
negotiate with terrorists; we defeat them. Secondly,
we defeat them with the law - only with the law, but

with the full force of the law. Thirdly, international
cooperation is absolutely necessary in terms of
intelligence, the coordination of security forces and the
speediest possible extradition of murderers. Fourthly,
civil society must be involved. Once again, the Spanish
experience shows that, between 1960 and 1997, after
the killings in the Basque country, the victims had to
be buried in silence and in the dark, because often they
were said to be responsible for their own misfortune.
When civil society reacted, things began to change.
Lastly, it is necessary to reveal, show and uncover the
real face of these murderers. They are not soldiers; they
are - I repeat - criminals. They are not believers;
they are blasphemous because religion is always the
language of peace.

Before drawing lessons that could be useful to the
international community, I shall make a few comments
on the current situation. As has been said, more than five
years of war in Syria have resulted in 250,000 deaths,
12.5 million people who need urgent humanitarian
assistance, 8 million internally displaced persons
and 4 million refugees outside the country in Jordan,
Turkey and Lebanon, which is putting those countries
in a extraordinarily difficult situation. I recall the fact
that Lebanon, whose per capita income is one fifth of
that of the European Union, has a refugee population
equal to 25 per cent of its total population. I do not need
to describe Jordan's situation; anyone who has been to
Zaatari knows what is happening there.

However, the worse part of the situation in Syria
is that the fight between the two forces has created a
vacuum that Daesh and other forces associated with
Al-Qaida have exploited in order to try to establish a
caliphate that would drag us back into the darkest periods
of the Middle Ages, using the most modern techniques
to recruit, finance and broadcast its grisly deeds. The
second phenomenon that we have experienced recently
is the massive flow of refugees who have to flee their
land in search of freedom. This calls into question the
very foundation of the immigration and asylum policy
of the European Union. It demonstrates that we cannot
wait much longer. We must act and act now.

In Libya, we also find a very complicated situation.
Simply put, there has been a lengthy war between the
Tripoli and Tobruk factions that has also been exploited
by Daesh to plant its black flags on the coast of Libya
and has unleashed a flow of illegal migration that is
also calling into question the immigration policy of the
European Union.

In Iraq, things are a little better because, as we
see it, there is a legitimate Government which, at our
request, has allowed us to send more than 300 Spanish
troops to train Iraqi forces. In Spain's opinion, the Iraqi
Government should pursue its inclusive efforts so that
the Sunnis, the former soldiers of Saddam Hussein
and the Kurdish peshmerga will join together with the
regular army in a common effort against a common
enemy. If I can borrow from the title of a famous
pamphlet, what is to be done done? The first issue is that
without the cooperation and international coordination
on the part of everyone - members and non-members
of the coalition - this will not work.

Secondly, it is absolutely necessary to coordinate
the struggle against foreign fighters. To that end, we
recently convened, on 27 and 28 July in Madrid, a
special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which approved a ministerial statement, which I will
not read out because it is available to the members of the
Security Council. Given its geographical situation and
historical tradition, Spain is closely involved with the
countries of the Mediterranean and the Near East. We
have hosted many meetings with the moderate Syrian
opposition in Cordoba. We have facilitated international
meetings on Libya involving the most important
countries of the world. In Barcelona, we brought the
together 28 countries of the European Union plus eight
from the southern shore of the Mediterranean. And we
have launched institutional reinforcement programmes
to strengthen democratic institutions, in particular the
Masar programme -which means "way" in Arabic - in
North Africa and the Supporting the Inclusive Public
Policies in Sub-Saharan Africa Programme, the Apia
Programme, in sub-Saharan Africa.

The second lesson that we can draw from the Spanish
experience, which is applicable to the situations we are
experiencing, is that it is necessary to respect the rule
of law and to combat impunity. Just yesterday, we met
with experts and representatives of various countries
and non-governmental organizations in order to submit
a draft project for the establishment of an international
criminal court against terrorism. This would be an
international legal instrument designed exclusively to
combat crimes of terrorism with the instruments of
international law. The court would be a complement to
the intervention of the International Criminal Court and
would fill the gaps that have been observed, and would
come into effect only when a State is not in a position
to try, prosecute and punish. Therefore, it would be a
subsidiary to national courts.

I have spoken of the Spanish experience and of
the need to involve civil society in combatting terror.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue represents, in
the view of Spain, a fundamental tool. We therefore
participate with Turkey and many other countries in
the Alliance of Civilizations. We participate with Saudi
Arabia and Austria in the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue, and we have organized various initiatives
to support this dialogue and establish a tolerant and
peaceful image ofIslam that is a doctrine of love.

We also participated in the debate organized by the
French presidency on the defence of religious minorities
(see S/PV.7419), where we presented, as a specific
initiative that I will reiterate, the establishment of the
post of special representative of the Secretary-General
to combat violent extremism, who would coordinate
the myriad initiatives that are often not coordinated
yet have the same objective, but have little resources
because they lack coordination. In Barcelona on 23 July,
I repeated this same invitation at a meeting attended
by religious leaders, brought together by the Alliance
of Civilizations and the Union for the Mediterranean.
Speaking before the Alliance, I said that the Union for
the Mediterranean brought together 43 countries of the
north and south banks of the Mediterranean and was
therefore a very important forum for analysing these
issues.

I would also like to announce that the Club de
Madrid will meet on 27 and 28 October and will bring
together 100 former Heads of State and Government
from around the world to analyse the terrorist
phenomenon and efforts to combat terror.

I have underscored the fact that it is important to
include public opinion in our efforts and to show it the
real face of the victims. Therefore, we will convene
in the Security Council, under the presidency that we
will assume tomorrow, an Arria-formula meeting for
victims of terrorist violence throughout the world who
will testify about their suffering and pain and what
they expect from us. Now, in this context of involving
civil society in combating terror, we assign particular
importance to the role of women. Therefore, on
13 October the President of the Government of Spain,
Mariano Rajoy, will preside over a Security Council
meeting, a high-level debate on women and peace and
security, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000).

I conclude with a reference to young people. No
young person is born a terrorist. They become terrorists.
Education is thus a vital element. I am not going to give
a lecture on education, but let me just narrate a short
story.

In the Syrian conflict we are seeing almost 500,000
children who are not going to school. That creates a
suitable breeding ground for radicalization and the
fuelling of terrorism. The Security Council and the
United Nations have said that we need to include a
debate on that theme in our discussions. Poverty,
unemployment and living conditions are the root causes
of terrorism. I am not going to give a lecture on poverty
either, but simply say that in a recent visit to Gaza I had
the opportunity to observe that 1.7 million people live
in Gaza who are without jobs, without a future, without
any hope. The majority are under 25 years old, and
90 per cent of those people have no jobs, no activities
and, I insist, no future.

I refer to the importance of social networks and the
Internet. It has been said that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham is an anachronistic movement in terms
of its objectives and purposes but extraordinarily post-
modern in the way it uses social networks. It is up to us
all to make an effort.

I would like to close by saying that we welcome
the efforts of all countries, whether they are part of the
coalition led by the United States of America or not,
to fight together. If we have a common enemy, then let
us have a common front, and let us postpone any other
objective, however legitimate it might be, for the only
goal that should unite us: the defeat as soon as possible
terror in the countries where it is existing.

