Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom's position is fully contained in the
statement made by Spain on behalf of the European
Union (EU), and there is no need for me to add more
words to that admirably clear position, which is
entirely consonant with the strong stance taken by the
Secretary-General.

There is nevertheless one point in particular
which I feel I need to emphasize. Resolutions 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002) are significant developments
of Security Council policy on this issue. The deliberate
use of violence and, in particular, the unproductive and
unacceptable escalation in the degree of force used by
the Israeli Defence Force, have got to be brought to a
halt. The Israeli forces must quickly withdraw from
Ramallah and other West Bank towns. Likewise,
Palestinian suicide bombings, which are undoubtedly
acts of terror, must cease, and the Palestinian Authority
must make a 100-per-cent effort to that end.

I believe that the whole Security Council is clear
that there can be no military solution. Israelis and
Palestinians alike have the right to security. But this
can be secured only by a peaceful settlement,
negotiated between the parties. President Arafat and
the Palestinian Authority are the legitimate
representatives of the Palestinian people, with whom
Israel must be able to resume that dialogue. It is not in
the interests of peace - or, I submit, of Israel - to
weaken their capacity.

These two resolutions have to be implemented;
they are routes out of the desperate position into which
the two sides have got themselves. They provide,
succinctly and forcefully, the basis for real peace. The
whole United Nations system should be directed to
implementation. In our national diplomacy, the United
Kingdom will play its part; so will the EU, collectively.

As Ambassador Ryan just mentioned earlier, a
high-level delegation of the EU is leaving for the
region now, with the intention of meeting the leaders of
both sides, to encourage the immediate cessation of the
violence and the implementation of the resolutions.
They and other active negotiators within the "quartet"
have the basis for action in resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002) - which need no further interpretation -
and in the conclusions of the Arab League Summit. We
should be doing everything to facilitate their practical
work on the ground.

