Mr. Fedotov: I would like to start by expressing
my most heartfelt condolences to the Government and
the people of Pakistan. We are deeply shocked by the
horrific terrorist attack on a school in Peshawar that
resulted in the death of so many innocent people,
including children. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) remains committed to
supporting the Government of Pakistan in its efforts to
promote peace and security. Pakistan is a key partner of
UNODC in the region in addressing the challenges of
drugs and crime.

This time of transition has had a clear impact on
drug control efforts in Afghanistan. The new leadership
and the international community face formidable
challenges posed by illicit drugs. Nevertheless, the
transition also presents an opportunity to assess
counter-narcotics strategies and to ensure that our
responses are strong and effective. Since I reported to
the Council in June (see S/PV.7208), UNODC released
the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2014 last month. The
report, unfortunately, confirms the negative trend
of the continued increase in opium cultivation and
production. The total estimated area under cultivation
rose to 224,000 hectares in 2014, an increase of 7 per
cent over the record level of last year. Eradication
decreased from 7,348 hectares in 2013 to 2,692 hectares
in 2014. As a result, production has climbed as much
as 17 per cent to 6,400 tons. Average opium yield rose
9 per cent. I will stop quoting figures and numbers, as
they are contained in the Secretary-General's report
before the Council (S/2014/876).

All in all, the illicit opium economy and related
criminality, money laundering and corruption continue
to threaten security, social and economic development,
governance and health in Afghanistan, the region
and beyond. That has been repeatedly recognized
by the Security Council, including in its presidential
statement of June (S/PRST/2014/12). The question
before us remains: what can we do to stop illicit drugs
from undermining the fragile progress, imperilling the
future of Afghanistan and causing global harm?

First and foremost, the lessons of the past decade
strongly suggest that counter-narcotic efforts must
be fully integrated into development and security
strategies, and delivered as part of unified assistance.
We must do more to ensure that action to weaken the
stranglehold of drugs and crime goes hand in hand with
efforts to strengthen the licit economy. The importance
ofintegrating counter-narcotics responses is reaffirmed
in resolution 2145 (2014). It is further reflected in the
continuing discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda, as well as in the preparations for the 2016
special session of the General Assembly on drugs.

Our responses must be long-term and adequately
resourced, and they cannot be allowed to fall victim
to silo mentalities or piecemeal approaches that cannot
produce sustainable results.

I was in Kabul in November to meet President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah.
In our meetings, three priorities for comprehensive
drug control were identified, which can guide us as we
move forward: first, enabling alternative development
as part of a broader and more comprehensive and
more ambitious effort to modernize the agricultural
sector; secondly, improving prevention, treatment, care
and rehabilitation services; and, thirdly, countering
organized crime and drug-trafficking through enhanced
regional and interregional cooperation.

Let me begin with the first point. Farmers need
viable, licit livelihoods as a sustainable alternative to
opium cultivation. As experience in other countries
facing drug cultivation and production challenges has
shown, eradication can be successful if fully supported
by meaningful alternative development programmes.
Reducing the vulnerability of farmers and communities
must also include addressing the issue of access to
irrigation and local markets, as well as access to
education and health care. UNODC's World Drug
Report 2015 will feature a special thematic chapter
analysing the available evidence on the implementation
of alternative development programmes, which can
also help to inform efforts.

Afghan opium accounts for 80 per cent of global
production. The devastating impact on health and
communities that illicit drugs have had in many
countries is well known. But Afghanistan also pays
a terrible price. The prevalence of opiate use in
Afghanistan is among the highest in the world.

It is increasingly recognized that a balanced
approach to the world drug problem must address
demand reduction, with prevention and treatment
services, including for HIV, based on scientific
evidence and respect for human rights. Supporting and
expanding such services must also be a priority in drug-
control efforts in Afghanistan. UNODC is developing
and piloting new programmes for drug prevention and
treatment services for children exposed to drugs at a
young age.

Shared responsibility is the guiding principle of the
international community's support and involvement in
Afghanistan. The importance of regional cooperation
has been reaffirmed by the Security Council.
Nevertheless, we must do more to ensure that that
shared responsibility become better operationalized
so as to control drug-trafficking networks. We must
reinforce cooperative action against corruption and
money laundering, strengthen governance and promote
effective criminal justice responses to stop impunity.

UNODC is also supporting Afghanistan's efforts
to engage with its neighbours and the broader region.
Through a three-tier, national-regional-global approach,
UNODC is helping to weave together cross-border law
enforcement, cooperation in criminal matters and drug-
prevention responses, based on sound research of opiate
trade trends. That interregional approach connects
West and Central Asia, South-East Europe, the Gulf
region and Eastern Africa - regions affected by the
illicit trafficking of opiates and precursor chemicals
from and into Afghanistan.

UNODC's "Networking the Networks" initiative
has facilitated a number ofjoint intelligence-led drug-
control operations that are currently under way. We
are also working with several countries through the
Maritime Crime Programme to address the growing
problem of heroin-trafficking on the high seas of
the Indian Ocean, the so-called southern route. The
Container Control Programme, which has been
extremely effective in countering all forms of illicit
trafficking, is now expanding beyond sea ports and
dry ports to develop airport capacities, starting with
Pakistan's Karachi airport.

The importance of enhanced coordination also
applies to the efforts of the United Nations system. The
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for Afghanistan for 2015 to 2019 provides a solid
platform for a joint United Nations response, including
on counter-narcotics. Coordinated action also helps
to ensure the efficient use of the available financial
resources and international aid.

President Ghani, at the recent London Conference,
affirmed Afghanistan's readiness to overcome the past
and face the future with full unity and with confidence.
We must support Afghanistan in this momentous task
and begin the decade of transformation with courage
and determination.

