Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The international community had great expectations for
the meeting of the "quartet" in Madrid and Secretary of
State Powell's mission to the region. Perhaps those
expectations were too great. The quartet and Secretary
of State Powell have probably had a positive effect on
the situation, and the concrete results will come into
View only later on.

But the reality is that all these initiatives leave us
with an additional sense of frustration, as the parties
still have not complied with the resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). That is why we find ourselves once again
meeting in this Chamber.

I should like to touch on two separate but related
topics: the humanitarian situation and the proposal for
a multinational force.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, we have
begun to receive initial reports from Jenin. The camp is
described as appearing to have been struck by an
earthquake - such is the degree of devastation and
destruction. What emerges clearly from such early
reports is that what happened in Jenin goes beyond any
military logic. Reports of buildings being demolished
with women and children still inside them are
appalling, to say the least. Other testimony about
summary executions and the use of civilians as human
shields are very serious allegations of international
humanitarian law.

What is most important now is for us to help the
people who are still in the camp, to attend properly to
the wounded, to rescue those still trapped in the rubble
and to retrieve the bodies of the dead. We would like to
join all of those who have called on the Israeli
authorities immediately to allow rescue teams free
access to Jenin.

But above and beyond emergency humanitarian
action, there must be a clarification of what actually
happened in Jenin, and we deem it indispensable that a
mechanism of inquiry be set up.

Jenin is perhaps the most tragic case with respect
to the humanitarian situation, but it is certainly not the
only one. We have been told, for instance, that the
strict military controls for access to the Gaza Strip are
causing a food shortage.

The mission of the Commission on Human
Rights, led by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, has been postponed because the Israeli
authorities have not given their permission.

I wish to point out that nothing that I have said
means in any way that the suicide attacks carried out
by extremist Palestinians against the Israeli civilian
population can be excused. On other occasions, in this
Chamber and in informal consultations of the Council,
we have denounced this practice, emphasizing also its
total ineffectiveness in the search for the political
results to which the Palestinian population aspires. In
this context, the use of holy sites as areas of
confrontation is unacceptable. That is what is
happening at the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.

Yesterday the Secretary-General made a proposal
to the members of the Security Council on the
establishment of a multinational force. We welcomed
the Secretary-General's initiative in consultations and
do so now at this open meeting. It is undoubtedly an
important proposal that must be very seriously
considered. It is clear that the parties are submerged in
war logic, as was pointed out in the Secretary-
General's briefing. Therefore, intervention by a third
party is needed. We had already expressed our belief
that neither the actions of the Israeli Defense Forces
nor the suicide attacks of extremist Palestinians will
achieve the security hoped for by some nor the political
aspirations of the other side.

The only possible path has been and continues to
be political negotiations. The establishment of a
multinational force would contribute to the creation of
a climate favourable to political negotiations. The
parties must recognize that this would benefit both
sides. Therefore, they should welcome the Secretary-
General's proposal. We hope to be able to discuss his
initiative as soon as possible, once it has been
evaluated in the various capitals.

Colombia believes that we must continue building
an appropriate role for the Council to play in this age-
old Middle Eastern conflict, a role that will be fulfilled
by preserving unity among its members, as well as the
type of cohesion demonstrated in this latest phase, at
least since 12 March, when resolution 1397 (2002) was
adopted. It would be inconsistent and inappropriate if
the Council were to contradict the spirit and the content
of resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002).

