Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Farid Zarif. I congratulate him on his recent
appointment and thank him for his remarks. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
remains a crucial pillar of peace and stability in the
province.

At the beginning of my statement, I would like to
once again express our deep gratitude to the substantial
majority of the world's nations that respect Serbia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. By continuing to
support the principle of the inviolability of borders of
United Nations States Members, they are preventing a
dangerous precedent that could be repeated in any part
of the world, with devastating consequences for
international peace and stability.

The security situation in our southern province of
Kosovo has been greatly aggravated since the end of
the previous reporting period. Serbia's repeated
warnings that unilateral forceful action would
adversely affect stability kept being ignored by some
key actors. Despite considerable diplomatic efforts, it
has not been possible to reach consensus in the
Chamber that unilateralism and the use of force are
unacceptable. As a result, today everything is much
more difficult, as positions harden in the light of
deteriorating conditions on the ground. It is truly
frustrating that all of this was eminently avoidable, had
everyone had enough patience to seek solutions by
exclusively peaceful means and through dialogue.
At the beginning of the three-month period
covered by the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/675), it was possible to be cautiously

optimistic, as certain aspects of the situation in Kosovo
seemed to be improving. The fifth round of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina had just taken place, on
2 July, and had produced status-neutral agreements in
some important areas. Rather than trying to build on
the positive momentum, however, a choice was made
in Pristina to attempt to unilaterally alter the reality on
the ground, clearly outside of the framework provided
by the dialogue.

That happened twice during the reporting period.
The first time was on 25 July, when the territory's
ethnic-Albanian authorities ordered the deployment to
North Kosovo of the so-called paramilitary Regional
Operational Support Unit (ROSU), with the aim of
seizing the administrative checkpoints known as Gates
1 and 31. According to the report, this was "not
coordinated with the international presences or the
communities on the ground" (S/2011/675, para. 3). As
a consequence, dynamics changed overnight - "a
significant deterioration in the security situation"
(ibid., para. 10) in North Kosovo. The report also
states that "In reaction to the actions of Pristina, local
Kosovo Serbs, who continue to reject the authority of
the Kosovo institutions, erected roadblocks" (ibid., para. 4). Thanks in part to the swift, yet measured,
response by Belgrade, the situation was contained and
did not spin dangerously out of control. The overall
state of affairs in North Kosovo had ceased to worsen
by the end of August, although tensions remained high.

It is against that backdrop that the sixth round of
dialogue took place in Brussels, on 2 September.
Another status-neutral solution was reached, that time
on customs stamps. We were led to believe that, in the
period ahead, implementation would be discussed in
good faith so that underlying procedures could be
agreed and put into practice. Instead, for the second
time in as many months, an attempt was made to
impose an outcome that was clearly outside of the
dialogue framework on the very same issue, namely,
Gates 1 and 31.

On 7 September, Hashim Thaci, the so-called
Prime Minister of Kosovo, explicitly stated his
purpose, that is, to "preserve and assume control over
the territorial integrity of the Republic of Kosovo". He
also said that "Kosovo customs officials, appointed by
the Kosovo Customs, will be present; Kosovo border
police, appointed by the Kosovo Police, will be
present". A document entitled "Kosovo Police
Operational Plan" confirmed that intention. It reads:
"All operations will be conducted under Kosovo
sovereignty and in accordance with Kosovo laws and
regulations".

That is manifestly incompatible with resolution
1244 (1999), and drastically deviates from the status-
neutral framework of the United Nations. It also
ignores the terms of the Secretary-General's six-point
agreement, which was welcomed by the Council in
November 2008 and which states very precisely that
"international customs officers appointed in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) will be reinstated at gates l and 31".

Nevertheless, both the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) chose to support the operation, which began
on 16 September. Explicit warnings were voiced in the
Chamber on the eve of the announced action that this
would effectively mean stepping beyond the limits of
KFOR's and EULEX's respective mandates, in
violation of resolution 1244 (1999). Not only would
that undermine the centrality of the dialogue process,
but it was also blatantly obvious that it would heighten
tensions in North Kosovo, and would surely result in
the loss of the international missions' legitimacy in the
eyes of the local population.

Unfortunately, the inevitable happened. Residents
of North Kosovo responded by reinforcing existing
roadblocks and erecting new ones. Their resolute
determination to resist the imposition of a decisively
unwanted regime has become one of the most
conspicuous elements of the reality on the ground.
Regretfully, some of the occasional clashes turned
violent and resulted in injuries on both sides of the
divide. Serbia's strong condemnation of the use of
force by any party has always been swift and
unequivocal.

At this particularly delicate moment, it is critical
that we send the right messages and draw the
appropriate lessons from the recent incident at Dudin
krs, near Zvecan, and yesterday's at Jagnjenica. Both
began in similar fashion. Unprovoked, KFOR troops
rapidly approached the barricades and immediately
started to dismantle them with heavy equipment. That
caused the situation to escalate. Villagers from
neighbouring areas began to arrive to defend their
positions. In both cases, scores of civilians and dozens
of soldiers were injured.

We call upon all stakeholders on the ground in
North Kosovo - KFOR and EULEX officials, as well
as local community leaders - to engage in dialogue
and work together to restore calm immediately. The
removal of barricades is clearly in the interest of peace
and stability, but it should be achieved exclusively
through peaceful means. We must find the way out of
the vicious circle of violence, in which only extremism
thrives. It is indicative, however, that almost every
time a new round of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina is due to take place - in the present case,
tomorrow - unilateralism suddenly comes back to the
fore.

Negotiations conducted in good faith are
predicated on abstaining from the use of instruments of
compulsion. Those are mutually exclusive concepts.
Either one negotiates in good faith or tries to resolve
the issue through forceful imposition. The choice could
not be clearer: peaceful dialogue or unilateral action.
Serbia is ready for the former, and categorically rejects
the latter. We therefore echo the report's conclusion
that "sensitive issues relating to northern Kosovo can
be resolved only through peaceful means, taking into
account the views of the communities on the ground"
(ibid., para. 56).

While we have rightfully focused our attention on
events taking place in the North, we must not ignore
the fact that the situation in the South has gotten worse,
as well. The report underlines that, in comparison to
the same period last year, "the number of violent
incidents affecting the Serb population [south of the
Iber/Ibar] increased following the July events" (ibid., para. 20). In addition to the brutal murder of a Kosovo
Serb returnee, the report also lists numerous acts of
desecration and vandalism against Serbian Orthodox
Church holy sites and cemeteries, vehicle stonings,
arson attacks, burglaries, theft of farm equipment and
drinking well contaminations. The report does not
indicate that any of those hate crimes have been
solved, or even that anyone has been charged with
committing them.

Unfortunately, the report omits a number of other
incidents that further darken the overall picture of the
situation on the ground in the province. I will limit
myself to mentioning just one of them, but it is typical.
On 28 July, on the outskirts of the village of
Doganovie, on the Vitina-Strpce road, two ethnic Serbs
from Klokot were stopped by a ROSU contingent.
They were on their way to sell vegetables at the Strpce
farmers market. They were forced out of their vehicle
and their Serbian papers - acceptable under the terms
of the dialogue - were torn up. Their license plates -
also acceptable under the terms of the dialogue - were
taken away from them. The ROSU officers then
proceeded to beat them mercilessly. Many similar
incidents have been taking place, but I believe this one
is illustrative enough.

Under such shocking circumstances, it is no
wonder that, for Kosovo Serb internally displaced
persons, the "pace of the returns remains markedly
slow" (ibid., para. 32). In that quarter, only 96 ethnic
Serbs went back to the province, less than half of the
number who returned in the same period last year. The
future looks even bleaker. According to a document of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees entitled "UNHCR Global Appeal 2012-
2013 - Serbia (and Kosovo: SC Res, 1244)", "the
potential for returns is almost exhausted".

Almost a year ago, the Council of Europe
released a deeply disturbing report entitled "Inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo". Since that time, excruciatingly
little has been done to uncover the truth about those
allegations, especially considering the uniquely
heinous nature of the charges. In that regard, the recent
appointment of Clint Williamson as lead prosecutor for
the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force is a
welcome development. We will assist him and his team
in any way that we can, for we believe they can make
an invaluable contribution to uncovering what occurred
inside Kosovo itself.

That, however, remains manifestly insufficient,
for the alleged harvesting and smuggling of organs of
innocent Serbian civilians took place beyond that
territory. Despite all protestations to the contrary, it is
indisputable that EULEX cannot operate at full
capacity anywhere outside Kosovo. In other words, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo has
neither an adequate mandate nor sufficient temporal
and territorial jurisdiction to carry out an investigation
that would be comprehensive in scope. The EULEX
Special Investigative Task Force has no ability to
enforce the cooperation of all concerned. Only this
body can do that.

We are not opposed to the centrality of EULEX in
an investigation mechanism. But it must be both
empowered by, and accountable to, the Security
Council. That has been the standard applied in each
previous instance involving serious war crimes and
crimes against humanity in the Balkans, whichever side
the perpetrators belonged to and irrespective of their
political roles. There is no compelling reason not to
make a comprehensive, independent investigation
accountable to the whole world in this case as well.

That is the only way to guarantee fairness and
transparency and to prevent doubts about anyone's full
commitment. A few days ago, however, the Task Force
spokesman said that details of the investigation it is
conducting would remain confidential until it has come
to an end. That might take years, he added. That is
outrageous and unacceptable. If senior officials of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia brief the Security Council every six
months, why should those tasked with the organs
trafficking case not do so as well? We have already
presented some proposals on the investigation
mechanism, and we urge the Council to act upon them.

Come what may, the truth cannot possibly rise to
the surface without ironclad witness protection
guarantees. At this point, they simply do not exist. The
recent mysterious death of a key witness in an
important war crimes trial has reinforced the
perception that EULEX is unable to guarantee the
safety of those in its protective custody. The defendant
in the case in question is Fatmir Limaj, a powerful
former minister in Hashim Thaci's Cabinet. He has
been identified by the Council of Europe, together with
several others, including Thaci himself, as having
played vital roles as co-conspirators in various
categories of criminal activity.

The witness, Mr. Agim Zogaj, had been under the
protection of EULEX, but somehow ended up alone
and dead in a park in Duisburg, Germany. Local
authorities have stated that they were unaware that he
required 24-hour protection. In an authentic diary
excerpt published posthumously by the Pristina daily
newspaper Koha Ditore, Zogaj addresses Limaj
directly, writing that "for years now my children fear
you more than they feared Milosevic". In another
passage, written just a few days before his death, he
suggests that EULEX did not have the capacity to
protect him. That raises the question of whether he
truly committed suicide, as the local police have
preliminarily concluded.

My Government is resolved to undertake all the
necessary measures to pave the way for establishing a
comprehensive peace between Serbs and Albanians.
We will keep working relentlessly in its pursuit, despite
all the setbacks caused by unilateralism. Dialogue is
the only vehicle to reach that goal. Its intention - as
stated in a General Assembly resolution that was
adopted by acclamation and initiated the dialogue, is to
"improve the lives of the people" (resolution 64/298, para. 2). That is its most important, status-neutral
objective. The talks are not an exercise in enforcing
either party's legal position. They are focused on
practical considerations. If both sides are prepared to
be flexible, common ground can surely be found.

A great twentieth-century leader famously once
called for a fresh start. "Let us begin anew", he said,

"remembering on both sides that civility is not a
sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject
to proof. Let us never negotiate out of fear. But
let us never fear to negotiate. Let both sides
explore what problems unite us instead of
belabouring those problems which divide us".

We too must reinvigorate our efforts. It is essential that
all stakeholders pledge to make the dialogue the sole
mechanism within which differences will be brought to
the fore.

We are facing a worsening situation in Kosovo. It
necessitates more active engagement by this body. I
call on the Security Council to make sure that no more
forceful unilateral acts are allowed to take place, and
that it does so in clear, unequivocal, unbiased and
status-neutral terms. I urge this body to take that
crucial step without any further hesitation.

If we are genuinely concerned about peace and
stability in Kosovo - if re-establishing security and
improving the quality of life for the people on the
ground is our objective - then there can be no
justification for refusing to heed such a call right now.
A failure to act would be a disappointing abdication of
the responsibility entrusted to this Council by the
world's family of nations. Taking charge of the present
moment, on the other hand, cannot but enhance the
enduring benefit and honour of the founding principles
of the United Nations.

