Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana is pleased to see
Burkina Faso presiding over the Security Council this
month and was particularly honoured to see Mr. Alain
Yoda, Minister for Foreign Affairs, presiding earlier
over today's open debate. My delegation also wishes to
express its appreciation to the delegation of Burkina
Faso for having organized this debate, as well as for
having prepared the concept paper on the important
issue as illicit drug trafficking, which poses a real and
present threat to the peace, security and stability of
many regions of the world, including Africa. My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
presence and his statement, and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for his briefing. We also align ourselves
with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

West Africa has become not only a transit point
but also a final destination for the illicit drug trade,
which usually follows a circuitous route, originating in
South America, to Europe and elsewhere, in a vicious
cycle of reduction, supply, transport, transit and
consumption. In some cases, that illicit trade has
triggered or fueled conflicts, corruption and other
organized crimes, such as the trafficking of persons,
particularly women and children, who are often
deceived, abducted or otherwise forcibly recruited as
drug couriers against their will.

In keeping with Ghana's commitment to the fight
against illicit trafficking in drugs, the Government of
Ghana has taken measures at the national level to
combat drug trafficking, including strengthening land
border controls and sea patrols. The Narcotics Control
Board of Ghana is being streamlined to enhance its
data collection capability, and the possibility is being
explored to enable the Board to exercise the power to
prosecute drug-related crimes. The judicial and law
enforcement authorities of Ghana have accorded cases
involving drug trafficking renewed priority with a view
to ensuring the speedy disposal of such cases and to
imposing stricter bail conditions for suspects, including
safeguards to preserve evidence obtained to facilitate
prosecutions, while at the same time ensuring that
standards of fair trial and due process are not
undermined. Training programmes have been
undertaken to enhance the ability of judicial and law
enforcement agencies to handle drug cases in a more
efficient manner.

Recognizing that our national efforts must be
complemented by bilateral, regional and international
cooperation, given that the problem of drug trafficking
is a global challenge, Ghana has sought and received
bilateral technical assistance to improve airport
screening procedures for passengers and luggage.
Following parliamentary ratification by Ghana of the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, our country is
considering becoming a party to the principal
Convention itself. In March this year, Ghana hosted an
international meeting to address the protection and
assistance needs of victims of drug trafficking.

At the subregional level, Ghana subscribes to the
Political Declaration on the Prevention Of Drug Abuse,
Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crimes in West
Africa of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and urges the international
community to provide the required resources for a
more effective implementation of the ECOWAS
Regional Response Action Plan aimed at strengthening
national capacities and cross-border cooperation to
tackle drug trafficking and organized crime.

To that end, Ghana welcomes the West Africa Coast
Initiative, which is a United Nations inter-agency
initiative involving UNODC, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and
INTERPOL. Effective coordination and coherence
among those agencies, and also among the agencies
and ECOWAS and the African Union (AU), would be
instrumental in achieving the successful
implementation of that Initiative. It is no coincidence
that the ECOWAS Action Plan highlights not only
illicit drug trafficking, but also other organized crimes.
Efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking must be part of
the overall effort to deter, detect and punish organized
crime, as the various forms of organized crimes tend to
be mutually reinforcing and interlinked.
National, regional and international efforts to
enhance national capacities to combat organized crime
might be fruitless if organized crime networks, which
normally operate in the shadowy underground world in
order to elude detection, succeed in compromising the
integrity of law enforcement agencies through
corruption, which would provide those networks with
the opportunity to conduct and carry out illicit drug
and related activities with impunity. In fact, in many
cases, what is required is not capacity-building at the
legislative, institutional or technical levels, but rather
the ability and political will of law enforcement
authorities and political leaders to say no to crime and
corruption.

That is why Ghana is a party to the African Union
Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
and has introduced various pieces of legislation to
make corruption unattractive to public officials and
private individuals alike. The Attorney General of
Ghana has recently circulated an analytical publication
comparing Ghana's anti-corruption laws to the United
Nations and AU treaties on corruption as a tool to
create public awareness of Ghana's commitment to
combating corruption at the national, regional and
international levels. Combating corruption should be
central to any strategy to fight drug trafficking and
other organized crime.

As is well known, the experience of some
countries emerging from conflict has taught us that
illicit drug trafficking and other organized crimes tend
to thrive in an atmosphere of conflict, the absence of
the rule of law and the lack of good governance and
democratic accountability, in which the legitimate State
institutions, and indeed society as a whole, have been
rendered weak and fragile. For that reason, some
organized criminals have at times sought to undermine
the stability of States and frustrated post-conflict
recovery efforts.

During the democracy roundtable held by the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance in Mexico City last week, participants heard
examples of illicit funds that have been used to
influence electoral processes and to corrupt and seize
the State apparatus. It also called for broader
international cooperation against organized crime, with
a focus on the collective defence and protection of
democratic institutions and processes so as to
strengthen their resilience to the pressure of illicit
funding and organized crime.

In its presidential statement of July this year
(S/PRST/2009/20), the Security Council recognized the
link between illicit drug trafficking and other organized
crime and conflict when it expressed concern about
cross-border issues in West Africa, such as the illegal
drug trade, terrorist activity in the Sahel, maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, weapons proliferation,
in particular of small arms, and the resurgence of
undemocratic seizures of power, and called for a
comprehensive strategy of conflict resolution and crisis
prevention while addressing such issues.

That means that, in addition to the ECOWAS
Regional Response Action Plan to combat illicit drugs,
the international community must support ECOWAS in
implementing its Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials, which came into force recently. Such a
comprehensive strategy should include support for the
ongoing efforts of ECOWAS, in collaboration with the
AU, the United Nations and the international
community in general, to promote respect for human
rights, democracy, the rule of law and constitutional
order in West Africa, including support for the
application of the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance.

It is equally important for the Council and the
General Assembly to continue or to enhance their
political, financial and strategic support for the
Peacebuilding Commission to expedite its work, in
partnership with ECOWAS and the AU Peace and
Security Council, in addressing the root causes of the
conflicts in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, Burundi and
the Central African Republic with a view to
consolidating post-conflict recovery in those countries.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
previous and present calls for partnership, shared
responsibility and international cooperation would
suggest that the international community is aware of
what is required to confront the challenge of illicit drug
trafficking and other organized crime. Such calls also
indicate that what might be missing is urgent action to
address the problems already identified in the various
United Nations and other studies and reports, as well as
in resolutions of this Council, including the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32) adopted
today.
I therefore wish to close by echoing the plea
made in July by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that illicit drug
trafficking must be stopped (see S/PV.6157), and to
call for urgent action.

