Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): On behalf of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council and for the excellent cooperation between
the Council and the configuration. As per established
practice, the following statement has been approved by
the members of the PBC configuration, including the
country concerned - Burundi.

I previously had an opportunity to brief the Council
on 21 November 2018 (see S/PV.8408) following my visit
to Burundi earlierthat month. The Burundi configuration
convened shortly thereafter, on 26 November 2018. In
addition to receiving a comprehensive report of my
visit, the configuration heard briefings on the United
Nations peacebuilding engagement and refugee
returns to Burundi. The Peacebuilding Support Office
informed the configuration about its support for the
socioeconomic dimension and Peacebuilding Fund
funding for projects in support of the role of women
and youth in peacebuilding efforts. The Regional
Refugee Coordinator of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in Nairobi, Ms. Catherine Wiesner, indicated in her
briefing to the configuration that refugee returns to
Burundi will possibly peak in 2019, with more than

100,000 returnees. She noted that an innovative cross-
border project supported by the Peacebuilding Fund
and implemented by the International Organization for
Migration, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNHCR, in coordination with the Governments
of Tanzania and Burundi, had improved co-existence
among returnees, refugees and host communities in
targeted areas, including through livelihood activities
to reduce socioeconomic pressures.

However, she drew attention to the fact that the
Burundi regional refugee response plan, designed to
assist refugees in neighbouring countries, is among
the least-funded appeals in the world. Unfortunately,
three months later, that observation is still correct.
The challenge posed by severe underfunding remains
acute. Funding is also required to support the joint
refugee return and reintegration plan, an integrated
response designed to assist refugee returnees in
Burundi by addressing their immediate and longer-
term reintegration needs. Members ofthe configuration
commended the critical assistance provided by UNHCR
for the voluntary return of refugees and underlined
the need to respect international standards in order to
facilitate the conditions necessary for the sustainable
reintegration of returnees.

Furthermore, the members of the configuration
remain committed to drawing the attention of
bilateral, regional and international partners to the
persistent need for support in reducing vulnerabilities,
strengthening resilience and improving disaster
preparedness and response in Burundi. They also
agree on the need to continue supporting the ongoing
efforts towards national reconciliation and helping to
preserve the gains achieved through the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement.

Finally, members of the configuration underlined
the important supporting role of the East African
Community (EAC) in the run-up to the 2020 elections
in Burundi. Free, inclusive and democratic elections are
most likely to prevent violence and unrest and produce
an outcome that will be perceived as legitimate inside
and outside of Burundi.

A number of significant developments occurred
since I last had an opportunity to briefthe Council; some
of them were already mentioned by the Special Envoy
and by the observer of the African Union. According to
the information from the ground, the security situation
has remained generally calm since the previous briefing
to the Security Council, held in November.

At the recent EAC Summit in Arusha, former
President Mkapa submitted his report on the EAC-led
inter-Burundian dialogue process. The configuration
has always considered its role as complementary and
supportive to the ongoing political processes at different
levels. I want to take this opportunity to thank former
President Mkapa for his tremendous efforts.

On 25 January, the Minister of Finance, Budget
and Economic Development of Burundi and the
United Nations Resident Coordinator jointly signed
the United Nations development assistance framework
for Burundi for the period from 2019 to 2023. On
1 February, the President of Burundi, His Excellency
Pierre Nkurunziza, officially launched the localization
strategy for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the
presence of Ministers, State authorities, local leaders
and international partners. I encourage bilateral and
multilateral partners and the Government of Burundi to
continue their dialogue on the implementation of those
objectives, as well as for the resumption of assistance.

In December 2018, the Government requested that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights terminate its activities in the
country and withdraw its staff. Human rights are an
important element of peacebuilding; peaceful and
resilient societies are an essential part of sustainable
development. Stakeholders need to continue supporting
the authorities in Burundi on their path towards building
capacity for the protection and promotion of the full
range of human rights, including civil and political, as
well as social, economic and cultural rights.

The preparations for the 2020 elections already
seem to absorb much of the energy and attention of
the authorities, as well as many other stakeholders in
Burundi. As we move closer to those elections, I invite
the Government of Burundi and the political parties
to work together to create the conditions for the next
elections to be inclusive, free, democratic and peaceful.
In that regard, I welcome the news from Bujumbura that
the Minister of the Interior of Burundi gave approval
of the new political party, the Congres national pour
la liberte, of Agathon Rwasa, who is also the current
Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly.

Meanwhile, the persistent challenges in the
socioeconomic area shall remain at the core of the
configuration's attention for the current year. The
national development plan, issued by the Government
of Burundi, provides an opportunity for Burundi
and its bilateral and multilateral partners to engage
in a strategic and substantive exchange on the plan's
implementation, as does the recently approved
development assistance framework. The alignment
between the national development plan, the national
priorities of the development assistance framework and
the SDGs provides the basis for strategic and coherent
engagement among all stakeholders towards the
common objective of building resilience, eliminating
poverty and reducing inequality and vulnerabilities. I
encourage the Government of Burundi and its partners
to engage in an open and substantive strategic dialogue
on the implementation of the plan, followed by sector-
specific discussions on concrete projects.

The Burundi configuration will pursue its
discussions and activities in the coming months on the
priorities that I have outlined. Allow me to conclude
with the following recommendations.

First, the Government of Burundi, political parties
and other stakeholders should work together closely,
with the support of the Member States of the subregion,
and build on previous efforts in order to create an
enabling environment for free, inclusive, democratic
and peaceful elections in 2020. The configuration
stands ready to support Burundi and its neighbours in
all possible ways in that effort.

Secondly, Burundi and its international partners
should keep the focus on mid- and long-term
socioeconomic development, even as the preparations
for the 2020 elections increasingly move to the centre
of attention. I reiterate my invitation to the Government
of Burundi and its partners to enter into a strategic
conversation on how the implementation of the national
development plan can foster mutually beneficial,
people-centred and innovative forms of engagement.

Thirdly, the international community should
remain responsive to the importance of providing
adequate assistance to help address the urgent needs
of the people of Burundi and reduce vulnerability,
which remains high in spite of improvements compared
to the previous year. With its support, bilateral and
multilateral partners can contribute to a conducive
environment for peaceful and inclusive elections.

Fourthly, the PBC Burundi configuration
should continue supporting the ongoing process of
national reconciliation and work with the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, among others.

The PBC Burundi configuration remains
committed to supporting the Government of Burundi
and its partners in those areas, with a continued focus
on the socioeconomic dimension, particularly on the
implementation of the national development plan.

I thank the Council for its interest and continuous
support for the configuration.

