Mr. Binmuharak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. I wish you and the friendly delegation of
China every success. I would also like to thank you for
giving us an opportunity to speak before the Council. I
also thank Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley
for their briefings and for their efforts.

I would like as well to thank the humanitarian
workers, in particular local teams present on the
ground in Yemen. I thank the activists, humanitarian
workers and our sister Ms. Rasha Jarhum, and through
her Yemeni women, who deserve our gratitude given
their steadfastness despite the suffering and difficulties
inflicted upon them.

We are meeting today at a time when the
humanitarian situation in my country is more difficult
than ever. It is deteriorating from one day to the next.
I will not go into the reasons, but the Council knows
that the situation is the result of certain factors. That
is why we cannot stop this disaster without resolving
its causes.

I would briefly like to address the economic,
humanitarian and political situation on the ground
so as to move together towards lasting solutions and
understand who is working for peace, stability and
ending the suffering of Yemenis and who, on the
contrary, is hindering peace.

From its provisional capital in Aden, the Yemeni
Government has undertaken a series of economic
measures with the assistance of the Economic
Committee and the Central Bank. One of those
measures is Decree 75, which aims to put an end to the
deterioration of the economy and the depreciation of
the national currency. Those measures have allowed for
an increase in the exchange rate of the Yemeni rial. It is
now 648 rials to the dollar, as compared recently to 860
rials to the dollar.

Decree 75 also aims to put an end to the smuggling
of oil-derived products on the black market at double
the price, while also allowing Yemeni traders to enjoy a
preferential exchange rate for the rial to the dollar. The
Central Bank is thereby trying to control the exchange
rate so that citizens can access essential foodstuffs at
a reasonable price instead of having to resort to the
black market and get them at high price. However,
the Federation of Yemen Chambers of Commerce
and Industry, upon the request of humanitarian
organizations, has suspended its mechanism for
the approval of foodstuff imports so as to facilitate
their entry and enhance the foodstuff reserves in the
various governorates.

The Central Bank has facilitated the issuance
of letters of credit for foodstuffs across Yemen. That
was made possible by Saudi deposits. We have thereby
been able to finance the import of wheat, rice and other
essential foodstuffs to the amount of $266 million.
Seventy-five per cent of those foodstuffs have been
delivered to governorates that are controlled by the
Houthi militias. Indeed, the Government of my country
gives the same treatment to all our citizens without
any discrimination.

In the light of the economic difficulties in my
country and urgent needs of the population, we call
on United Nations agencies in Yemen to address
themselves solely the Yemeni Central Bank - and the
commercial banks that are under its supervision - for
all financial transfers to Yemen. We also expect that
international humanitarian organizations working
in Yemen will support our economy by purchasing
the various products and foodstuffs from our local
markets. That would strengthen the Yemeni currency
and allow the Central Bank to carry out its oversight
functions, in particular when it comes to implementing
international resolutions concerning sanctions, the
fight against money laundering and the financing of
terrorism. That will also allow for the creation ofjobs
and help strengthen the private sector, on which more
than 6 million Yemeni citizens depend.

The Yemeni Government welcomes the Riyadh
declaration of 14 November, which aims to identify the
necessary and urgent measures to resolve the economic
and humanitarian situation in Yemen with the support
of brotherly and friendly countries, in order to provide
the salaries for all civil servants in Yemen based on 2014
data. I would like to thank the coalition countries and
all brotherly and friendly countries that have supported
our country's economy. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has provided more than $60 million on a monthly basis
to support oil-derivative products for power generators,
achieve rial stability and combat money laundering in
oil products, which constitute more than 60 per cent of
the demand on foreign currency in Yemen. Meanwhile,
Iran continues to support Houthi militias with ballistic

missiles and land and sea mines, which are used against
our people and neighbouring countries. That is a serious
violation of Security Council resolutions, according
to the reports issued by the Panel of Experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014).

On the humanitarian and political front, the
Government of my country is committed to international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights.
We call upon the international community to put
pressure on Houthi militias to allow for the quick
and safe delivery of humanitarian assistance and to
help humanitarian workers get access to the different
regions of the country in order to deliver medical and
humanitarian assistance to those who are in need of
them. The Houthi militias must respect and protect
schools and medical facilities, and they must not use
Yemeni civilians as human shields or recruit children
to send them to the battlefields.

Our people have had enough of constantly hearing
talk of the violations that they are subjected to and
the crimes committed against them by the Houthi
militias. Suffering is inflicted upon our people on a
daily basis, and the Yemenis are bitter when they see
the blood of their children spilled by executioners that
go unpunished. Our victims are killed twice. The first
time by criminal militias and their leaders, and the
second time when those crimes are ignored and the
militias are allowed to continue the conflict. Victims of
children and women are saying: "Do not kill us twice".

How can those who seek true peace fail to
participate in the peace consultations? How can those
who seek true peace take civilians, doctors and patients
as human shields? How can those who seek true peace
lay millions of land mines? How can those who seek
true peace recruit children and youngsters who are the
pillars of the future and send them to death? How can
those who seek true peace besiege populated cities and
their snipers kill children and women daily? How can
those who seek true peace kidnap journalists, activists
and teachers, throw them into prison and torture them?

I would like to respond to what Mr. Beasley
said a while ago about the need for foodstuffs. The
Houthi militias have just set fire to foodstuff depots
belonging to a Yemeni company in Al-Hudaydah,
despite suspending military operations. According to
documented and media reports, Houthi militias have
recruited thousands of children and taken hostage
doctors and patients of the 22 May Hospital in
Al-Hudaydah. They have used those people as human
shields and laid millions of mines in buildings, on roads
and even in trees, according to the Associated Press.
Mines have even been laid in Al-Hudaydah port at a
time when they have besieged the city of Taiz for more
than three years. The Houthi militias kill more women
and children in Taiz every day through shelling and
sniping.

The city of Taiz is waiting for international
organizations to visit with delegations so that our
children can tell them about their suffering. Two
children, Hani Al-Ra'i, who was six years old, and Jalal
Abdul Khaleq, who was eight years old, were killed by
Katyusha rockets launched by Houthi militias. Nobody
knows who they were; nobody knows their names.
Farid Shawqi, who was five years old, cried out after
being hit by a Houthi shell. He kept shouting "do not
leave me", and yet he regrettably died. Dozens of other
children are killed in Yemen every day as a result of
sniping or shelling. Unfortunately, nobody remembers
those children.

The Yemeni Government, on the other hand, has
made considerable efforts, through the office of the
Special Envoy, to reach an agreement on the exchange
of prisoners, in particular arbitrarily detained persons,
as well as those under house arrest. The Government
has accepted the exchange of Houthi prisoners with
those people who were arrested for nothing to do with
the war. We agreed to do so because we know that our
prisoners are living in extremely difficult conditions.
We are ready to accept all proposals pertaining to
confidence-building measures. We are ready to take all
measures that would help build confidence and alleviate
the suffering of our people. We appreciate the sincere
efforts of the Special Envoy in this regard.

The people of Yemen expect the Security Council
to do more than simply denounce the situation, issue
statements and even adopt resolutions. What we expect
is that the resolutions of the Council will be translated
into concrete action on the ground. We still have an
opportunity to reach peace. We actually have thousands
of opportunities to reach just, comprehensive,
sustainable and genuine peace on the basis of the three
agreed terms ofreference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference,
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, notably
resolution 2216 (2015). We need peace in order to put
an end to the consequences of the coup d'etat that my
country has suffered and to restore States institutions.
Heavy and medium weapons must be surrendered to the
legitimate military institution, which has the exclusive
right to own such weapons.

The Yemeni Government reiterates its position in
support of the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve
peace. He intends to hold a new round of consultations,
hoping that the coup party would participate in good
faith in order to discuss .the confidence-building
measures which are proposed by the Special Envoy.

His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and the Yemeni Government are working
hard, sincerely and in good faith to achieve peace
because Yemen is the country of civilization, history
and wisdom. Yemen deserves to live in dignity, peace
and prosperity while united, strong and independent.
We will never accept Iranian influence or the replication
of the Iranian experience in our country.

The Council should stop cursing the darkness of
war and humanitarian tragedies. It has to light the
candle of peace and silence the guns forever.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.
