Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized during your presidency of the Council this
debate on an issue of great importance to all of us, that
is, the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I should
also like to thank you for the concept note (S/2013/447)
you have circulated to inform our debate.

More than 13 years have passed since the Secretary-
General submitted his first report (S/1999/957) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict to the Security
Council, which adopted resolution 1265 (1999).

Our debate today coincides with the observance of
World Humanitarian Day and the tenth anniversary of
the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in Iraq.
This compels us to turn to the topic of those who have
fallen while working for a noble international cause.

We urge the Council to continue regular
deliberations on this issue in order to seek an objective
and broad approach to find a way to protect civilians,
first and foremost to address the root causes of conflict,
as well as to provide regular political support. That is
the best way to protect civilians.

There is no doubt that many civilians fall victim
to armed conflict in many regions. In that regard, we
must point out a fact that must be taken into account,
namely, that it is rebel movements that are provoking the
greatest number of victims among civilians, including
women and children, so as to turn people against the
Government and cause the international community to
intervene in conflict zones. The best example of that is
what is being done by the armed rebel groups in Darfur
in order to undermine the peace process, the Doha
Document for Peace and other process aimed at peace
and stability in the region.

In that connection, I would like to thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, who this morning noted in her speech that it
was the armed groups in Darfur that had prevented
humanitarian access to more than 90,000 in the area
under their control.

The alliance among revolutionaries attacks villages
in Southern and Northern Kordofan states, which are
heavily populated. They are also attacking the offices
and headquarters of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the World Health
Organization and other international organizations, as
well as, recently, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei. That is a flagrant example of targeting
civilians.

The Security Council must play its part in combating
the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front, which
includes the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North and the other movements in Darfur that reject
peace. Moreover, we expect that the talks with South
Sudan will set the foundation for strong relations
based on good-neighbourliness and non-interference in
domestic affairs. We also hope that they will lead to
the implementation of the agreements that have been
reached and the normalization of relations between our
two States, to the benefit of the interests of our two
brotherly peoples.

Today's debate also touches on the responsibility
to protect, a noble principle to which we all aspire.
Nevertheless, it is worrying that some are attempting
to use that principle for political ends - for instance,
marketing the responsibility to protect. We would
like here to recall that the responsibility to protect, as
reflected in the 2005 Summit Outcome, continues to
be a concept subject to differing interpretations among
Member States. Defining it should not to the detriment
of the legitimacy and sovereignty of States, including
their full and direct responsibility for protecting their
citizens.

Moreover, we should recall that civilians' right
to protection during armed conflict is part of a
comprehensive and independent matrix of rights and
obligations, as the Summit Outcome also underscored,
beginning with achieving development, combating
poverty, preventing conflicts and resolving differences.

