Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council,
particularly Her Excellency Mrs. Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for organizing this open
debate. I also thank the briefers for their input.

I associate myself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

It is a source of grave concern that civilians
still account for the vast majority of casualties in
armed conflicts. The worst aspect of this issue is that
most of the victims are among the most vulnerable
civilians - women and children. Recalling that 2019
marks the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of four
Geneva Conventions, the question arises as to why we
still face - as confirmed by the Council - the erosion
of respect for international humanitarian law, despite
those and other important legally binding instruments.
Citing certain examples from our own region, I will try
to briefly answer that question.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/373), not only did civilian casualties increase
in Afghanistan in 2018, but so did civilian casualties
resulting from the use of air-launched weapons - by
61 per cent - the highest number in a single year
since 2009. What was the Council's reaction to such a
Violation of international humanitarian law by United
States and NATO forces?

In Syria, where, in accordance with our obligations
and religious teachings, we accord the highest priority
to the protection of civilians, a United Nations
assessment mission to Raqqa in April 2018 found that
nearly 70 per cent of buildings in the city had been
destroyed or damaged and that essential services, such
as water, electricity and health care, were absent or
severely limited. Did the Council hold the United States
and its partners accountable for such a clear violation of
international humanitarian law?

In Gaza, during the Great March of Return, for
the period from 30 March 2018 to 29 March 2019,
Israel brutally killed nearly 280 civilians, including
56 children, and wounded nearly 32,000 others, more
than 3,000 of whom were children. The Council has
been completely silent on those crimes. The inhumane
blockade of Gaza by Israel - the clearest violation of
international humanitarian law and a crime against
humanity - entered its twelfth year in 2019.

Lastly, according to the Secretary-General's report,
civilian casualties increased in Yemen throughout 2018,
with a devastating impact on children. On 9 August
2018, in a single incident, a school bus in the market of
a densely populated area in Dhahyan was deliberately
targeted by Saudi Arabia. The attack left 52 civilians
dead, among them 40 children, and 79 wounded,
including 56 children. It was the single-worst attack
since 2015. What was the Council's reaction?

In conclusion, I would like to cite two examples
from a United Nations publication published by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

"In 2015, the Israel Defense Forces were initially
listed but removed prior to the report's publication
[and]; [i]n 2016, the Saudi-led coalition, which
had been listed for grave violations in Yemen,
was removed from the listing following political
pressure". (Building a Culture ofProtection, p. 32, footnote 132)

The conclusion that can be drawn is that respect for
international humanitarian law continues to be eroded
because criminals are not held accountable, because
they continue to commit those crimes with impunity
and because they are emboldened to disregard
international humanitarian law and commit further
brutalities. The Council can show its seriousness in
protecting civilians, which is a legal obligation as well
as a moral imperative, by putting an end to a policy
based on political considerations.

