Mr. Nteso (Lesotho): The Lesotho delegation has the
honour to take the floor today on the agenda item
concerning the situation in Angola. We in southern Africa
continue to attach great importance to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, to the preservation
of the unity and territorial integrity of Angola and to lasting
peace for the people of Angola.

Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. We have clearly benefited from your
wise and skilful guidance of the work of the Council
during the course of the month. At the same time, I wish
to pay a special tribute to your predecessor for his
exemplary leadership of the work of the Council last
month. Let me also take this opportunity to express my
delegation's gratitude to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for their tireless efforts in the
search for peace in Angola.

At the last meeting of this body, we applauded the
inauguration of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. Spurred by this event, we urged the
international community to sustain its support for the
people of Angola and shared the hope that tangible and
rapid progress could be made towards completing the
implementation of the other aspects of the Lusaka
Protocol. We remained keenly aware, however, that a
great deal still had to be done before lasting peace could
be achieved for the people of Angola and thus cautioned
that even though the establishment of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation was an important step,
it was not an end in itself.

The latest developments in Angola are quite
disturbing. We are particularly concerned about reports of
skirmishes between the Government forces and UNITA in
the north-eastern part of Angola, which have resulted in
some casualties. There is no doubt that these military
tensions in the north-east have an impact on the general
situation in Angola. It is imperative that all Angolans put
an immediate halt to such skirmishes and rededicate
themselves to consolidating the progress achieved thus
far.

It is also disturbing that the much-hoped-for meeting
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi has yet to
take place. The importance of this meeting cannot be
overemphasized. It is the much-needed ingredient required
to show the commitment and determination of all parties
to bringing the peace process to a successful conclusion.
This long-overdue meeting will be a catalyst for the
normalization of State administration and for building
confidence and trust in the interest of national
reconciliation. We therefore wish to underscore the
urgency of a meeting between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi.

While we were encouraged to note that 23,000
demilitarized soldiers had been discharged from the

 

quartering areas, the slow progress of the demobilization of
UNITA ex-combatants and the closure of the selection and
demobilization centres remain causes for concern. The
Secretary-General's report shows that UNITA has once
again resorted to obstructing the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) activities and has hijacked its envoy.
These acts of interference and obstruction are to be
deplored, and this Council should once oblige UNITA to
desist from such actions. It is crucial that no effort be
spared to intensify demobilization in order to ensure that
the process is completed by the envisaged deadline of
August. We have also noted the precarious financial
situation of the IOM. and reiterate the Secretary-General's
appeal to the donor community to contribute generously to
its efforts.

Regarding the downgrading of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) into an
Observer Mission, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations. We have all come too far and
invested too much in the Angolan peace process to allow
the achievements made so far to be wasted. Now that the
door to peace for Angola has been opened, the international
community has a moral duty to stay engaged in order to
make lasting peace an irreversible reality for Angola. A
careful analysis of the situation on the ground will be
necessary for this Council to determine the mandate of such
a follow-on Mission. In View of the reported skirmishes in
the north-east region, some form of military presence will
be warranted. Such a mandate should be flexible enough to
allow the mission to tackle the myriad problems that are
likely to arise. Among the many activities of the Observer
Mission, human rights, humanitarian and public information
programmes will be necessary to create conditions
conducive to political stability, economic and social
recovery and sustainable development.

In his report the Secretary-General informs us that
despite persistent difficulties and unnecessary delays, he is
generally satisfied with the spirit of cooperation and
tolerance that has been displayed by both sides, even in the
most difficult times. We are encouraged to see the
increasing willingness of both parties to work together and
hope that this spirit of cooperation and mutual
accommodation will prevail so that progress can be made
in completing the implementation of other aspects of the
Lusaka Protocol.

As the longed-for peace, progress and prosperity for
the people of Angola begins to dawn, we must remember
the women and men of UNAVEM. III, whose day-to-day
sacrifices are bringing us closer to peace. We pay a special
tribute to them. Our gratitude also goes to the
international donor community and to the countries of the
troika for their valuable support and efforts in the struggle
for peace and stability for the people of Angola.

