Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. My delegation
would also like to express its appreciation to Mr. Robert
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his briefing.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Guinea on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Riyad
Mansour, Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine,
for his statement this morning. Malaysia reaffirms its
principled support for a just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine that recognizes the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people to an independent State,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

Malaysia has remained committed to the
implementation of such internationally recognized
initiatives as the Arab Peace Initiative, the Oslo
Accords, the Quartet road map, the Madrid terms of
reference and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We are at a significant juncture in the Middle East
peace process. The Palestinian people are joining hands
in unity, and their leadership is intensifying its efforts
to achieve independence. Israel, on the other hand, is
sending dangerous signals that it is not ready for peace,
and is escalating illegal and provocative actions on the
ground. Despite the efforts of United States Secretary
of State John Kerry to facilitate direct negotiations,
what we have observed so far only demonstrates the
asymmetry between the occupied and the occupier.

Malaysia remains steadfast in its desire to assist
the Palestinian people in their efforts to establish a
framework within which to administer a sovereign
Palestinian State. In that connection, my delegation
welcomes the Palestinian leadership's decision to
accede to 15 international conventions. We reaffirm
our longstanding commitment to supporting
Palestine's continued efforts to obtain diplomatic
and legal recognition in the United Nations and other
international organizations. Malaysia has always
supported a consolidated national unity between
Fatah and Hamas, and we commend both sides on the
reconciliation agreement achieved last week. However,
my delegation regrets that this move was met by the
Israeli side with a suspension of negotiations, as well as
further economic sanctions on top of those it imposed
when Palestine signed the international conventions.

We continue to be gravely concerned about
the situation in the pccupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Malaysia strongly condemns
the Israeli security forces and extremist settlers' brazen
desecration and illegal invasions ofthe Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which intensified in recent days following a debate by
the Israeli Parliament on sovereignty over the holy
site. The Security Council has made its views known
on Jerusalem's status in numerous resolutions adopted
between 1968 and 1980, specifically in resolutions
672 (1990) and 673 (1990), on Israel's violations of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Council should not remain
silent while the occupying Power flagrantly violates
those resolutions and ignores its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Those violations also include the deliberate extension
of illegal settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem.

The situation in the Gaza Strip remains critical. My
delegation is shocked that an Israeli air strike injured
innocent civilians in Gaza shortly after the Fatah-
Hamas reconciliation deal took place. It was just one
example of Israel's escalation of military activities in
recent weeks, as well as a manifestation of collective
punishment. Civilians continued to be shot at and
killed near border fences and in fishing boats, while
trying to earn their livelihoods in a shattered economy.
We remain deeply alarmed that the food and energy
security needs of the population of Gaza are at severe
levels. In that regard, Malaysia reiterates its demand for
an immediate end to the illegal blockade of the Gaza
Strip.

Malaysia reiterates its grave concern over the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria. All parties
should comply with the provisions of resolution 2139
(2014) and allow for humanitarian aid to be provided to
all of those in need. That also applies to the situation
faced by Palestinian refugees in the camps of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) at Yarmouk. We
welcome UNRWA's tireless efforts to provide for the
distribution of food, particularly the resumption of the
delivery of much-needed supplies after more than two
weeks of being denied entry into the camp.

My delegation continues to support international
efforts to call upon all parties in Syria to immediately
end the crisis in a peaceful and meaningful manner
through dialogue and negotiation, for the sake of the
Syrian people and the region as a whole. In that regard,
we support the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi and urge all parties to work together
towards a political solution that is Syrian-led and
inclusive. It is our hope that the parties concerned will
be able to put aside their differences in order to ensure
an outcome that will benefit the people of Syria.

Malaysia also reiterates its objections to Israel's
actions in the occupied Syrian Golan, including the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements in
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, Malaysia calls for the
withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Syrian Golan
in line with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981).

My delegation welcomes the progress made by the
new Government of Lebanon and recognizes the high
priority it has placed on ensuring security and stability
and protecting the national sovereignty of the country.
At a time when the effects of the Syrian conflict
continue to escalate and spill over into Lebanon,
Malaysia urges all parties involved in the conflict
to cease cross-border fire and other violence. In that
regard, we reiterate that Israel must cease its violations
of Lebanese sovereignty - whether by air, sea or
land - and withdraw its troops from Lebanon, with
full respect for the Blue Line, as set out in Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).
