Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Let me start by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I also
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his briefing on the outcome of the
election for the Constituent Assembly in East Timor.

Previous interventions have already highlighted
the importance of the elections as a milestone in the
overall transition of East Timor to independence and in
the setting-up of democratic institutions in the new
country.

We must congratulate the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and its entire staff, in particular Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, for a job very well done. Overcoming that
further challenge on the way to independence was
possible due only to the commitment of all the staff on
the ground, as well as to the support of the
international community as a whole. Portugal is proud
to be one of the major contributors to this effort.

My country participated in the observer missions
of the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries to the elections of 30
August. We fully associate ourselves with the
statements that both organizations have made in this
regard, in particular, with the statement just made by
the Presidency of the European Union to the Council.

We also sent a national team of both government
and civil society representatives to observe the
elections in all 13 districts. We welcome the peaceful
and generally orderly manner in which the election
took place. We have every reason to believe that this
was a free, fair and transparent exercise.

Today, we must, above all, pay tribute to the
people of East Timor and their political parties. Once
again, they demonstrated incredible political maturity
and tolerance. For their behaviour during the electoral
campaign and for the high voter turnout on election
day, they deserve our respect and our confidence.

We trust that all the political parties will accept
the results of the ballot and the will of the people
expressed therein. In this regard, Portugal welcomes
statements by different political parties reiterating their
commitment to peaceful implementation of the results,
as well as the statements by the winning party that it is
ready to engage in an all-inclusive Cabinet. We hope
that the work of the Constituent Assembly will reflect
the spirit of cooperation and national unity. I cannot
fail to underline that the East Timorese elected 23
women to the Constituent Assembly, 27 per cent of the
total number of deputies.

We have come a long way since the troubled
times of September 1999. Today, the situation in East
Timor has developed in a way that most of us did not
think possible when UNTAET was created. The same
effort that the international community made in East
Timor at that time must now be continued during the
transition to independence and beyond. The Timorese
expect as much and deserve no less.

As always, Portugal is committed to remaining at
the forefront of these efforts.

