Mr. Yap (Singapore): We would first like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his usual
thorough and useful briefing on the latest developments
in Kosovo.

Looking at the overall picture, it is clear that the
situation on the ground in Kosovo will continue to
require continued United Nations and international
engagement for some time to come. Indeed, the
benchmarks process initiated by Special Representative
Steiner provides a useful framework to determine the
state of affairs in Kosovo. Aptly given the slogan
"Standards before status", the benchmarks framework
gives a precise and coherent picture of the standards
that have to be achieved on the ground before an
ultimate solution can be found to the issue of Kosovo.

We are, therefore, glad to note that the
benchmarks approach has the support of the Kosovo
political entities themselves, to the extent that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government have
established a mechanism to monitor progress and some
of the Institutions have formulated action plans for
attaining the standards that have been set.

We are also pleased to learn that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) is developing a set of progress indicators to
systematically track what has been achieved and to
identify the aspects where greater efforts have to be
made. This would facilitate something we have
repeatedly encouraged: a more in-depth analysis of the
benchmarks to ascertain the trend lines and any
emerging threats so that necessary action can be taken.

I would like to raise two specific issues, the first
of which is the consequences of the municipal elections
held last month. While the elections were successfully
and peacefully conducted, it is unfortunate that the
Kosovo Serbs turned out in low numbers. That has not
helped their cause in terms of having greater
involvement in political life in Kosovo. The results of
the elections bear this out. Even more so now, the
majority in Kosovo must protect the rights of the
minorities, and the minorities must make a greater
effort to participate in the political and social life of the
society. In that regard, we welcome the support given
by the leaders of the Kosovo communities for the
decentralization concept, and Special Representative
Steiner's intention to push ahead with that concept. It
is important that UNMIK engage Belgrade on the
implementation of the concept.

My second point relates to returns. We agree with
Mr. Steiner that returns are a top priority for all, and
we support the launching by him and Prime Minister
Rexhepi of the Task Force on Returns to give high-
level support to and coordinate the returns programme
in order to invigorate the returns process. The goal
must be for returns to be sustainable and for returnees
to be integrated into society - which, we note, is far
from the case in some municipalities.

The international community's continued support
is essential. We hope that the donor conference for
Kosovo, held in Brussels yesterday, produced the
necessary outcome with respect to the funding of the
returns programme.

Finally, allow me to say that my delegation looks
forward to participating in a forthcoming Security
Council mission to Kosovo.

