Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is a bright day today,
but it is a pity that Mr. Heusgen is not here to see the
curtain be opened.

On a more serious note, we thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing and
Ms. Rajaa Altalli for being here with us today.

My delegation is following closely the development
of the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee, facilitated by the United Nations. The
launching of the Committee, the adoption by consensus
of a code of conduct and a set of initial procedural
practices, as well as the agreement on the small drafting
body, are indeed commendable advances. We note that
the second session of the Constitutional Committee,
last November, did not really go as planned. Obviously,
we regret that it was not possible to convene a meeting
of the 45 members of the small drafting body. However,
my delegation believes that this is part of an ongoing
process, which we all knew would be far from easy.
Disagreements will always arise in such processes,
but the most important thing is that dialogue and
consultations among the relevant parties continue.
Compromise and flexibility are required. With
patience, the objective of a final result that is good
for the people of Syrian can be reached. That should
be the main objective. Indonesia sincerely wishes that
the two co-Chairs of the Government and opposition
delegations will soon agree on the agenda and move
forward with the next session. I would like to highlight
a further three pertinent points.

First, it is critical for the international community,
particularly Council members, to continue supporting
the work of the Constitutional Committee. That
includes supporting Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in his
efforts to facilitate the process, including the reaching
of consensus among the members of the Committee.
We hope that the members of the Committee can
concentrate on their work, without unnecessary external
interference that couldjeopardize the ongoing process.
We concur with what Mr. Pedersen underlined in his
remarks, namely, that the Constitutional Committee
must be consistently nurtured. It is not an easy word or an
easy task. The success of the Constitutional Committee
at this stage is important in order to build trust and
confidence, which are badly needed on that issue, and,
as Mr. Pedersen also mentioned, to ultimately open the
door for broader political processes that we hope will
be beneficial for the people of Syria. We in the Council
should continue to support that effort.

Secondly, Indonesia reiterates the importance for
all parties to reaffirm their strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. It is a necessary foundation
for advancing the political process within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015).

Thirdly, in the absence of a political solution, the
situation in Syria will continue to deteriorate, and we
should not let that happen. Many Council members have
voiced their grave concerns about the humanitarian
situation in Syria, urging that we should immediately
end the suffering of the civilians in need. Again, the
only sustainable solution to the crisis is through an
inclusive, Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Only they
will decide their own future.

We appreciate the various dialogues supporting the
United Nations-facilitated political process in Syria. We
also appreciate the involvement of various stakeholders
who would see peace in that area. The constructive
approach needs to continue and be enhanced. The
international community has its own role to play in
assisting Syria in overcoming the crisis, and the Council
also has a responsibility to help alleviate the hardship
of millions of civilians in Syria. Hopefully, we will
fulfil that responsibility today by adopting the draft
resolution on the cross-border mechanism. Inshallah.

On another note, we would like to echo
Ms. Wronecka's statement. I do not know whether
the timing is right, but I was informed that this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council - hopefully.
This being the last scheduled open meeting of the
Council for this year, Indonesia would like to extend
its appreciation to all our colleagues and the outgoing
members - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Peru,
Poland and our neighbour in the Chamber, Kuwait - for
their strong cooperation and commitment to maintaining
international peace and security. We have worked
closely this past year, and it has been a great pleasure to
work with all the Permanent Representatives, mission
staff, experts and political coordinators, who have
done quite a lot in pursuing the mandate and quest
of the Council to ensure peace and security. Once
again, we extend our best wishes to all colleagues. We
look forward to working with the incoming members
beginning on 1 January. A merry Christmas and happy
New Year to all.

