Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I too would like to thank
Mr. Holmes for his sobering briefing and his
observations on his recent trip to the Sudan, Chad and
the Central African Republic, in the face of enormous
challenges to civilian protection, owing to the
continuing conflict in Darfur and its spillover effects,
which are causing increasing humanitarian suffering
for hundreds of thousands of civilians. We share
Mr. Holmes' concern about the further deterioration of
the situation on the ground and the growing number of
people affected by the conflict and by attacks on their
camps and violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. We call on the Government of the Sudan and other
Governments to fulfil their obligations with regard to
their primary responsibility to protect their own
civilian populations.

Since the delivery of humanitarian relief is of
critical importance, we would like to pay tribute to all
the humanitarian agencies that remain active despite
the violence and attacks against their workers. A
number of reports point out that the targeting of
humanitarian operations, staff and equipment has
become routine in Darfur, and we are worried that
humanitarian work could become unsustainable in the
long run. We urge the Government of the Sudan to
remain engaged and extend its full cooperation to
humanitarian agencies.

Slovakia welcomes the recent signing of a
communique between the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan to alleviate the
administrative burden that is hampering relief
operations, as well as the extension of the moratorium
on restrictions placed upon the operations of non-
governmental organizations. However, we would like
to express our continuing concern about the
bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian work in
Darfur, including delays in the issuance of visas and
work permits.
Slovakia believes that the international
community should address the humanitarian needs of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the region
in a robust, timely and effective fashion. That is why
would like also to reiterate our position that we see the
deployment of an effective international peacekeeping
force in the region as the only way to save lives among
the people in Darfur, eastern Chad and the north-
eastern Central African Republic.

Since impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity is unacceptable, it should be crystal clear that
individuals responsible for atrocities committed in
Darfur and in neighbouring States must be held
accountable. In that regard, we fully support the
investigation by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, and we call upon the Government of
the Sudan to provide all necessary cooperation in that
regard.

To prevent violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, we
believe that the Council should also consider making
more effective use of targeted sanctions in the future.

Finally, Slovakia remains gravely concerned over
the humanitarian situation in a number of countries in
Africa. Since we are fully aware of the dire situation of
civilians, especially woman and children, trapped in
armed conflict, we would like to support the continuing
efforts of the United Nations to strengthen the
protection of civilians and humanitarian mechanisms,
enabling the international community to respond in a
timely and efficient manner to humanitarian crises and
emergencies.

In that context, we would like to ask the Under-
Secretary-General what other parts of Africa he plans
to visit in the future. Since we are deeply concerned
about the current humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe,
we would appreciate it if Mr. Holmes could give us an
indication of whether he plans also to pay a visit to
Zimbabwe.

