The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa.

South Africa firmly believes that the question of
peace in the Middle East will not be resolved unless the
question of Palestine is resolved. Today, we debate the
longest-standing subject on the agenda of the Security
Council. Our failure to find a resolution to the plight
of the people of Palestine and to secure their peace and
freedom is a profound stain on our stated mission and
objectives. In the period since our previous debate, the
situation has deteriorated markedly, suggesting even
less hope for peace.

The Council has a duty to the people of Palestine,
which is clearly articulated in the Charter of the United
Nations, and it is vital that dedicated attention be

directed towards finally achieving the outcomes stated
in manifold United Nations resolutions.

South Africa believes that it is always possible to
find solutions to seemingly intractable challenges. Our
own struggles were advanced by United Nations action
and determination to end a crime against humanity.
We need similar, vigorous international solidarity,
indignation and commitment for Palestine. The Council
is fully aware that it is in this very organ that the
elusive breakthrough exists - that it is only several
of the members present here that can ensure peace and
security in Palestine and the entire Middle East.

Council resolutions have been breached and
ignored. Resolution 2334 (2016) confirmed that the
Council would not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those that were agreed by the parties through
mediation. Yet those very agreed decisions and
negotiations have been undermined through unilateral
decisions aimed at predetermining the outcome of the
negotiations. That points to bad faith and can never
secure peace.

Of even greater concern is the fact that the people
of Palestine seem to have become a forgotten people
whose hopes are dissipating in the face of diminishing
world support and the absence of any real attempt at
honest and genuine negotiations. We in South Africa
are gravely concerned by the continued disregard for
the long-standing Middle East peace process through
the systematic foreclosing of the final status issues,
particularly with regard to the borders, the return of
refugees, the status of Jerusalem and the ever-expanding
illegal settlements. There is clearly no intention to seek
or achieve peace by those implementing such actions.
How is it possible to believe in the Council, in peace
and security, in the face of such offending breaches of
its very decisions?

The Council must find ways to repair its damaged
and waning credibility as a source of peace and
security. First, the Council must insist on receiving
regular written reports on the implementation of its
decisions, particularly with respect to resolution 2334
(2016). Secondly, the Council must visibly show its
solidarity with the long-suffering people of Palestine
by ensuring that the long-overdue field visit to the
occupied Palestinian territory is conducted by those on
the Council willing to do so. Thirdly, the Council must
take further action against the continued violation of
human rights and disregard for international law.

South Africa fully supports a two-State solution
and an agreed peace process aimed at ensuring two
coexisting Viable States side by side, offering hope
and example to those who suffer hatred and insecurity.
This solution would bring important benefits for the
entire region. We also utterly condemn the human
rights violations against the Palestinian people and the
Violence directed at the people of Gaza and the West
Bank through occupation and aggression by Israel.

The Council cannot be seen to condone such
actions of violence and hostility as the building of
further barriers and walls, the closing of schools and
the killing of civilians. The Council should act to ensure
gestures of hope and the building of trust between the
parties, which requires, as a first step, a firm statement
against intolerance of violent infringements and other
negative actions.

This institution, the United Nations, was founded
on the principles of ensuring the presence and practice
of human rights, respect for the worth and dignity of
every person, equality whether rich or poor, mighty
or weak, and a world of justice, peace and respect for
international law. On the subject of Palestine, we have
clearly failed on these principles. Our commitments
have fallen short, and suffering continues unabated. We
must do more before the next debate.

There are many who will speak on this subject
today, which indicates great trouble and great interest in
this troubling inadequacy. Let us remember that while
debate is important, we lose credibility as an institution
when words are not accompanied by action. The people
of Palestine require action.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the other Council members
who wish to make statements.

