Mr. Mladenov: l have the honour to present the
second report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/82)

pursuant to paragraph 6 ofresolution 2169 (2014), as well
as the fifth report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/70)
pursuant to paragraph 4 ofresolution 2107 (2013) on the
issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
and missing Kuwaiti property.

As I complete my tenure as the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Iraq, to borrow a phrase, I
remain a paranoid optimist - an optimist because,
despite the year-long security crisis, Iraq's political,
community and religious leaders have coalesced to save
their country from terror. Today more than ever, there
is a growing understanding that Iraq can move forward
only on the basis of the principles of democracy, the
rule of law, respect for diversity and inclusivity. This
understanding has been increasingly evident since
the formation of a national unity Government set on
addressing many long-standing concerns of the Iraqi
people. I am, however, also paranoid that things may go
wrong. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
remains in control of most of Iraq's western provinces;
the fragile efforts towards unity and reconciliation
need to be carefully nurtured if they are to bear fruit;
while the economy has been hit by falling oil prices and
skyrocketing security costs.

Since its formation in September 2014, the
Government has taken important steps in fulfilling its
agenda. It has engaged countries of the region, all with
a View to regaining the confidence of Iraq's population
in the political process and promoting stability. While
pursuing these objectives, Iraq's most pressing goal
remains to win back territory taken by ISIL. In that
respect, the Government hats taken important measures
for security sector reform. The authorities have pledged
to provide military and financial assistance to local
leaders and tribal fighters to aid their struggle against
ISIL. Since the beginning of the year, at least 4,000
Iraqis from Anbar and Ninewa have signed up as part
of the popular mobilization force - an important first
step in securing local forces for the liberation of Iraq's
western provinces.

I encourage the Government to empower and
quickly provide all necessary means to these local
fighters as they seek to free their homes from ISIL,
while also supporting recovery and reconstruction. I
also encourage the Council of Representatives to adopt
the necessary legislation to establish the Iraqi national
guard so as to allow the provinces to take greater
responsibility for their own security. In January, the
Government submitted to Parliament a bill to that
effect.
An exclusively military solution to the
problem of ISIL is impossible; indeed, it would be
counterproductive. I therefore welcome the consistent
calls for unity by the President, the Prime Minister
and the Speaker of Parliament. Any effort to achieve
unity through reconciliation must be based on the
Constitution and the principles of inclusivity, with the
full participation of political, religious and community
leaders from across Iraq. A particular focus must also
be placed on increasing the role and participation
of women. As such, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has strongly supported
the Government's national reconciliation and social
cohesion agenda.

Recently, we convened in Baghdad a round table
on social cohesion with prominent Iraqi political,
religious and civil society representatives, who
discussed the causes of recommendations that were
presented to the Government. Subsequently, the
United Nations convened round tables in Karbala and
Basra, bringing together local leaders. During these
meetings, participants reiterated the importance of
strengthening social and religious cohesion, as well as
of rectifying divisions within Iraqi society. the United
Nations Development Programme is also expanding its
community reconciliation initiative at the grass-roots
level.

In addition to these developments, relations between
the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government have improved following their historic
agreement on energy exports and revenue-sharing.
Improved cooperation is also evident between the
Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, volunteers,
local communities and the forces of the anti-ISIL
international coalition. This cooperation has been
key in dealing with the most recent security threats,
including to the city of Kirkuk, the Ein Al-Assad air
base and elsewhere in the country.

Despite these positive steps, the process is fraught
with risks. Armed conflict and acts ofterrorism continue
to inflict a terrible toll on the people of Iraq. In 2014,
at least 12,000 civilians were killed and over 23,000
injured. In January this year alone, there were over
2,200 civilian casualties, including 790 killed and some
1,500 injured. Almost daily terrorist attacks continue to
deliberately target all Iraqis - most notably from the
Shiite community, as well as from ethnic and religious
minorities - across the country. The continued reports
of massive human rights violations and abuses being

committed by ISIL against civilians are gruesome. ISIL
has made a point of not hesitating to openly publicize
its crimes committed against men, women and children.
The safety and security of members of Iraq's diverse
ethnic and religious communities in areas controlled
by ISIL - particularly the thousands of women and
children who remain in captivity - remain of grave
concern. Equally worrying is the increasing number
of reports of revenge attacks committed particularly
against members of the Sunni community in areas
liberated from ISIL control.

All of these ongoing human rights violations
present a serious threat to the cohesion of Iraq.
Some of Iraq's recent military gains in Diyala, Salah
al-Din and Ninewa governorates have been marred by
claims that militias have killed unarmed civilians and
intentionally destroyed property and places of worship.
It is imperative that the Government act swiftly and
decisively to bring under control all armed groups that
are outside of the Constitution. Failing to do so risks
undermining the much-needed process of national
unity and reconciliation. Political parties, however,
should also show restraint in their statements in the
face of such acts, which are clearly aimed at destroying
Iraq's social fabric.

It is in that respect that I welcome the Government's
decision to conduct a full investigation into the alleged
massacres in Diyala province. To paraphrase Prime
Minister al-Abadi, a crime is a crime, no matter who
has committed it, and all responsible should be held
accountable It is also encouraging that, as we speak
today, Iraq's President, Prime Minister and Speaker
of Parliament are holding a joint meeting to identify
measures to address the events of recent days.

The Government faces the additional challenge of
a very fiscally constrained environment. In a hallmark
of success in January, the Council of Representatives
approved the 2015 budget. Despite very tight spending
limits due to the fall in oil revenue, spiralling security
costs and an massively expanded public sector wage
bill, Parliament was able to set aside some $500 million
to help rebuild lives and livelihoods in those areas that
are liberated from ISIL. The United Nations is working
actively with the authorities to set up a recovery and
reconstruction fund through which Iraq's allies,
neighbours and friends can contribute to this process
as well.

Most urgently perhaps, the Iraqi authorities and
the United Nations need to redouble our efforts in
supporting over 2 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs) who have been forced from their homes since
January 2014. Let me recall for the Council the gravity
of the situation on the ground by highlighting some
numbers. Some 5.2 million people need humanitarian
assistance in Iraq today, of whom 2.25 million are
displaced and 235,000 are refugees from the conflict in
Syria. To date, the population of the Kurdistan region
has increased by some 30 per cent because of the influx.
Despite the generosity of local communities across the
country, one-third of IDPs in accessible areas are living
in unfinished and abandoned buildings, makeshift
shelters and spontaneous settlements. They are highly
vulnerable and dependent on assistance to survive.

Let me sound the alarm bell. Sixty per cent of
humanitarian operations in Iraq are likely to shut
down or be curtailed unless funding is received in
the next few weeks. The food pipeline will break in
mid-May unless funding is received before the end of
March. The essential medicines pipeline will break at
the end of March. The United Nations humanitarian
country team, led by newly appointed Humanitarian
Coordinator Lise Grande, has put together a list of fast-
track priorities that cannot be postponed or ignored. We
urgently need approximately $150 million to support
IDPs, whose life-saving protection needs are enormous
and likely to grow. I take this opportunity to appeal to
the international community in that regard, at a time
when Iraq is highly vulnerable and when support for the
humanitarian operation will make a decisive difference
in the direction of the country.

As I conclude my mission in Iraq I would like to
send a message to the Government of Iraq to encourage
it to move swiftly on the full implementation of the
ministerial programme and the political agreement.
Those documents hold the key to seeing Iraq
successfully move forward. Discussions on approving
the necessary legislation for a national guard should be
swiftly finalized. That is important in order to empower
provinces to take more responsibility for their own
security. It will also help ensure that all weapons are
firmly under the control of the State. Most important,
the Government should act decisively to rebuild the
armed forces on a truly national basis.

Part of the political agreement that has been the
basis for the formation of the Government is to grant
amnesty and to revise the justice and accountability
law in order to allow Iraqis who have not committed
crimes under the brutal regime of Saddam Al-Hussein
to move forward with their lives and find their place in
their country.

While tackling the security and political
challenges, the social and economic agenda must also
remain in focus. Addressing pockets of deep poverty,
particularly in the south of the country, providing
quality social services, providing a business climate for
investors, fighting pervasive corruption and, perhaps
most urgent, facilitating the return of displaced persons
to their homes and rebuilding areas liberated from
ISIL - all such policies are all key to social peace in
Iraq. I also take this opportunity to assure the people
and the Government of Iraq that the United Nations
will continue to provide international assistance and
expertise in that process.

Let me turn briefly to the fifth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013), on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-
country nationals and on property.

Iraq-Kuwait relations continue to be on the
ascendant. High-level Iraqi visits and the results of the
fourth Joint Ministerial Committee meeting are very
encouraging. Kuwait's consulates in Basra and Erbil,
when opened, will take Iraq-Kuwait relations to the
next level.

I wish that I could report similar progress
to the Council on the missing Kuwaitis and the
Kuwaiti national archives since the previous report
(S/2014/776). The Kuwaiti Government and people are
understandably disappointed that nothing tangible has
been achieved for many years now. UNAMI shares
their disappointment. We have placed much emphasis
on witnesses and continue to emphasise that the most
modern scientific advances and technology should
be utilized. A UNAMI-identified witness travelled
recently to Kuwait during the reporting period. That
visit, for which UNAMI and the Iraqi Government
had worked hard, regrettably did not yield anything
substantial. Time remains our most formidable foe.
Our team is working to reach another witness, who has
been overseas and who Kuwait believes holds the key
to identifying a gravesite that may contain as many as
180 mortal remains.

Let me assure the Council and the families of
the Kuwaiti missing persons that the United Nations
will continue to do its utmost to fulfil its mandate.
Nonetheless, the key to achieving tangible progress is
primarily in the hands of the parties themselves. The
goodwill between Kuwait and Iraq is at its highest since
1990. I believe that this is a very opportune moment
for their respective leaderships to come together on this
important humanitarian issue, review efforts so far and
decide on a new course of action. Resources, technology
and a fresh approach may all be required. As always,
UNAMI stands ready to support that process.

As I conclude my tenure as the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Iraq, let me say, on a more
personal level, how humbled I have been by the people
of the country. For decades they have lived with
dictatorship, conflict and terrorism, yet they persist
in their determination to build a democratic State.
Generations have been scarred and brought up in
fear - fear of oppression, fear for their future, fear for
their lives. Iraqi society has been deeply scarred and
will take a long time to heal. But the medicine is to look
forward to unity and reconciliation, not to turn to the
failed policies of the past.

ISIL flourishes when Iraq is weak, and Iraq is
weak when it is divided by sectarian politics and when
political patronage overtakes national loyalty. My
unyielding optimism for the country, however, stems
from the spirit of the ordinary Iraqi people, those who
stood up to defend their country in the summer of last
year, those who went out to vote despite car bombs and
terrorist attacks, those Iraqis who do not care whether
someone is Shia, Sunni, Christian, Yazidi, Kurd, Arab
or from any other community. It is the overwhelming
majority of ordinary Iraqis who have no foreign country
to flee to, no foreign passport to rely on. Those are the
men and women who will build a new Iraq. What we
in the international community can and must do is to
help them succeed. We must support them in building
democracy, without which the majority of Iraqis will
not feel secure, nor will their human rights be protected.
We must work with them to achieve a balance among
their diverse communities inside the country, because
without balance violence and extremism will persist.
We must assist them in ensuring justice, not reprisal,
for the crimes of the past and violations of today.
Finally, we must grant the people of Iraq the respect
and dignity that they deserve. That is the noble mission
of the United Nations in Iraq.

Allow me to thank Council members" Governments
and the Secretary-General for the unity that they have
shown in supporting Iraq, for the unyielding support
for UNAMI and for the trust they have placed in me to
lead this difficult Mission. I also want to express my
deep gratitude to my colleagues in the Mission, in the
Secretariat and in the United Nations country team for
their commitment, bravery and hard work throughout
the years. And I would like to thank the Government
and the people of Iraq for the hospitality that they have
extended to me, for their friendship and for their daily
courage to never give up in the face of terror. It has
been an honour serving as the Secretary-General's
Representative for Iraq.

