Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): I welcome the
presence here among us of the Foreign Minister of Georgia.

The United Kingdom believes that a durable peace in
Georgia will come about only if all concerned make a
serious and sustained political commitment to achieve a
settlement.

The onus for doing this remains with the two parties.
Both sides need to demonstrate the political will to break
the current deadlock. An important first step is early
agreement on the guarantees on security and legal status,
which will make it possible for refugees to return safely
and permanently to the Gali district.

A comprehensive settlement must respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State of
Georgia. Any action which contravenes this basic
principle is unacceptable. In this respect, the British
Government regards the holding of self-styled Abkhaz
elections as both illegitimate and unhelpful to the search
for a settlement.

The volatile security situation in Georgia is also a
major concern. We reiterate our condemnation of terrorist
activities in Gali and other parts of Georgia and call on
both sides to work actively to prevent further incidents
and provocations.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
and, in paying tribute to the Mission's work, we also
acknowledge the valuable role played by the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping
force in cooperation with it, and stress the importance of
the continued presence of the force.

Although primary responsibility for resolving the
conflict rests with the parties, the international community
also has its part to play. The draft resolution before us
shows the depth of the Council's concern at the
continuing impasse. Members of the Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General need to consider whether we should
become even more actively engaged in working for
solutions.

The United Kingdom remains committed to working
with the Secretary-General's Special Representative, the
Secretariat and the other members of the Friends Group,
not least with the Russian Federation as facilitator, to
support the parties in the search for a just and durable
peace.

In conclusion, I should like to record my
delegation's appreciation for the work of the outgoing
Special Representative, Mr. Liviu Bota. In carrying out
his mandate tirelessly in difficult and often frustrating
circumstances, he has shown the value of having an
effective resident Special Representative in Georgia.
Given the leading role of the United Nations in the peace
process, we attach considerable importance to the early
appointment of a well qualified successor.

 

