Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): My thanks to
Jean-Marie Guehenno for another typically very
helpful, comprehensive and useful briefing. I will be as
brief as I possibly can this morning because, as others
have noted, the representative of Spain will be
speaking later on behalf of the European Union.

There are a few points I would like to draw out as
national priorities. The first is that we continue to
support Special Representative Steiner's priorities for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK): strengthening law and order,
making progress on the economy and creating a safe
society for all communities. These issues are all
important for Kosovo's development as a forward-
looking, tolerant and prosperous society.

We have spoken in earlier briefings and debates
about the importance of the participation of the
minority communities in Kosovo. So the appointment
of a minister from a Serbian community to serve in the
provisional self-government is a welcome step forward.
The interests of Kosovo's minority communities can
now be fully represented in the provisional self-
government.

We also welcome the continued teamwork
between Belgrade and UNMIK, including the recent
agreements that have been reached on police
cooperation and railways. The inclusion of
representatives from the provisional self-government in
Pristina in this process is essential. That is a point that
we have made on several occasions, and I hope that it
will happen.

But that leads me to a point that Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and others mentioned earlier this
morning, which is the question of Kosovo's
international relations.

It is important that Kosovo develop good
relations with others in the region, not least to promote
trade and prosperity. However, the Kosovo Assembly
and self-government institutions must act at all times
within the terms of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework.

We were therefore concerned about the recent
Albania-Kosovo agreement on trade cooperation.
UNMIK has a clear responsibility for Kosovo's
external relations, and we fully support Special
Representative Steiner in his efforts to ensure that any
external agreements with Kosovo are coordinated with
UNMIK and signed by Mr. Steiner.

The Assembly and the institutions of self-
government must realize that any agreement signed
without UNMIK's involvement will not be recognized
by the international community. The agreement with
Albania should now be renegotiated with UNMIK's
involvement.

On refugee returns, the United Kingdom is keen
and willing to fund projects to help this process. We
await concrete proposals from UNMIK to take this
forward. We will encourage as many Governments as
possible to join in this effort.

Finally, another perennial United Kingdom point:
organized crime and extremism. The current level of
organized crime and extremism in Kosovo remains
extremely worrying. This is a key factor in holding
back economic and political development and also in
holding back refugee returns on a substantial scale. We
continue to support robust action by UNMIK and by
KFOR against those engaged in such activities, and we
welcome the recent arrests by UNMIK of four suspects
for crimes committed against Kosovars in June 1999.

I will stop now, but I would endorse much of
what Ambassador Mahbubani had to say about the
Special Representative's approach and about the very
useful material which we found waiting for us on our
desks this morning. We continue to believe that these
discussions in the Council on Kosovo are very useful.

