Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I would like first of all to
convey our warmest welcome and express our thanks
to you, Sir, and to the Government of Viet Nam for
having taken the initiative to convene this open debate
on children and armed conflicts. That is an issue to
which Italy attaches the utmost importance.

Italy fully subscribes to the statement delivered
by the representative of France as presidency of the
European Union.

The first message we wish to bring to the
membership's attention in this open debate is that, even
though the Security Council's action has started to
produce results, we are far from achieving the
necessary protection for children caught in armed
conflicts around the world. Such an ambitious goal
clearly requires a renewed and concerted effort by the
international community as a whole. The Security
Council has indeed an essential role to play and is
engaged in fulfilling its responsibilities, particularly
through the intensive efforts of its Working Group,
which is very well coordinated and chaired by France.

We recognize that the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF, and
representatives of other relevant United Nations
agencies, as well as many important non-governmental
organizations working in that field, are providing a
major contribution towards the goal we set out to
achieve through the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms created under resolution 1612 (2005). We
particularly welcome the synergies between the
activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, such as the fact-finding mission to
Afghanistan just referred to, and the steps taken by
UNICEF to resume its activities and projects in
countries such as Iraq.

On the other hand, we believe it essential that all
the relevant actors of the international community -
including the Governments of the countries involved,
the donor countries and the multilateral institutions -
join in the support and assistance to that fundamental
United Nations-driven endeavour. Italy will continue to
support programmes and projects aimed at the
rehabilitation and reinsertion into society of child
soldiers and children whose lives have been affected by
armed conflicts, as it has been doing for several years,
both bilaterally and through the European Union.

Outstanding efforts have already been undertaken
by the United Nations, but we should acknowledge that
much more remains to be done. For instance, while
deploying a growing number of child protection
advisers in our United Nations missions around the
world, we still have not developed appropriate child
protection training modules for our United Nations
peacekeepers. Such training modules need to be
approved and extensively applied. By doing this, we
will help the United Nations address the unacceptable
occurrences of sexual abuse by United Nations
personnel and peacekeepers. This is something that is
now long overdue, and Italy is ready to support the
United Nations in any possible way in developing
essential training modules.

We must also strive to mainstream child
protection at all points in the peace process. Child
protection must be an integral part of peace agreements
and a priority of the United Nations in dealing with
post-conflict scenarios and reconstruction programmes.
Italy believes that only if we safeguard fundamental
rights, such as access to water and health services, can
children in armed conflicts be assured adequate
physical protection and social reintegration.

As the scope and effectiveness of the role of the
United Nations in addressing the plight of children
continue to increase, Italy believes that the time has
now come to start working on a new Security Council
resolution on children and armed conflict. Such a
resolution would allow us to factor in all the numerous
lessons learned and the developments ensuing from the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005).

We believe that one very important and
significant development regarding the protection of
children in armed conflicts has been the recent
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1820
(2008), on sexual violence in armed conflicts, which
Italy is proud of having sponsored. That significant and
far-reaching resolution acknowledges that sexual
violence is now one of the primary threats to children
in situations of armed conflict. This is what the
children themselves have been clearly telling us, time
and again.

Once the monitoring and reporting mechanisms
are fully implemented in all countries involved, it will
be time for the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, to consider sexual violence - and
not only the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts - as an additional trigger for action.

