The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of April 2002. I am
sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Lavrov
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's very active agenda last month. I think
that we all admire the way he conducted the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before it the
document S/2002/507, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1407 (2002).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.

