Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I too join other
delegations in thanking the High Commissioner for his
very comprehensive report.

I have one short remark and three short questions.
My remark pertains to the relationship between
peacekeeping and the return of refugees. The High
Commissioner rightly said that the sustainable return of
refugees and displaced persons is directly dependent
upon peacekeeping. The inverse is also true, too.
Peacekeeping and, in particular, peace-building are not
possible without the return of refugees and displaced
persons. The problem of refugees, of course, is always
a cross-border problem, and I agree with the High
Commissioner that we have to find a formula for
peacekeeping missions to operate in cross-border
conflict situations.

Therefore, Germany very much supports the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) programme for the voluntary
return of refugees in Africa, and we will continue to
support all of its initiatives in that respect. The
sustainable reintegration of refugees in Africa is a
major concern for my Government. In 2003,
Germany's support for UNHCR for projects in
Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and Chad was
approximately €7.6 million. This year, we have
allocated €4.8 million so far for UNHCR projects in
Africa, with a focus on Angola, Somalia and Sierra
Leone. I can assure the High Commissioner that we
will continue to further support his Office's
achievements.

My questions pertain to Darfur and go in the
same direction as what my French and Romanian
colleagues have already said. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has
given us a number of more than 2 million people that
have been affected by the conflict. My question is, how
does Mr. Lubbers see the further development in the
near future? Are there large numbers of additional
refugees crossing the border? And how will UNHCR
be able to deal with that situation? Can UNHCR cope
with it?

My second question pertains to what the High
Commissioner said about the security of United
Nations staff members. I agree that a country-by-
country approach should by chosen when assessing the
security of staff members and that not everything is
like Iraq or any other place of crisis. But the High
Commissioner said that Security Management Teams
established in the field must be empowered to take
decisions on the ground relevant to the local
circumstances. That is all right. Then he said that this
should not be eroded by the bureaucratization and
centralization of our security management system.
Perhaps he could elaborate a little bit on what that
means, in detail.

My third and last question pertains to integrated
missions and the relationship between UNHCR and the
military. We share the High Commissioner's view that,
in principle, integrated United Nations missions
constitute a good approach. The advantage of
integration lies in a more efficient allocation of both
financial and human resources, and also allows for
easier coordination. United Nations peacekeeping
missions are increasingly of an integrated nature, with
military and aid personnel working hand in hand. In
some of those missions, humanitarian assistance is
already part of the mandate. In that regard, we would
like to draw attention to the 2003 Guidelines on the use
of military and civil defence assets (MCDA) to support
United Nations humanitarian activities in complex
emergencies. Those so-called MCDA Guidelines
complement the 1994 Oslo Guidelines for situations in
which State control over a country in crisis has
collapsed. My Government participated in the drafting
of those Guidelines, and, in our View, the following
principles contained therein are of particular
importance: first, respect for the sovereignty of the
State in crisis; secondly, impartiality, meaning that only
troops not involved in a conflict can assist
humanitarian actions; thirdly, subsidiarity, meaning
that humanitarian assistance is, above all, the task of
relief organizations and that MCDA should be only a
support of last resort; and fourthly, that military
assistance for humanitarian relief should be given only
on the request, or with the consent, of the target
country.

I would like to ask Mr. Lubbers what his
assessment is as to the state of implementation of those
Guidelines.

