Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): African problems are a constant concern for
the Security Council, reflecting the international
community's deep concern at ongoing, difficult
situations in Africa. We welcome the initiative of the
Brazilian delegation in taking up the most timely items
on the African agenda of the Security Council. We also
welcome the participation in our meeting of non-
members of the Council. We consider it to be an
example of the Council's transparency.

Recent developments in Africa demonstrate that
the best way to prevent internal conflicts is through
strengthening the rule of law and developing
democracy and good governance. The legitimate
authorities of African States must be assured that
neither their neighbours, the countries of the region nor
the international community as a whole will support
unconstitutional attempts to change Governments
and/or help unlawful armed groups to achieve their
political goals by breaking up States or destroying their
economies.

In that connection, we welcome the recent
decisive actions of the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States aimed at
restoring constitutional order in Togo. That reaffirms
once again that in many instances, regional and
subregional organizations, which are closer to events,
hold an advantage in warning of conflict situations and
in their settlement.
With respect to the settlement of conflicts in
Africa - and not just in Africa - I would like to
stress the importance of consulting troop-contributing
countries in order to improve the Council's decision-
making process. It is no secret that we have difficulties
when we consider items pertaining to modifications to
peacekeeping mandates, their format and, especially,
the size and number of forces. The most serious of
those problems we now see in Cote d'Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that work, we
rely on the military expertise of the Secretariat.
However, we would like to obtain the views and the
appraisals of troop-contributing countries, whose
contingents are directly involved in the area of
operations. The current practice of conducting the
relevant private meetings of the Security Council, in
which the delegations of troop-contributing countries
are usually very passive, is not fully justifiable. We
propose that the possibility of coming back to this
subject once again be considered, bearing in mind the
Council's earlier decisions in this sphere.

The Council's consideration of current conflict
situations in Africa shows that the greatest difficulties
are connected with the settlement of problems during
the transitional period. We have agreements on
ceasefires or on peace, but they are not carried out.
Transition governments are formed, but they
systematically fall into disarray. Timetables are worked
out for the political process, and they are not complied
with. Implementation of legislative activity is slow.
these are systematic violations of election deadlines,
and programmes for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration are carried out with difficulty or blocked
completely. Impunity gives rise to repeated massive
violations of humanitarian law.

The phenomena to which I have referred are
characteristic in various degrees of the situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Cote
d'Ivoire, Sudan, Liberia, Burundi and other places. In
such cases, the fragile situations in countries in conflict
can once again deteriorate into open armed hostilities.

Obviously, the parties in conflict bear the primary
responsibility for carrying out the agreements and
related obligations. But the scale of the problem is such
that considerable assistance is required from the
international community. The task of the Security
Council is to define the priorities clearly so that the
broadest set of international factors - Member States,
regional organizations, United Nations institutions,
international donors, the business community and non-
governmental organizations - with the United Nations
coordinating, could be drawn into the solution to
difficult problems during the transition period. Only
through such a comprehensive and complex approach
can we ensure the long-term solution to complex crises
in Africa.

On another point, the Security Council and the
entire international community should take a highly
responsible approach to the implementation of
sanctions. This has already been mentioned by several
delegations today. In fact, we should also be cautious
both in the choice of sanctions and in the timing and
the targeting of their implementation. We should not
forget that, once we have introduced a sanctions
regime - in particular, an arms embargo - the
Security Council must consider effective machinery to
ensure its implementation so as not to harm the
authority of the Council and of the United Nations as a
whole. The Russian delegation gave its view on this
matter in great detail in its explanation of vote on the
Security Council resolution on Darfur yesterday.

