Mr. Bassole: I would like to thank the Council
for the constant support that it has have given to the
Darfur peace process. Thank you also for this
opportunity given to me, as the Joint African Union
Chief Mediator, to update the Council on the current
state of the process, whose objectives are the
establishment of a comprehensive political peace
agreement and a popular consensus of opinion to
support it.

I would like to start by praising the large majority
of Sudanese actors for their engagement in the process
of dialogue to find an end to this crisis. Unfortunately,
the belligerents' current lack of confidence in each
other makes for slow progress in the peace talks and in
achieving an end to military hostilities.

On 18 November 2009 in Doha, the Mediation, in
partnership with the State of Qatar, launched the Darfur
peace talks in the presence of the representatives of all
of the different communities living in Darfur, as well
as of women's groups, the youth and internally
displaced persons. Representatives from the
Government of National Unity and the armed
movements also attended.

Allow me to thank His Highness the Amir of
Qatar and his Government for all the efforts that they
have made, diplomatically and organizationally, to
make the peace process successful. I would also like to
thank Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the
League of Arab States, for his unfailing support.
Together, the League of Arab States and the African
Union have sponsored the initiative, spearheaded by
Qatar, which is supporting the Mediation.

The inclusive peace talks that we have just
commenced will include both a dialogue between the
different parts of Darfurian society and direct
negotiations between the belligerent parties. The aims

are to find a comprehensive resolution of the
underlying causes of crisis, to overcome
inter-communal hatreds caused by war and to
accelerate socio-economic development. Civil society,
as well as the principal belligerents, must address the
central issues, which include: the socio-economic
reintegration of displaced persons and refugees; the
promotion of human rights and human security; the
fight against poverty and marginalization; the end of
military hostilities and political and security
arrangements; the 2010 elections and democratic good
governance; the resolution of land disputes; and
compensation, reconciliation and justice, including an
end to criminal impunity.

Civil society has a clear and important role to
play in the peace process. Its involvement will be
crucial for the promotion of social and inter-communal
reconciliation, in order to rid Darfurian society of the
germs of chronic conflict that risk prolonging the crisis
and affecting the entire subregion. Ending the crisis
across Darfur requires addressing varied and complex
issues: the pastoral and agrarian use and management
of land; environmental degradation and the precarious
livelihoods and living conditions of nomads; the new
social and political realities of the camps of internally
displaced people, et cetera. Civil society must be
involved in the search for solutions in order for there to
be widespread, sustainable peace.

The process of negotiations between the armed
movements and the Government of National Unity has
slowed since the signing of the 17 February 2009 Doha
Goodwill Agreement. This is due to a crisis of
confidence between the principal belligerents, as well
as various differences that undermine the cohesion of
the movements.

The Mediation has intensified its efforts with the
Justice and Equality Movement of Khalil Ibrahim, as
well as with the Sudan Liberation Movement of Abdul
Wahid al-Nur. Our aim is for these two founding
movements of Darfur's rebellion to unite their
positions and those of all of the other movements of
Darfur. I would like to praise the reunification efforts
undertaken by the armed movements and supported by
Libya and the United States.

To encourage them in this direction, the
Government of National Unity should do its utmost to
strengthen the credibility of the peace process. In

09-6229]
particular, it should reduce tensions in Darfur, improve
security and advance socio-economic development.

I call upon all of the belligerent parties to agree a
cessation of hostilities and to commit themselves to
improve significantly the security situation in Darfur.
There needs to be an end to hostage-takings, clashes
between belligerents, the marauding of armed militias,
the recruitment of fighters, the anarchic circulation of
arms and above all, impunity.

During the course of the peace talks, the
Mediation will encourage the parties to agree and
establish a coordination body with the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) that will facilitate the free and safe passage
of people and goods across Darfur.

It is also crucial that the Sudan improve its
relations with Chad. That is a necessary, although not
sufficient, condition for peace in Darfur. The
re-establishment of confidence between the two will
help to reduce tensions considerably. We should praise
the recent initiative taken by Chad and the Sudan to
improve their relations. I also ask the Council to
continue to encourage the supportive diplomatic efforts
of Libya, the Dakar Contact Group, Qatar and the
wider international community.

The Darfur peace talks are taking place today in
the uncertain and tense environment of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The good conduct of the 2010 general
elections across the whole of the Sudan, including
Darfur, is a key factor for peace. The Mediation
therefore strongly urges the parties to the Darfur crisis
to reach the political understanding necessary to allow
for the holding of elections - elections that will
reinforce democracy, peace and stability in Darfur and
the whole of the Sudan.

To that end, I would like to commend the
excellent work done by the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, in coordination with the
Department of Political Affairs and the African Union
Commission, to develop an integrated overall approach
to peace in the Sudan. It will help the Mediation to take
into account the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
calendar. It also supports the efforts of the Government
of National Unity, the key actor in both the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur
processes, to promote peace across the country.

I would also like to highlight the analysis of the
causes of conflict outlined in the report of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur. It explains how the
conflicts in the East, South and West of the country are
related to national political and economic power-
sharing arrangements. That is why it is urgent that we
come to a political arrangement in Darfur ahead of the
electoral deadlines. Those elections should not threaten
peace and stability in the Sudan. Rather, they should be
an opportunity for the promotion of democracy, good
governance and stability in the country.

Arriving at a political accord is essential to
ensuring that the electoral process is neither boycotted
nor taken hostage. To achieve that, I will invite the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan, including
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement, to work with
the parties to the Darfur conflict during the peace talks
in Doha. I hope that, together, they can agree the
necessary political arrangements to allow the entire
population of Darfur to take part in the elections. That
will also offer them the opportunity to resolve, through
dialogue, the questions of political representation and
democratic good governance. Voting by the whole of
Darfur's population in calm, free and fair elections
constitutes the legitimate and acceptable means for the
selection of its local and national political leaders.

The approach of the joint African Union-United
Nations Mediation and of our partner, Minister
Al-Mahmoud of Qatar, is adapted to the realities of
African countries facing crises. It is also inspired by
the values and traditional approach to conflict
resolution in Africa, which are based upon the mutual
confidence and respect of the parties. A participative
and inclusive approach is the best way to establish
lasting peace in Darfur. The Mediation is therefore
involving representatives of all communities and
women's groups, young people and internally displaced
persons alongside the belligerents,

The first civil society forum, held in Doha, was
an important success. I must thank the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan, as well as local
administrative authorities in Darfur, for their
facilitation of the forum, in collaboration with
UNAMID. The popular representatives of Darfur were
able to assemble and freely discuss solutions to the
cr1s1s.

In the coming days, alongside negotiations
between the belligerents, the Mediation will organize a
workshop with representatives of civil society and
armed movements. The aim will be to reinforce the
internal cohesion essential to the process. The
exclusion or marginalization of one of the actors by the
Mediation would otherwise certainly entail fratricidal
clashes inside Darfur. Such fighting would increase
insecurity and decrease stability across the whole
subregion. The process of building peace must not
exacerbate rivalries between the parties. Rather, it
should unite them and help seal social reconciliation.

The Council's support for inclusive peace talks
will play a decisive role in encouraging all the parties
to join to process in Doha. The Sudanese State and its
Administration are the lynchpin for the construction of
peace. The international community should support
them in the promotion of peace and democratic good
governance, as well as socio-economic development in
Darfur.

Among the challenges to the process are mistrust
arising from the trauma of war and growing political
rivalries, which are accentuated by the coming
elections. Despites those challenges, however, we have
hope that the principal actors in the crisis will come to
the negotiation table to agree the modalities for ending
the conflict. They need to agree the terms for peace,
justice, national reconciliation, human security and
economic and social progress in Darfur.

The refusal of some armed movements to take
part in political dialogue and the persistent divisions
between others should not be allowed to block the
establishment of peace in Darfur. That is why the
Mediation will, in the near future, submit to the
belligerent parties for approval the solutions emerging
through consensus from all of Darfur's communities.
With the genuine popular support of the inhabitants of
Darfur and the assistance of the international
community, it will be possible to make significant
progress towards durable social peace.

The Mediation recognizes the varying states of
readiness of the parties and will not sacrifice the
credibility or sustainability of the process. The
Mediation will make progress with those who are
ready, allowing time for those who are not. It will also
simultaneously pursue three tracks: building consensus
of opinion among civil society, organizing negotiations
between the movements and the Government, and
improving Chad-Sudan relations. It will advance as
quickly as possible along each track, which will
facilitate progress along the others.

I would like to finish by reiterating my
commitment and my determination to fulfil, to the best
of my ability, the mission that has been entrusted to
me. I will continue to work, with integrity and
impartiality, to improve the situation of the population
of Darfur and the whole of Sudan. The Mediation will
continue to advance, despite the complexity of the
crisis and all of the various obstacles in our path.

To succeed in this mission to bring peace, we
need now more than ever this Council's support to
reinforce the authority and credibility of the Mediation.
With the undivided backing of the Security Council
and the international community at large, and with the
engagement of the parties to the conflict, the
population of Darfur will hopefully soon be able to
find peace, reconciliation and socio-economic
progress.

