The President: I would like to welcome some
parliamentary colleagues from Ireland who are
attending this meeting. They are members of the
Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee: the
Chairman, Des O'Malley, members Michael
O'Kennedy, Jim O'Keefe, Michael D. Higgins, Ben
Briscoe and Liam Elward, and the Secretary of the
Committee, Liam Kniff. I am delighted that they are
able to join us today on this historic occasion for
Ireland.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2001/963)

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/200l/963.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, having considered
the report of the Secretary-General of ll October
2001 (S/200l/963) and having held a public
meeting on 19 October 2001 (S/PV.4392 and S/PV.4392 resumption l), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, consistent
with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and bearing in mind its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the outcome of the Arta peace conference, the
establishment of the Transitional National
Assembly and the Transitional National
Government. It encourages the Transitional
National Government to continue, in the spirit of

constructive dialogue, the process of engaging all
groups in the country, including in the north-
eastern and north-western areas, with a view to
preparing for the installation of permanent
governance arrangements through the democratic
process.

"The Security Council believes that the Arta
peace process continues to be the most viable
basis for peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia. It urges the Transitional National
Government, political and traditional leaders and
factions in Somalia to make every effort to
complete, without preconditions, the peace and
reconciliation process through dialogue and
involvement of all parties in a spirit of mutual
accommodation and tolerance. It calls on all
parties to refrain from actions that undermine the
Arta peace process. The Council emphasizes that
while the search for a national solution continues,
unwavering attention must be paid to achieving
local political settlements as well.

"The Security Council expresses its support
for the Transitional National Government's
ongoing efforts to enhance security in the
Mogadishu area and to make operational the
National Commission for Reconciliation and
Property Settlement, which should be
independent, as foreseen in the Transitional
National Charter. The Council emphasizes the
necessity for efforts against international
terrorism in accordance with resolution 1373
(2001) of 28 September 2001 and welcomes the
stated intention of the Transitional National
Government to take steps in this regard. The
Council urges the international community,
including through the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), to provide assistance to Somalia for
the implementation of the aforementioned
resolution.

"The Security Council calls on the
concerned States in the Horn of Africa to
contribute constructively to the peace efforts in
Somalia. It emphasizes that the situation in
Somalia and the objective of long-term regional
stability can most effectively be addressed if
neighbouring States play a positive role,
including in the process of rebuilding national
institutions in Somalia.

"The Security Council acknowledges
Djibouti's major contribution to the Arta peace
process and welcomes its continued role in this
regard. It encourages the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the
Organization of African Unity/African Union and
the League of Arab States to enhance their efforts
to promote peace in Somalia.

"The Security Council calls on all States
and other actors to comply scrupulously with the
arms embargo established by resolution 733
(1992) of 23 January 1992. The Council insists
that all States, in particular those of the region,
should not interfere in the internal affairs of
Somalia. Such interference could jeopardize the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council insists that the
territory of Somalia should not be used to
undermine stability in the subregion.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the attack of 13 October 2001 on a police station
in Mogadishu, in which a number of officers and
civilians were killed. It reiterates its
condemnation of the attack on 27 March 2001 on
the compound of Medecins sans frontieres in
Mogadishu and the subsequent abduction of
international personnel, and demands that those
responsible be brought to justice. The Council
notes that these attacks were launched at the same
time as the consideration of a possible United
Nations peace-building mission for Somalia.

"The Council emphasizes that no measure
of violence can alleviate the plight of the Somali
people or bring stability, peace or security to their
country. It calls for an immediate end to all acts
of violence in Somalia. Deliberate acts of
violence should not be allowed to prevent the
rehabilitation of Somalia's governing structures
and the restoration of the rule of law throughout
the country. In this context, the Council
condemns the leaders of those armed factions
who remain outside the peace process and
continue to be obstacles to peace and stability in
Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses concern
about the humanitarian situation in Somalia, in
particular in southern areas and in the Bay,

Bakool, Gedo and Hiran regions, due to the
expected food insecurity and lack of rainfall in
the October-December period. It draws attention
to the urgent need for international assistance,
inter alia, in covering food and water shortfalls,
thereby also combating potentially further
destabilizing stress migration and prevalence of
disease. Noting that problems in livestock exports
have also been a major influence in worsening the
economic and humanitarian situation, the Council
calls on all States and on all authorities within
Somalia to cooperate in efforts to allow the
resumption of such exports.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction that the United Nations, the Red
Cross movement and non-governmental
organizations continue to provide humanitarian
and development assistance to all areas of
Somalia. The Council calls upon all parties in
Somalia to respect fully the security and safety of
personnel of the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations, and to guarantee
their complete freedom of movement and access
throughout Somalia. The Council calls on
Member States to respond urgently and
generously to the United Nations Consolidated
Inter-Agency Appeal for 2001, for which only 16
per cent of the identified needs have been
financially provided thus far.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to take the following steps in
support of the peace process in Somalia:

(i) Dispatch a headquarters-led inter-
agency mission to carry out a
comprehensive assessment, based on the
existing general United Nations standards,
of the security situation in Somalia,
including in Mogadishu;

(ii) Prepare proposals for how the United
Nations may further assist in the
demobilization of militia members, and the
training of police personnel from the
Transitional National Government;

(iii) Invite donors to make contributions to

the trust fund for peace-building in Somalia,

to be put in place as proposed in the 19

December 2000 report of the Secretary-
General (S/2000/12ll), with a View to
facilitating targeted activities in line with
proposals developed pursuant to paragraph
(ii) above;

(iv) Consider the scope for adjustments, as
appropriate, to the mandate for the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia;
(v) Consult all concerned on finding
practical and constructive ways of achieving
the following objectives:

(a) promoting coherency of policy
approaches towards Somalia and
consolidating support for peace and
reconciliation in the country;

(b) facilitating exchange of
information; and

(c) finding ways and means of
drawing attention to Somalia's needs
related to national reconciliation and
development.

"The effort to achieve the objectives stated
in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above should
have a focus in the region and include close
interaction with IGAD and its Partners Forum
(IPF), the Organization of African Unity/African
Union, the League of Arab States and the
Security Council;

(Vi) Intensify, through urgent contacts with

donor countries and relevant non-

governmental organizations, the efforts for
humanitarian and development assistance in

Somalia; and

(vii) Submit reports, at least every four
months, on the situation in Somalia and the
efforts to promote the peace process,
including updates on the scope and
contingency planning for launching a peace-
building mission for Somalia. The next
report, due on 31 January 2002, should
provide an update on the activities
undertaken pursuant to paragraphs (i) to (vi)
above.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.

