Mr. Lowcock: Let me, like Martin, at the outset
again repeat the United Nations condemnation of
Saturday's attacks on Saudi Arabian oil facilities and
reiterate the Secretary-General's call of yesterday on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and prevent
any escalation.

On 29 August, as Martin just reminded us, the
Security Council issued a presidential statement on
Yemen (S/PRST/2019/9) e its fourth since 2015 and
the first since it adopted resolution 2451 (2018) last
December. In that statement, the Council advocated
for key humanitarian priorities, including, first,
respect for international humanitarian law; secondly,
unhindered humanitarian access; thirdly, a fully funded
aid operation; and, fourthly, support for Yemen's
struggling economy.

Many of those themes were also addressed in
resolution 2451 (2018) and, indeed, in nearly all the
Council's products since hostilities escalated in Yemen,
more than four years ago. We have also covered
those issues extensively in our monthly briefings to
the Council.

And yet, with few exceptions, we seem no closer
to the outcomes we all say we want. In some cases, we
have moved farther away. I would like to update the
Council now on the current situation on each issue.

First, let me turn to the issue of international
humanitarian law, which requires all parties to
respect civilians and civilian infrastructure and to
take constant care to spare them throughout military
operations. Since last month's briefing, we have seen
numerous incidents that have killed or injured civilians
or damaged civilian infrastructure.

Two weeks ago, air strikes hit a prison in Dhamar
governorate. In better times, this facility had been
a university i itself a sobering illustration of where
this war has taken Yemen. More than 100 people were
killed in the attack, making it one of the deadliest of
the conflict. What exactly happened in this incident
remains disputed.

The scale ofthe carnage in Dhamar is shocking. But
otherwise, this kind of attack is disturbingly common
and familiar. On Friday, three days ago, shelling by
Ansar Allah-affiliated forces in Al-Hudaydah killed
11 civilians, including seven children. The same day,
two children were killed in a separate shelling incident
in Taiz. There are many other similar examples. We see
a persistent pattern ofattacks in Yemen that kill or injure
civilians or damage critical civilian infrastructure.

A nationwide ceasefire, as I have long advocated,
would reduce people's exposure to harm right now. All
parties must uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law at all times. Part of this commitment
entails accountability for serious violations. In 2017
the Human Rights Council established the Independent
Group of Eminent Experts to examine possible
violations. They have just released a disturbing report,
and I hope that their mandate will again be extended.

Secondly, despite the Council's recent and
repeated calls for unimpeded humanitarian access, the
operating environment for aid agencies has perhaps
never been worse than it is right now. In June and
July, humanitarian agencies reported 300 incidents
that hindered humanitarian assistance, affecting
4.9 million people. Almost 90 per cent of incidents
were due to bureaucratic impediments and other kinds
of interference.

Most of those incidents were due to restrictions
imposed by Ansar Allah authorities. They include
obstacles to beneficiary registration, attempts to divert
aid and efforts to control the selection of implementing
partners. Humanitarian workers have been detained
at checkpoints and, in several cases, arbitrarily
arrested. Staff also face intimidation and harassment
at Sana'a airport.

The Ansar Allah authorities are now seeking
to introduce new regulations for international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that would
undermine humanitarian principles. A large number of
NGO projects in the north have been unable to start this
year, affecting some 4.3 million people.

I am also disappointed at the fact that the long-
planned assessment of the FSO SAFER oil tanker
has not taken place. Based on prior agreement from
the Ansar Allah authorities, we deployed the United
Nations assessment team and equipment to Djibouti
last month. The assessment should have started on
27 August. As the start date approached, Ansar Allah
authorities raised several objections, despite their
earlier agreement. We worked hard to overcome those
objections, but, when it became clear that progress was
highly unlikely, we just had to send the team home.

We remain eager to assist with the SAFER, within
the limits of technical feasibility and available funds.
But whether this work can proceed is up to Ansar
Allah. I have explained to the Council many times now
the risks posed by the tanker, and I implore Member
States to do all they can to allow us to address this issue
as quickly as possible. Our team can still deploy within
three weeks if allowed to do so.

In the south, the recent violence in Aden and other
areas illustrates how volatile the situation remains.
Millions of people in the south also need humanitarian
assistance, including help to prevent and treat cholera
or stave off extreme hunger. The services we provide
in the south are essential to save lives and reduce the
suffering there.

Recent clashes between the Government and
forces affiliated with the Southern Transitional
Council undermined this critical work, restricting
some operations for several days. Despite this, we have
done everything we can to keep operations on track.
Humanitarian staff remain in place and are not leaving.

But this volatility, if not addressed, will continue to
present a serious potential threat to aid operations in the
south. We are also concerned by ongoing Government
delays in approving NGO projects, which are currently
holding up relief programmes for an estimated
1.6 million people. We continue to see bottlenecks at
the Dhubab checkpoint, where coalition requirements
are slowing aid agencies' access to Government-held
areas along the west coast.

The third point is funding for the aid operation.
Despite all the access problems, we can reach people
and save lives if humanitarian agencies are adequately
financed. Let me repeat that: if funded, the aid operation
will help save millions of lives.

I havejust this morning received confirmation from

the Saudi authorities that they plan on 25 September to
transfer $500 million in a single payment to my Office
in discharge of the pledge they made for the Yemen
humanitarian response plan in February. I warmly
welcome this and look forward to the signing of the
agreements on 25 September alongside the transfer of
the funds that day.

The United Arab Emirates has also just allocated
$200 million to the response plan. This includes
$100 million for the World Food Programme and an
additional $100 million channelled through my Office
for other urgent priorities.

Until there is more money in the bank, we will not
be in a position to reopen vaccination programmes and
nutrition centres or to resume cholera-prevention work
or other activities that we have had in recent weeks
to close down. Other programmes targeting millions
of people will also remain at grave risk. So, again, I
welcome the developments I have just informed the
Council of.

The fourth point that the Council highlighted in its
29 August statement is Yemen's struggling economy.
This is an issue that requires more attention. Recent
indicators are alarming. The exchange rate is once more
depreciating and is now hovering atjust over 600 Yemeni
rial to the dollar - compared with, as the Council will
recall, 215 rial to the dollar before the crisis. We have
not seen the rate cross the 600-rial threshold since last
year, when uncontrolled depreciation took hold in the
country and prompted major hikes in food prices.

Because Yemen imports nearly everything, higher
exchange rates mean that millions more people are
unable to afford food and other essential goods. Last
year, the collapse of the currency was a primary driver
in pushing Yemen to the brink of widespread famine.

In the past, injections of foreign exchange have
helped to stabilize the exchange rate. Last year, such
support quickly brought the rate back from a peak
of 800 rial to about 400 rial. We need a predictable,
regular programme for those injections, which, I hope,
Yemen's partners will provide. I am encouraged by the
news last week that Saudi Arabia has released another
$90 million to the central bank from a $2 billion deposit
announced in January 2018.

I also remain concerned about the potential impact
of regulations of the new Government of Yemen on
commercial fuel imports, including Decree 49. We are
concerned that such measures could discourage critical
import flows despite the presence of an effective United
Nations inspection and monitoring mechanism to

facilitate them. The stricter enforcement of regulations
is already creating delays for commercial ships serving
Al-Hudaydah. As of today, the Government and the
coalition are blocking 10 vessels with commercial fuel
imports from entering Al-Hudaydah. Together, the
ships are carrying 163,000 metric tons of fuel. That is
more than an average month of fuel imports.

The impact on hundreds of thousands of families
is already being felt. People who are barely surviving
now will find it much harder to do so unless adequate
levels of commercial imports, including fuel, are able
to enter the country continuously through all ports. In
the wake of fuel shortages last April, the Government
introduced more flexible arrangements and shortages
eased. According to Government statements at the
time, that approach did not undermine the stated
purpose of the regulations. We therefore hope that the
Government will again take that route. We also call on
Ansar Allah to end interference in fuel markets, which
exacerbates shortages.

Beyond those humanitarian priorities, the presidential
statement mainly addressed the urgent need to get the
peace process back on track. We all agree that peace
is what Yemen needs more than anything, and Martin
Griffiths and his team have our full support as they
work with the parties to achieve that.

