Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Despite the very sad circumstances, I welcome the
Foreign Minister of Turkey to the Security Council this
afternoon and acknowledge the presence of the Deputy
Secretary-General. I would also like to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.

The United Kingdom deeply deplores the loss of
life during the interception of the Gaza flotilla this
morning. It is a matter of grave concern that Israeli
actions should end in such heavy and tragic loss of life.
My Government has been in regular contact with the
Israeli Government about these events throughout the
day.

The United Kingdom advised British nationals
against attempting to access Gaza in this way because
of the risks involved. But, at the same time, there is an
unambiguous need for Israel to act with restraint and in
line with its international obligations. Given the
number of casualties in this incident, Israel now bears a
responsibility to provide a full account of what
occurred, what efforts were made to minimize the loss
of life and why the death toll was so high. It will be
particularly important to establish whether enough was
done to prevent deaths and unnecessary injuries.

These events are clearly very serious, but we
cannot View them in isolation. They must be set against
the context of the intolerable and unsustainable
situation that prevails in Gaza. It is clearer than ever
that Israel's restrictions on access to Gaza must be
lifted, in line with resolution 1860 (2009). The current
closure is unacceptable and counterproductive. There
can be no more important international response to this
tragedy than to ensure an urgent and durable resolution
to the Gaza crisis. This will remain among the highest
international priorities of the new British Government.

The international community must meet its
responsibilities as well. The United Kingdom continues
to work to alleviate suffering in Gaza. We call on all
concerned to continue to assist with humanitarian and
reconstruction aid and economic development.
The events also highlight the need to find a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It is essential that proximity talks progress and
that the parties enter direct negotiations as soon as
possible.

We may be entering another period of anger and
instability in the region. We urge all sides to act with
transparency and restraint to make sure that this
incident leads to no further Violence and no further
deterioration of the situation in Gaza.

We call on the Israeli authorities first to provide a
full, timely and transparent account of the incident that
led to the loss of life and the subsequent actions taken,
including what measures are in hand to ensure an
impartial and comprehensive investigation and to
ensure that there is no further such loss of life.
Secondly, they should provide full information and
immediate consular access to all embassies whose
nationals are involved in that incident. Thirdly, Israeli
authorities should open the crossings to allow
unfettered access for aid to Gaza and to address the
serious concerns both about the deterioration in the
humanitarian and economic situation and about the
effect on a generation of young Palestinians. Israel
must allow the unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza,
consistent with resolution 1860 (2009).

Finally, we also urge Hamas and all parties to
comply with the call in resolution 1860 (2009) for
renewed and urgent efforts to achieve a comprehensive
peace based on the vision of a region where two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace, with secure and recognized borders.

