The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for preparing the
ninth report to the Security Council and for her briefing

on the work of her Office in relation to its ongoing
efforts to ensure accountability for serious international
crimes in Libya.

Lithuania is concerned that since the last time
the Prosecutor briefed the Council (S/PV.7306), the
security situation in Libya has sharply deteriorated.
Indiscriminate attacks in heavily populated areas, the
abduction of civilians, torture, unlawful killings and
arbitrary executions with mass beheadings testify that
violations of international humanitarian law and abuses
of human rights continue to be committed in Libya.
The growing impact of terrorist groups in Libya,
particularly those affiliated with Daesh, is terrifying.
Alleged executions by those groups, including the mass
beheading of 21 Egyptians in February and dozens of
Ethiopian and some Eritrean nationals in April, may
constitute crimes against humanity and war crimes
under the Rome Statute. Such an environment clearly
cannot be conducive to ensuring accountability in the
country.

Especially worrisome are the growing threats
to human rights defenders, media workers and
journalists. Last year, eastern Libya was among the
five most dangerous areas for journalists worldwide;
97 journalists were attacked, 29 kidnapped and four
killed. We encourage the Prosecutor and her Office to
closely monitor that situation, as some of those crimes
could fall within the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court.

Lithuania notes with concern the slow progress that
has been made on the issue of detainees in Libya. The
Government of Libya has to redouble its efforts to put
an end to that situation, release the detainees against
whom there is no evidence, and refer cases where there
is evidence to the national courts, in accordance with
national legislation.

Lithuania thanks the Prosecutor for her update
on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. We continue to urge Libya to
uphold its clear legal obligation and surrender Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the ICC. We
are aware that national proceedings against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi resumed last fall; however, Libya
should ensure that that trial does not undermine its
responsibility and obligation to cooperate with the
Court.

Despite the fact that Libya still faces numerous
challenges in the area of strengthening rule-of-
law institutions, a constructive dialogue continues
between the Offices of the ICC Prosecutor and the
Libyan Prosecutor General on further implementation
of the memorandum of understanding. International
cooperation is essential to achieving a genuine peace in
Libya, building a strong and effective judicial system
and ensuring respect for its citizens' human rights.
We support the creation of a contact group on justice,
as suggested by the Prosecutor, and believe that such
a group could provide particular support in fighting
impunity at the national level.

Allow me to conclude by expressing our strong
support for the ICC and the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor, and to reiterate that the United Nations has
to ensure that adequate resources are made available for
the investigation of the situations referred to the Court
by the Security Council. The fight against impunity
is not an obligation exclusive to the States parties
to the Rome Statute; it is the obligation of the entire
international community. Therefore, the commitment
to provide the Court with the necessary recourses has
to be fulfilled.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

