Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for presenting the report on the work of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) (S/2011/32). We welcome the Prime Minister
of the country, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, and we listened
attentively to his assessments.

I can say straight away that Russia is satisfied
with the stabilization of the military and political
situation in Timor-Leste and with the progress made in
key areas of its development. That is undoubtedly due
to the country's leadership and to the United Nations
Mission. The political forces in Timor-Leste have been
demonstrating a responsible approach and a
commitment to the process of national dialogue and
reconciliation based on democratic principles. That is
especially important in the context of the general
elections planned for 2012.

The stabilization of the situation has created the
necessary preconditions for tackling long-term
challenges. The Government has managed to achieve
economic growth, a decrease in the poverty level and
improvements in human development indicators. We
welcome the progress in handing over responsibilities
for law enforcement from United Nations peacekeepers
to the Timor-Leste police. We trust that process will be
concluded shortly. We agree with the Secretary-
General's proposal to refocus the efforts of the United
Nations Mission on providing assistance to the national
police and strengthening its potential. Given that, while
the State authorities are currently being established, the
socio-economic problems remain acute, the progress
that has been made requires further and stronger
assistance from the international community. In that
regard we support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the
Mission for a year.

We approve the plan to decrease the police
component of the Mission as the situation in the
country improves, and in accordance with the wishes
of the Government. The Mission should be prepared to
provide assistance in conducting the elections. We have
taken note of the information on the start of
discussions with the leadership of Timor-Leste on the
parameters of future work for the United Nations
Mission and the modalities for the United Nations
presence.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and to all the staff of the Mission,
which include Russian civilian police officers, for their
professional work.

