Mr. Rosati (Poland): Let me congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. As this turbulent month is
coming to an end, I wish to thank you for the efforts you
have made to ensure the efficient work of the Council.

The Polish delegation is gravely concerned about the
escalation of tensions in Palestine. The outbreak of violence
and continuing open confrontation may jeopardize the
results of the peace efforts already achieved, destabilize the
situation in the whole region and endanger the continuation
of the Middle East peace process.

Our concern has been aroused even more by a visible
gradual aggravation of the crisis, which appears to be
steadily growing worse and more dangerous.

We deeply regret the loss of lives and suffering
resulting from the recent tragic developments in Jerusalem,
Ramallah, Bethlehem and other places.

The incidents that took place in Palestine have
particularly grave significance since they involved an open
exchange of fire between the Israeli security forces and the
police of the new Palestinian Authority - the first incident
of this kind since the beginning of the peace process.

It is therefore important that the parties to the conflict
take decisive and immediate steps to defuse the current
situation. One important step in that direction could be the
restoration of the status quo in Jerusalem's Old City. It is
equally important that the parties refrain from actions that
might lead to a further escalation of tensions.

We call upon the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian authorities to respect and implement the
agreements achieved, as well as to avoid creating
problems that are bound to impede the continuation of
constructive dialogue between them. This, in our view, is
the only way to lead to lasting peace in the Middle East.

We commend diplomatic efforts made by other
States, including the members of the Security Council, to
encourage both parties involved to desist from
perpetrating further acts of violence and to meet at the
negotiating table to seek a peaceful settlement of their
differences. We express our earnest hope that the parties
to the conflict will respond to those efforts in a positive
way.

Being among the countries that have been
consistently supporting the Middle East peace process
initiated in Oslo and Madrid, the Polish delegation is of
the view that this process constitutes an important factor
related to global international security and stability.

We deeply believe that the question of Palestine can
be resolved by peaceful means and confidence-building,
through the cooperation of both parties concerned.

