Mr. N obilo (Croatia): Allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Indonesia's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and to
assure you of my delegation's full cooperation on the
many important issues currently before the Council.

I should also like to extend my congratulations to
the delegation of Honduras on the exemplary way in
which it coordinated the work of the Council during the
month of July.

After four years of the utmost patience and restraint,
the Republic of Croatia accurately concluded that the least
costly solution for both Croatia and the international
community to end Croatia's agony and the international

 

community's humanitarian concerns in Bosnia and
Herzegovina would require a limited but credible use of
force that would end the siege of Bihac and restore order
in adjacent occupied territories of Croatia. This action was
successfully completed on Monday, in 84 hours.

I should just like to add in this regard that most of the
remaining pockets of resistance surrendered yesterday, with
the assistance and mediation of the United Nations
Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO).
The relevant authorities have commenced giving access to
the reintegrated areas to UNCRO, humanitarian
organizations and media, consistent with reasonable security
precautions.

My Government's security operations in the so-called
Krajina region of Croatia cannot be equated with earlier
actions by Belgrade and its proxies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia. Nevertheless, some are still
tempted to find such convenient, but legally and morally
corrupt, comparisons.

My Government's action was carried out mostly on its
internationally recognized territory and in part of the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the express request
of that Government. Establishing sovereignty and security
on its own territory and coming to the aid of a friendly
Government is fully consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and is a hallmark of international relations
and behaviour. The earlier actions by Belgrade and its
proxies were foreign aggression, pure and simple, against
a legally declared and, later, internationally recognized
Member State. This fact has been recognized in various
documents, and most precisely in General Assembly
resolution 49/43. Any such comparison, therefore, not only
breeds ill will in Croatia's public opinion but also calls into
question well-established practice of international law and
norms of international behaviour.

The operation against Knin, which lasted one day,
cannot be equated with the shelling and complete
destruction of Vukovar, which lasted four months, nor with
the siege of Sarajevo, which has gone on more than three
years. Who can seriously condemn Croatia's short and
professional action, which in its second day ended the siege
of Bihac, a siege that lasted more than three years and
would have continued for who knows how much longer
without our action?

The siege of Bihac was a major concern for the
Council. It has been resolved at minimal cost to the
international community and to the civilian population in
the area. Therefore, my delegation regrets that the Council
did not accept my delegation's amendment that would
have acknowledged that the siege of Bihac had been
successfully lifted.

This security action was undertaken with the utmost
regard for limiting collateral damage and protecting
civilians and United Nations personnel on the ground. The
extremely short duration of a security action of this
magnitude only confirms that we were very successful on
all of these counts.

The operation was not perfectly free of wrongdoing,
however. But, clearly, no one can expect an operation that
includes some 150,000 troops on both sides to be
completely free of collateral damage. Nevertheless, the
Croatian Government deeply regrets the loss of innocent
civilian lives and the loss of the lives of three UNCRO
peace-keepers. My delegation joins my Foreign Minister
in expressing our sincere condolences to the families of
the three soldiers from the Kingdom of Denmark and the
Czech Republic, which will for ever be affected by those
losses.

In this regard, I must emphasize that my
Government has accepted its part of the responsibility for
these and other casualties amongst the United Nations
personnel, and has already taken appropriate measures to
remedy the costs of individual indiscretions and criminal
acts against the peace-keepers. The same measures will be
taken against the individuals who have acted against
innocent civilians and their property. Along with these
remedies, my Government has already taken various
measures and programmes to normalize life in the
reintegrated areas and to limit the humanitarian
consequences of the Serb exodus from Croatia.

The exodus of ethnic Serbs from one region of
Croatia cannot be compared to the earlier Serbian ethnic
cleansing of non-Serbs from the same region, nor to the
present expulsion of non-Serbs from Srebrenica and Zepa.

The exodus of Serbs from this region of Croatia is
a tragedy, but not of Croatia's making. My Government
has made numerous appeals to the ethnic Serb citizens of
Croatia to stay and offered them amnesty, resources and
protection to do so, while their own leadership, it is
becoming increasingly evident, was ordering them to
leave. The former Croatian Serb leader Milan Babic
suggested as much in an interview with Radio Belgrade
on Tuesday. The self-proclaimed authorities in Knin may

 

have decided on mass evacuation in order to provoke
international outrage against Croatia and a military response
from Belgrade, Babic suggested.

The Council should also recall that immediately after
our security action began in the Western Slavonia region in
early May the former so-called president, Milan Martic, of
the so-called Krajina issued such evacuation orders and
asked for United Nations assistance in transporting all Serbs
from that region.

This exodus is a tragedy because of the Serbian policy
seeking a nation-exclusive State. These and many other
Serbs have been misled by their leaders, by their opinion-
makers and by their Church into believing that Serbs cannot
live with Croats or with Muslims or, for that matter, with
almost anyone else. This manufactured belief is the real
tragedy, and there is nothing that my Government or the
international community can do to change it and make them
stay at this time. Clearly, the Serbs from the so-called
Krajina are victims of their own leadership's folly.

Nevertheless, my Government - in the words of my
Prime Minister at the meeting with the local leaders from
the reintegrated territories on Tuesday -

"would repeat appeals to civilians who have fled to
return."

Many will eventually return, but only when they are able to
overcome the tragedy of their leaders and beliefs. Croatia
will welcome them. They and the international community
should know that twice as many Serbs live in Croatia as the
number who fled from the so-called Krajina region. Most
Serbs would not be manipulated by the Belgrade-inspired
propaganda. As a result, today they live in the homes that
their families lived in for centuries, enjoying peace and
paying the price of war, in the same way as all other
citizens of Croatia.

Croatia's security actions can be seen not as following
the logic of war, but as establishing a solid foundation for
a just peace. The new balance in the region will rejuvenate
the peace process in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We must recall that prior to Croatia's action the peace
process in the region was deadlocked for months. The
Bosnian Serb leadership had rejected the Contact Group
plan, and the Croatian Serb leadership refused to negotiate
at all. The latter's eleventh-hour transformation, despite
some claims to the contrary, was neither genuine nor real.
After four years of their stalling and refusal to accept a
single non-Serb displaced person back into their territories,
we should not have had any illusions about the intentions
of the Knin leaders.

Moreover, their eleventh-hour promises did not in
any way correspond to their actions on the ground. For
confirmation, we do not have to look any further than the
situation in Bihac. The offensive on Bihac stopped, and
the siege was ended, only when the Croatian Army and
police forces became engaged in the area.
My Government fully supports the new initiative by
the United States to find ways to restart the negotiating
process in a timely manner, and would support a new
conference along the lines suggested by the President of
the Russian Federation, His Excellency Mr. Boris Yeltsin,
if it were carefully prepared and if the President of the
Presidency of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Alija Izetbegovic, were also to attend.
The new negotiations should be based on the principle of
mutual recognition among all successor States of the
former Yugoslavia, on the Contact Group plan for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and on the linkage of the sanctions
regime against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to its role in the implementation of a
negotiated settlement for the Serbian minority in Croatia.

This linkage will be especially important in respect
of a successful resolution to the problem of the remaining
occupied territory in Croatia - the Vukovar region, or
the former Sector East. My Government has no present
military plans for this region and will invest all possible
resources to resolve the problem peacefully. The Belgrade
occupation of this territory of Croatia could not be more
evident, and any premature easing of the sanctions regime
without resolving this problem first may leave my
Government with no other option than a military one.

My Government will also look to UNCRO to assist
Croatia in resolving the problem of the Vukovar region
peacefully. UNCRO's implementation of its mandate,
which also calls for control of the international borders of
Croatia that are not under control of the Croatian
Government, will go a long way to achieving this critical
objective of the peace process. As UNCRO redefines its
role in the reintegrated areas of Croatia, my Government
would welcome a redeployment of some of its excess
resources to the international border in the Vukovar
region.

