Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
having organized today's briefing. I am also grateful
to Ms. Margaret Chan, Mr. Nabarro and other speakers
for the updated information of the situation regarding
the Ebola virus.

The decision of the Secretary-General on the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response on July 31 is clear evidence of
the real progress achieved in countering the epidemic.

At the same time, although there has been a
significant improvement in the situation in Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, which have been affected by
Ebola, the international community must continue to
take active measures to prevent similar events in future.
As long as there is even a single case of infection, the
threat of the spread of the virus remains real.

At this juncture, a key role in achieving and
maintaining a sustainable zero indicator of infection
will be played by the expert capacity and coordinating
activities of the World Health Organization (WHO).

The Russian Federation continues to make a
significant contribution to international efforts
to eradicate Ebola, including providing bilateral
assistance to the aforementioned States of West Africa,
strengthening international response mechanisms
for emergency public-health and epidemiological
situations, enhancing national readiness on preventing
the transboundary spread of the virus, and carrying out
scientific research to devise new means of diagnosis
and prevention. Russia has allocated $20 million to the
budgets ofWHO, UNICEF, the World Food Programme,
the International Civil Defence Organization, the World
Bank and the Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. The total Russian contribution has exceeded
$60 million.

Since August 2014 a Russian mobile laboratory has
been working in Guinea, on the basis of which Russian
experts are providing practical and advisory assistance
to the Guinean authorities. In November 2014, Russia
transferred to Guinea a 20-bed field hospital. In January
2015, in the city of Kindiya, Russian private-sector
contributions helped contribute to the building of a
permanent hospital with 65 beds for the treatment of

infectious diseases. Russia also is actively working on
creating a vaccine against Ebola.

In the context of the development of Russian-
Guinean cooperation in the area of combating infectious
diseases, a decision to provide financing of$ll.7 million
over three years has been taken in the framework of a
joint scientific research programme aimed at training
staff and providing material and technical support for
the infrastructure of Guinea.

We intend to continue to cooperate fully with our
African partners in ensuring the permanent eradication
of the virus and overcoming its negative consequences.

