Mr. Apparicio da Silva (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, on behalf of the Argentine
delegation, I should like sincerely to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We would like also to
congratulate the Chinese delegation for the excellent
manner in which it guided the Security Council's work
during the month of April.

Mr. President, allow me to begin by
congratulating you for having taken the initiative to
hold an open meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste.
Argentina is particularly grateful for the detailed
presentation on the current situation in Timor-Leste
given by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.

The Argentine delegation also wishes to
acknowledge the presence of the Senior Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, at this meeting, which demonstrates the
Timorese Government's acknowledgement of the
invaluable support provided by the Council to Timor-
Leste in recent years. We wish to reiterate Mr. Ramos-
Horta's message to the effect that the Council should
not forget the Timorese people during the historic
times they are living through today. Argentina, through
Mr. Ramos-Horta, conveys its recognition to the brave
and steadfast people of Timor-Leste.

Minister Ramos-Horta's presentation provided us
with information that will help the Council better to
understand the current situation in Timor-Leste and
enhance its decision-making process with respect to the
future of the United Nations presence in the country.

The mandate of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) is nearing its end, and the
report of the Special Representative contains a clear
message: peace and democracy have not yet been
consolidated in Timor-Leste, and, under those
circumstances, it is fundamental to secure a continued
United Nations presence in the country through the
establishment of an integrated office.
The elections to be held in 2007 will represent a
new phase for Timor-Leste. They will be the first
elections to be held after the country gained its
independence and will require broad-based
international support. We wish to underline the
importance of the elections being held before 20 May
2007. We must not forget that disturbances might occur
that could negatively affect the peacebuilding process
and the construction of a democratic State in Timor-
Leste. Given these circumstances, it is indispensable
that we support the country in addressing possible
attempts at destabilization during the election period.

We must recognize that security remains
precarious in Timor-Leste. The threat posed by militias
has not yet been totally eliminated. The unrest within
the armed forces and recent violent protests indicate
that the progress achieved to date, which has been
considerable, has not resolved the country's
difficulties.

The establishment of the security sector requires
further support by the United Nations, supplementing
the major bilateral projects under way. In that respect,
we would like to ask Minister Ramos-Horta and Mr.
Hasegawa to provide us with further information on the
root causes of the recent incidents in Dili.

Regarding the border with West Timor, we hope
that Timor-Leste and Indonesia can soon achieve a
border management agreement. We welcome the good
relations between the two countries in recent years,
which prove that it will not be difficult to resolve
outstanding issues. We believe that the continued
presence of United Nations liaison officers is
important, especially considering that border
demarcation is not complete and that there is no formal
agreement on border management. In that context, it is
also necessary to better train the Timor-Leste Border
Patrol Unit. We are sure that a United Nations mission
including a police adviser component will contribute to
strengthening Timorese police institutions.

Another challenge that is no less important to
building peace and democracy in Timor-Leste relates
to strengthening the legal system. As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/251) indicates, there is still
a need to strengthen the institutions in this field. In
Timor-Leste, the police and the legal system are at a
nascent stage and complementary, and they must
continue receiving United Nations support. The
creation of effective institutions and mechanisms
geared towards the promotion and protection of human
rights is something else to which Argentine attaches
particular importance. My country looks forward to the
report on justice and reconciliation that the Secretary-
General is preparing in line with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1599 (2005). We reiterate our view that
reconciliation must not be attained at the cost of
justice.

A third group of challenges is the fight against
poverty and the promotion of development. Here, the
support of the international community will continue to
be essential. Specifically, it will be fundamental to
promote economic growth in Timor-Leste at levels
making it possible to effectively fight poverty and
ensure better distribution of the benefits of
development between the country's urban and rural
populations.

With scarce resources, Timor-Leste has in recent
years achieved impressive progress in the fields of
education and health. But 41 per cent of the population
still lives below the poverty line. Here, we welcome
the fact that the Timor Government's budget will grow
75.5 per cent in the fiscal year 2006-2007 and that
nearly all public expenditure will be allocated to
infrastructure projects, such as the construction of
schools, health centres and roads.

Argentina recognizes the considerable progress
that Timor-Leste has made since the previous report of
the Secretary-General. The Timorese people continue
on their path towards peace and democracy. However,
the challenges to such process are still immense, and
we therefore believe that the Security Council should
support the establishment of a new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste by adopting a resolution on the
basis of the report before it.

The new United Nations presence should include
elements such as those requested by the Timorese
Government in several communications to the
Secretary General: electoral assistance, civilian
advisers, police training and liaison officers for the
borders and to assist in security matters. Also to be
considered are elements related to capacity-building
and national mechanisms for the promotion and
protection of human rights as well as the promotion of
justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste. It could also
provide support for development initiatives and
coordinate the various bilateral cooperation projects.

In that context, we support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General on the creation of an
integrated United Nations office. We believe that with
35 police and civilian advisers - UNOTIL has 75 -
and 10 liaison officers, of which there are currently 15
in the framework of UNOTIL, such an office could
meet at least the minimum needs indicated by the
Timor authorities and pointed out by Mr. Hasegawa.

To conclude, we believe that, one year away from
the 2007 elections and as a culmination of the Security
Council's support and involvement over the years, a
new United Nations mission would focus international
attention on peacebuilding in Timor-Leste, on building
democracy and on promoting sustainable development.

