Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Indonesian presidency for convening
this open debate on the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which is also a priority for
our country. We especially welcome your presence,
Madam President, as well as that of other high-level
participants. We are also grateful for the important
briefings by the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of
the Center for Civilians in Conflict.

We would like to recall that we are marking the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption the Geneva
Conventions, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relative to the protection of civilians.

Peru is a country committed to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We are party to the major international instruments in
both areas, and our national legislation has accordingly
incorporated, developed and implemented them within
our domestic legislation. We consider the Security
Council's responsibility to protect civilians under
international humanitarian law a high priority. The
Council has a moral and legal obligation to act in
concert to end the suffering of millions of people in
countries such as Yemen, Syria, Libya and Palestine,
among others.

In that connection, we emphasize that 119
States, including Peru and nine other members of the
Council, have subscribed to the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group on
mass atrocity crimes, which commits us to acting in a
timely and decisive manner to prevent and end atrocity
crimes. We believe that the principle of the sovereignty
of every State implies their primary responsibility to
protect their peoples, and that in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, when national authorities
fail to protect their populations the international
community must assume that responsibility under
international law.

In that regard, Peru adheres to the concept of
responsibility to protect. We also highlight that
several peacekeeping operations deployed through a
Council resolution have mandates to protect civilians,
including against acts by the regular army of their
own Government.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
emphasizes the urgent need to address the harmful
impact caused by the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas, which have not only claimed millions
of lives but also caused damage to infrastructure and
essential services, giving rise to forced displacement
and the economic exclusion of victims. That means
improving compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights law in order to ensure the
protection of civilians, including in attacks on schools
and medical facilities during armed conflicts. In
addition, due care and rehabilitation of victims are
fundamental to any sustainable peacebuilding process,
in particular given the psychological impacts of
conflicts on civilians, especially the most vulnerable.

We believe in the importance of taking into account
the needs and concerns of affected communities in order
to improve their protection. We would like to highlight
the role that young people and women are called upon
to play in conflict prevention and resolution, justice
and reconciliation. Ensuring accountability for atrocity
crimes is equally critical. We therefore support the work
of international investigative mechanisms to address
atrocity crimes, such as that established in the case
of Da'esh. We also believe that the universalization of
international criminal jurisdiction will make it possible
to prevent the suffering of civilians in conflicts
more effectively.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
humanitarian agencies and workers, as well as the Blue
Helmets, involved in protecting civilians in conflict
areas under the most difficult conditions, risking their
lives to save others.

