I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their reports, as well as for their briefings today. Despite the challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic, my delegation is reassured of their commitment and efforts to adapt and to ensure the continued implementation of their respective mandates. I will focus on three issues today. First, I will address the operational aspect of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are pleased to note the Mechanism's continued efforts, under the leadership of Judge Agius, to further enhance the efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of its operations. It is crucially important for the Mechanism to continue making headway in line with the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and resolution 2529 (2020). We are also encouraged by the Mechanism's efforts during this challenging time to resume its functionality, including with regard to in-court activities and its responsibility to supervise accused, detained and convicted persons. Secondly, I will turn to the progress in Mechanism's activities. Indonesia appreciates the progress that the Mechanism has achieved, thanks to the dedication of its President, judges, Prosecutor and all staff members in carrying out its essential residual functions while mitigating the impact of the pandemic. We are pleased to note that the Mechanism was able to restart its core judicial activity, which was postponed due to the pandemic, at The Hague as well as at the Arusha Branch. We look forward to its further achievements despite these unprecedented and difficult times. The pandemic shall not hamper the Mechanism's priority to conclude its mandate in a timely and efficient manner. That brings me to my final point, which concerns the cooperation of States. We recall that States are required to cooperate with the Mechanism, including by complying with orders and requests for assistance in relation to cases before it. We note the ongoing efforts of the Prosecutor to locate and arrest the six fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who remain at large. Therefore, we would like to call on relevant States to intensify cooperation with, and render assistance to, the Mechanism, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. Felicien Kabuga's arrest was a success story of cooperation between the Mechanism and Member States that needs to be replicated. We need to make sure that no one can escape justice and, at the same time, render justice to the victims and survivors. As this is our very last intervention on this file, I would like to express our delegation's sincere appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and his team for their cooperation and excellent work. We also extend our best wishes to the Chair of the Council's Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, Ambassador Dinh Quy Dang, as well as his hard-working team, in steering the Group as it moves forward. I would like to reaffirm Indonesia's commitment to strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice by supporting the work of the Mechanism in order to put an end to impunity and ensure accountability.
