Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his remarks. We
appreciate the briefing given by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, and commend him for the important role that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is playing in Kosovo.

Brazil has a firm and long-standing commitment
to the peaceful settlement of disputes. In 1999, Brazil
was an elected member of the Security Council and
voted in favour of resolution 1244 (1999). It was
intended to provide a legal framework for a negotiated
solution to the dispute on the status of Kosovo. The
need to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was also
expressly recognized. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains
in force and therefore continues to be the key
parameter guiding the United Nations presence in
Kosovo.

That position was expressed by Brazil in the
public hearings conducted at the International Court of
Justice in December 2009 as part of the proceedings
related to the advisory opinion on the unilateral
declaration of independence by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.

As the Security Council continues to be seized of
the matter, the opinion of the Court, coming possibly
later this year, will be a crucial element to bear in
mind. Until that time, UNMIK should continue to play
its constructive role in promoting engagement between
Pristina and Belgrade. We expect both parties to
cooperate fully with the Mission. Success in this area
will benefit all.

As stressed by the Secretary-General, the overall
security situation in Kosovo remains relatively calm.
This is due to the restraint shown by the parties and the
population, which is to be commended. Stability has
also been further sustained by the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. It
should continue to operate under the overall authority
and within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations, thereby preserving the integrity of resolution
1244 (1999).

Also positive are the signs of a possible
improvement in the cooperation between UNMIK and
Kosovo authorities. It is, however, worrisome that
municipal elections not called for by UNMIK were
held in Kosovo on 15 November. Under resolution
1244 (1999), the holding of elections is one the main
responsibilities of the international civil presence in
Kosovo. In the same vein, by-elections were held by
Serbia in the northernmost municipality of Kosovo on
29 November. UNMIK did not participate in the
preparation for these elections, which were not called
for by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

We share the Secretary-General's disappointment
at the lack of concrete progress in the implementation
of practical arrangements regarding the protection of
cultural heritage. Progress on this issue would be
relevant as a much-needed gesture of goodwill, which,
in turn, could set a positive example to follow in more
politically sensitive negotiations.

We note the concern express by President Tadie at
possible unilateral action in northern Kosovo.

There is no acceptable alternative to dialogue and
negotiation when differences arise. We urge the parties
to resume efforts to reach an agreed solution.
Meanwhile, it is their duty to ensure that the political
and security situation on the ground remains stable and
that every minority community is fully protected from
threats or acts of intimidation and harassment.

