Mr. Pahad (South Africa): I, too, want to express
our gratitude for the contributions made by many of the
members of the Security Council. Clearly there is some
concern about aspects of the security situation and the
non-movement in the political process. Cognizant of
that, we believe that, in the context of what has

happened in the last few months, there has been good
progress in certain area of which we must not lose
sight.

We believe that the leaders generally have at least
committed themselves to sharing a common interest -
to ensuring that each of them has the possibility of
contributing to the achievement of the common and
shared goal of returning C6te d'Ivoire to normality. We
think that all of them - whether at Linas-Marcoussis,
at Accra, or subsequently through the mediation - in
all the consultations have agreed on the most essential
elements of the comprehensive settlement that we are
all seeking. They have all repudiated war and violent
conflict as options for solving the Ivorian crisis. All
have agreed that the task of ending this crisis is
extremely urgent given its negative impact on the
Ivorian population. All of them accept the fact that the
solution to the Ivorian crisis is in the immediate
interest of the West African region as a whole.
There is no debate about the unity and territorial
integrity of Cote d'Ivoire. There is no debate about
respecting the existing agreed framework for the
solution to the Ivorian crisis, as provided for in the
Linas-Marcoussis and the Accra II and III Agreements.
There might interpretations of its elements, but there is
no general debate about working within that
framework.

There is also general agreement, we believe, that
we must resolve the nationality question, which lies at
the heart of the Ivorian crisis. All elements of that
question must be addressed, including the citizenship
rights of many ordinary people and the issue of
eligibility for the post of President of the Republic.
The question is not whether that is accepted; the
question is, what is the process to be followed to
ensure that article 35 comes into force?

I believe it has also been agreed in principle -
despite the existing difficulties - that the approved
2005 presidential elections must take place as
scheduled, with all the people of a united Cote d'Ivoire
participating and all those wishing to run for office
being allowed to run. And, finally, there has been an
agreement to implement in December 2005 the road
map presented by the mediation and supported by the
rest of the international community.

We have agreed on all those fundamental issues.
The question is, notwithstanding the problems, will we
now be able to ensure that those previous agreements
in principle are implemented much faster? There has
been movement forward, despite some of the
outstanding problems that have been referred to, and
on that basis we believe it is the responsibility of the
Ivorian leaders to take their leadership seriously, to use
the opportunity that still exists to really engage in
dialogue with one another, to talk among themselves,
within the framework of the mediation and - in the
interests of the Ivorian people, West Africa and Africa
as a whole - to take this opportunity to move forward
decisively and break any logjams that have prevented
sufficient progress on the three major issues that have
been identified: article 35, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and the
elections.

Despite the difficulties, we are confident that
there is a commitment to move forward if we can just
find the right framework within which movement can
take place. We look forward to the 3 April meeting, at
which, we hope that for the first time the Ivorian
leadership - sitting together, not having separate
meetings - can assess what they have all agreed to
and then agree together to make a decisive leap
forward in order to ensure that we create the conditions
for a cote d'Ivoire that is at peace with itself, that is
prosperous and that becomes the engine of growth for
the whole region. We are totally convinced that the
Ivorian people expect that. It is in the interests of the
Ivorians generally that the leadership take up the
challenge that the Ivorians expect them to take up and
move decisively so that we can achieve a breakthrough
in the coming period.

As we have indicated in our report, we want to
interact much more closely with the AU. We send
regular reports to the Chairman of the AU on progress
made. We would like to report back to the Security
Council after reporting to the AU Chairman on the
outcomes of the meeting. Let us try together to
determine what we want to get moving after 3 April so
that the next time we meet, we will be able to say that,
despite the problems, we have made a decisive impact
in trying to find solutions to what has been bedevilling
the West African region for so long.

