Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the
outset to thank the United Kingdom for having taken
the initiative to convene an open debate of the Security
Council on the issue of security, development and the
root causes of conflict. There can be no doubt that this
is a key issue that must be considered by many United
Nations bodies, commensurate with their mandate and
area of expertise.

The link between security and development
and understanding the root causes of conflict is
key to addressing certain development issues at the
international level, in particular security threats that
are played out in military confrontations or strike at
the heart of capital cities, as we saw recently in the
senseless terrorist attacks on Baghdad, Beirut and
Paris. We also face challenges resulting from poverty,
famine and lack ofhealth-care services, as well as those
relating to sustainable development. We must therefore
consider all of these factors when devising strategies to
address existing issues.

I should like to touch on several points that we
deem key to understanding the link between security
and development.

First, the causes of conflict include poverty,
unemployment, economic and social inequality, hatred,
exclusion, lack of education or access thereto, and
challenges linked to climate change. All of these have
been exacerbated by the global economic and financial
crisis and the lack of financial resources to deliver on
sustainable development, particularly through official
development assistance. We must therefore adopt a
strategy of preventive diplomacy in order to tackle
the root causes of conflict and prevent their spread or
escalation. Priority must be accorded to prevention in
order to bring about sustainable development for all
States and all levels of society, eliminate poverty and
exclusion, and promote democracy, the rule of law and
gender equality.

Secondly, the spread of terrorism has exacerbated
the situation and complicated the picture. Terrorism
represents a threat to international peace and security, as
well as to sustainable development. Therefore, fighting
terrorism is one of the most important elements in the
context of the link between security and development.

Thirdly, we need to identify the causes of conflict,
which are very complex. Sometimes they are clear, such
as the ones we have cited, but others must be further
investigated. Here I am thinking in particular of those
related to the fact that the international community
has not discharged its duty to address decades-long
conflicts that give rise to continuing hatred and deprive
peoples of justice and development opportunities. Like
cancer cells, they can have only negative effects, and
here I am thinking of the Palestinian question.

Fourthly, national responsibility is most important
in terms of conflict prevention and the protection of
civilians, in keeping with international instruments
and Security Council resolutions. It is also important
to respect the priorities and requirements set out by
national authorities, in line with national sovereignty,
so as to bring about social stability and peace. That
requires support for regional initiatives, in particular
the New Partnership for Africa's Development.

Fifthly, dealing with security and development
issues and the root causes of conflict is a complex
undertaking that should involve multiple United
Nations bodies. We must not, however, allow any
United Nations organs to encroach on the mandates of
others. We must not burden the Security Council with
issues such as sustainable development, which does not
fall under its mandate, in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations. We must not allow the work of the
Security Council to overlap with that of other bodies.

