Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
I thank the four briefers for their introductory remarks,
and the Senegalese presidency of the Security Council
for convening this debate.

France fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the Ambassador and Head of the Delegation
of the European Union. I have four points to make.

First, the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union on issues of peace and security
is an indisputable and significant fact. African
organizations, acting within the African Peace and
Security Architecture, are increasingly assuming their
responsibilities in crisis management on the African
continent. At the same time, as a natural consequence,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union becomes a necessity in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
development, which will only continue, will strongly
mark the term of the incoming Secretary-General.

Secondly, France acknowledges, encourages and
takes an active part in this development. On a bilateral
basis, France is one of the primary partners in capacity-
building for peace in Africa. Our partnerships foresee
the training of 20,000 African soldiers by 2020. This is
a major goal that we are committed to achieving.

France welcomes the role played by African Union
and African regional organizations, both at the political
level, such as the role that the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development plays in South Sudan and
that of the Economic Community of Central African

States in the Central African Republic, as well as at the
military level, in the framework of complementarity
with United Nations peacekeeping operations - for
example, as illustrated in the transition from the African-
led International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and in the transition from the African-
led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic - as well as, independently with the
Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram.

With regard to the Security Council, France
believes that taking into account the views of regional
organizations should become automatic and can lead
the way to building consensus when there is a strong
and consensus-based position of the African Union or a
subregional organization.

Thirdly, this partnership should be strengthened in
order to address at least four challenges, as called for in
the recent report (S/2016/780) of the Secretary-General
and in Mr. Kaberuka's report endorsed in July during
the African Union Summit in Kigali.

The first challenge is that we need more
collaboration and coordination. The United Nations
and regional organizations act both simultaneously and
consecutively with different modalities in response to
the same crises. The regional dimension is unavoidable
when the United Nations takes action after an African
Union operation or in support of the implementation of
a peace agreement negotiated in the region. All of those
dimensions are tied together.

The second challenge is the need to identify
which situations would benefit more from the added
value of which organization. The United Nations does
a great deal, but it cannot, and does not know how
to, do everything. In certain situations, a regional
organization is perhaps better equipped to respond to
the specific circumstances on the ground. The African
Union Mission in Somalia, for example, comes to mind,
where the African Union brings genuine added value
as compared with the capacities of the United Nations.

The third challenge is to ensure the necessary
financial predictability and sustainability for African
peace operations. That is the message of the Kaberuka
report, presented to the Council in September by the
African Union, which France welcomes. It includes
proposals that should be seriously considered both by
the African Union and its member States - which
should finance 25 per cent of the cost of African
operations - and by the United Nations - which
should make a mandatory 75 per cent contribution to
the cost of the operations.

The fourth challenge is to ensure that the funding
structure is implemented within a robust, comprehensive
partnership. Financing African peace operations
through mandatory United Nations contributions must
go hand in hand with the joint planning and monitoring
capabilities of the Security Council and the African
Union, which entails bolstering and even creating a
mechanism that does not yet exist. We must also attach
the greatest importance to respecting human rights, as
operations mandated, supported and financed by the
Security Council must respect the highest human rights
standards and, more generally, must pay particular
attention to the conduct of the operations. Finally, we
must identify precisely what type of operations lend
themselves to such a mechanism and what type of
concrete support the United Nations could provide.

All of those challenges have been clearly identified
in the three underlying reports for this debate, the
Kaberuka report and the two Secretary-General reports
from September. They are also taken up in the concept
note (S/2016/966, annex) circulated by the delegation of
Senegal for this meeting, as well as in the draft resolution
contained in document S/20l6/977, which will be put to
the vote at the end of the debate. The draft resolution
fully spells out the framework of the partnership and
duly acknowledges the fact that, although the United
Nations-African Union partnership on peace and
security has a financial component, it is not entirely
financial. Moreover, the draft text recognizes that there
is much work yet to be done and calls on the Secretary-
General and the African Union for their guidance in
supplementary and complementary work. France fully
supports that approach, and we thank Senegal and the
United States for having proposed it.

