Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important follow-up meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I also thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing and for his
report (S/2014/3l4, annex).

Bosnia and Herzegovina emerged as a result of one
of the deadliest European crises since the fall of the
Berlin Wall. In spite ofthe adoption, in December 1995,
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, whose
overall goal was to consolidate peace and establish
a tripartite governing system in order to preserve
territorial integrity, challenges continue to persist all
these years later. Bosnia and Herzegovina finds itself in
a situation in which the growing popular frustration and
disatisfaction, the rise of nationalism, the legislative
stalement at the federal and local levels, the challenges
in holding of general elections in October and the
delay in achieving objectives and conditions set by
the the Office of the High Representative threaten the
foundations of the nation State.

First, with regard to the demonstrations that began
in February in Tuzla, which then spread to Zenica,
Mostar, Sarajevo and elsewhere, we deplore the violent
turn of the protests and the resulting injuries and major
damage to property. We nevertheless commend and
welcome the protesters' initiative in setting up plenums
as vehicles for dialogue in which to air complaints,
thereby illustrating their capacity to organize and
their desire to engage for the public good. Owing to
the nature of their complaints - which called for
reducing the salaries and privileges of elected officials
and reviewing privatization and socio-economic
reforms - the plenums have come to serve as
genuine and responsible interlocutors when it comes
to development, and that in a country in which the
unemployment rate exceeds 40 per cent. That type of
participation assures the basis for democracy in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The country's leaders should take
advantage of those achievements and turn them into an
element of national consensus.

We believe that diversity is an a crucial aspect
in building the nation State. Acts of exclusion and
discrimination linked to the conflict in the Balkans are
supposed to be resolved through the Dayton Agreement.
We deplore the fact that the new situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is marked by major political differences.
We also deplore the secessionist and pro-independence
rhetoric, which poses a serious threat to the country's
unity and stability. We condemn such acts and call on
political actors to respect the territorial integrity of the
country.

Chad welcomes the planned holding of general
elections in October, in connection with which the
Parliament set up an inter-agency working group
in November 2013 to develop a law and prepare for
the elections in the country. We also commend the
efforts made by the federal Government to continue to
function regularly and to pursue its efforts in drafting
and adopting new laws in an unstable and fragile
institutional context. The inability of State institutions
to function normally owing to infighting saps the
willingness to address political, legal and economic
issues. We encourage the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to undertake economic reforms likely to
contribute effectively to addressing the social situation
in the country and fomenting good governance.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Office of the High Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge the international
community, and the Security Council, the European
Union and NATO in particular, to redouble their efforts
to provide Bosnia and Herzegovinca with the necessary
assistance to consolidate national unity and strengthen
its institutional capacity for the sake of peace and
stability.

