The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings this morning.

The recent developments on the security and
political fronts in Yemen are very worrying and
have exacerbated the situation and the stalemate in
the political process, which is the result of the clear
obstinacy of one of the parties to the conflict, the
Houthis, who have refused to engage with the United
Nations efforts to end the crisis or even to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The State of Kuwait reaffirms the fact that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
The only way to settle the conflict is through
dialogue and a political solution that must be based
on the three reference points agreed on - the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome document of the National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015), which
is one of the basic pillars for resolving the crisis
in Yemen.

Historically, Kuwait has worked since the 1970s
as a mediator to bring its brothers in Yemen closer
together. In 2016, Kuwait spent more than 100 days
hosting peace talks between the Yemeni parties under
the auspices of the United Nations, in an effort to
achieve a peaceful settlement to the conflict, based
on the three reference points that constituted a road
map. We made those efforts because we hope to see the
brotherly nation of Yemen enjoy stability and to prevent
bloodshed among its people. Everybody, including the
parties to the conflict, considered the peace talks that
took place in Kuwait a historic opportunity for our
brothers in Yemen to bring an end to the conflict.
There is another aspect of the crisis that should the
Security Council should focus on. We all know about
the Houthis' firing of ballistic missiles at our brother
country Saudi Arabia.

By 5 February, 95 missiles had already been
launched against Saudi Arabia. Kuwait condemns in
the strongest terms the launching of ballistic missiles
by the Houthis against Saudi Arabia, as well as their
alleged attacks on the United Arab Emirates. This is
a dangerous development that threatens regional peace
and security, challenges the will of the international
community and undermines efforts to reach the aspired
political solution to the crisis. We also affirm Kuwait's
full support for our brothers in Saudi Arabia and for all
the measures taken by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to safeguard its security and stability. In that context,
we underscore that the Security Council cannot accept
a non-State actor threatening a sovereign State by
launching missiles that endanger the stability and
security of the region. Those rocket attacks must be
condemned every time they occur.

The security of seaways is also important and we
cannot be complacent in dealing with them. A clear
message must be sent that attacking or threatening
to attack vessels or mining the Mandeb Strait and
the Red Sea is absolutely unacceptable. This must be
condemned as well.

At the humanitarian level, it is important for us to
do more to alleviate humanitarian conditions for the
people of Yemen. In Kuwait, we are well aware of that
humanitarian aspect. We participated in the donor's
conference held in Geneva in April 2017, where we
committed to providing approximately $100 million
in humanitarian assistance. Countries of the coalition
to restore legitimacy in Yemen are continuing to make
efforts to reduce the suffering ofthe Yemeni people. On
22 January, the coalition announced a comprehensive
plan of humanitarian operations in Yemen, which
was hailed by Secretary-General Guterres and Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock. The plan includes a
generous contribution from Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates amounting to $1 billion in
humanitarian aid, amounting to nearly one-third of
the entire 2018 United Nations appeal for assistance
in Yemen. We hope that the coalition will be able to
improve the humanitarian situation on the ground by
the end of 2018.

In conclusion, and since this is the last briefing
of Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, I wish to express
our gratitude for the work he and his team have done
over almost three years since he started working to
resolve the Yemeni crisis. In Kuwait, we have closely
witnessed the efforts he has made in the peace talks.
We hope to be able to work with our new Special Envoy,
Mr. Griffiths. We pledge our full support for him in
carrying out his duties.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

