Mr. Fowler (Canada): I jumped the gun on the United
Nations aircraft. It is coming now. That was finances.

"Voice: (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene) On the two United
Nations flights which were brought down in the
Huambo area we use the same type of missile,
and the person who brought them down is called
Gregorio, the one who operated the gun.

"Mr. Fowler: It was a gun or missile?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): It was a portable. It was not a
gun. It was off-shoulder.

"Mr. Fowler: Was it the men he commanded
who brought down the aircraft or was it he himself
who brought down the aircraft?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): He personally brought them
down.

"Mr. Fowler: Was he told to shoot down those
aeroplanes?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): What happened was that we
had instructions to bring down any type of aircraft
that was flying within reach of anti-aircraft guns.

"Mr. Fowler: Including United Nations
aircraft?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Everything that was an
aircraft, because Savimbi said that United Nations
aircraft was in the service of the Government.

"Mr. Fowler: So there is no doubt among
UNITA forces that the United Nations was a fair
target.

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Yes. Those were the
instructions we had. Savimbi gave instructions that
the soldiers should bury the remains of the aircraft
when the aircraft was brought down; in other words
they should make it impossible to see or revisit the
site. There was also the story of the black box. In
other words, they should make it impossible to
decipher what happened.
"Mr. Fowler: Were there any survivors from

the first flight?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into 
English at the scene): No, there were none.

"Mr. Fowler: What was the reaction when the
second United Nations flight was brought down?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into 
English at the scene): The modalities were the same.

"Mr. Fowler: Was there happiness?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into 
English at the scene): The people were not happy.

"Mr. Fowler: Why not?

 

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): The population had gone into a
trance, and they knew that once the United Nations
aircraft was brought down, then worse things would
follow.

"Mr. Fowler: Like what?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): The war would resume. In brief,
military action would follow.

"Mr. Fowler: And did that happen?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Sanctions are now taking effect
because UNITA is now encountering many
difficulties.

"Mr. Fowler: What kind of difficulties?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): The aircraft do not land
normally. Now they have to be pirate flights, and that
has not been easy. Most of the aircraft have to land at
night. When the weather was rainy, there were further
difficulties. So, Savimbi really came out to say that
the sanctions were biting.

"Mr. Fowler: Did you know what he meant
when he said that?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Yes. He said the sanctions were
biting because not all the equipment that UNITA had
bought was able to be transported to the country.
Savimbi had issued specific, categorical orders to
shoot down any United Nations aircraft. He was not
interested in whether they were just crossing Angolan
airspace or whether they were based here or what they
were doing. He gave express instructions to bring
down these aircraft. Five minutes after each plane was
shot down, Savimbi was informed. For all the aircraft
shot down in Huambo province, it was Savimbi who
gave the instructions and it was he who, after they
were shot down, gave orders to cover them up so as
not to leave any trace. If they found any traces of
human bodies, all that should be burnt and destroyed,
and even the bones should by buried very far away.
Those were Savimbi's orders.

"Mr. Fowler: When Savimbi was informed of
the shooting down of the first United Nations
aircraft, did you see his reaction?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): I talked to him.

"Mr. Fowler: And how did he react?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): He was happy, and he said
that this was a way of pressuring all those who were
working with the United Nations to quit.

"Mr. Fowler: And the reaction of your fellow
staff officers, did they share your reaction? What
happened to the individual who had fired the missile
to bring down the aircraft?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): He was promoted.

"Mr. Fowler: He was promoted fairly quickly?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Yes. In less than one week.

"Mr. Fowler: When the second United Nations
aircraft was shot down less than a week later -

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): It was the same person who
fired.

"Mr. Fowler: And Savimbi's reaction to the
second one?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Happiness.

