Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank today's briefers for
their briefings. First of all, we thank Mr. Griffiths
for his leadership in this very delicate stage in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement; and,
through Mr. Lowcock, all members of his agency and
humanitarian partners in the field, who make every
effort to meet the needs of the most vulnerable in
Yemen. We also thank the Ambassador of Peru for his
excellent briefing.

We welcome the redeployment by Ansar Allah
over the weekend from the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa, which was verified by the United
Nations yesterday. We understand that to be a positive
development in the implementation of the first phase
of the Agreement. In that regard, the meeting held in
Amman laid the groundwork for future management
of the port. We are therefore convinced that, with
the assistance of the relevant agencies of the United
Nations, the effective and efficient functioning of the
port of Al-Hudaydah, which is a lifeline for the north of
Yemen, will be restored.

We call on the parties to the conflict to participate
constructively and in good faith to agree on the modalities
of the implementation of the agreements for the benefit
of the people of Yemen in general and so that it can lay
the foundation for a new political dialogue that would
lead to a definitive cessation of hostilities. In line with
the spirit of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, the parties
must facilitate the free movement of civilians and goods
to and from the city of Al-Hudaydah and its port, as
well as the ports of Saleef and Ras Isa, and the delivery
of humanitarian aid through those ports. In addition, in
his briefing Mr. Lowcock alluded to the most worrisome
part of the conflict: the terrible humanitarian situation
that affects millions of people after so many years of
war and economic and institutional decline. That must
be the point of reference that guides all our actions.

Given the many humanitarian needs, ranging
from protection to food security, we are concerned in
particular about the increase in the number of cholera
cases in the country, which have claimed the lives of
hundreds of children. We commend the work of the
relevant organizations on the ground and hope they
manage to control the current outbreak. For those
reasons, the international community must continue
to put pressure on all parties to the conflict to allow
timely, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
Hand in hand with such efforts, the financial resources
pledged to ensure compliance with the United Nations
Yemen humanitarian response plan should be made
available in an accelerated, predictable and timely
manner and be flexible to ensure that a comprehensive
response aimed at saving the lives ofmillions ofpeople
can be guaranteed without any further delay.

The ultimate goal of all diplomatic efforts in the
context of the conflict is to achieve a solution to the
problem and promote a lasting ceasefire throughout the
country. While we understand that all attention has been
focused on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement, it is important that we do not lose sight of
other parts of the country, where those affected have
not been granted respite from the war.

In that context, we would like to draw the Council's
attention to the plight of those who have been internally
displaced by the war - many of them women and
children who long to return to their homes - and to
the extraordinary work being done by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations to
provide assistance to all Yemenis in need. As we
have said on previous occasions, protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure are basic principles of
international humanitarian law. That is why we are
concerned about the attacks around the country. We see
that civilians continue to be denied the protection to
which they are entitled. They are once again paying the
highest price for the conflict in Yemen. We urge the
parties and the States that support them to do more to
protect civilians during the planning and execution of
military actions.

We would like to thank UNICEF for its work in
Yemen and for informing us about the situation of
children in the country. As the Executive Director
pointed out, the impact of the conflict on children in
Yemen has been devastating. Yemeni children continue
to pay the highest price of conflict and are subject
to constant abuse. Children make up 40 per cent of
the direct victims of attacks, but they also die from
preventable diseases, cholera or famine. Millions of
children are reported to be struggling to stay alive.
An undermining element is the 2 million children who
remain out of school, and the more than 2,000 schools
left without the conditions to function due to the attacks.

That paints a very worrisome picture that should
compel the parties to take the necessary measures to
ensure the protection of children in Yemen, while also
not forgetting about the need to ensure the release of
children associated with parties to the conflict and
those deprived of liberty because they are part of those
groups. We hope that the memorandum of understanding
signed last month between the Special Representative
and the coalition, along with the endorsement of the
road map by the Government of Yemen to revitalize the
2014 action plan and the Safe Schools Declaration, will
provide more than just hope for the children in Yemen
and their families.

Lastly, after the signing of the agreement, the
Council stands united in the face of the situation that
is afflicting the people of Yemen, knowing that only
through the express political will of the parties will
we be able to put an end to this scourge. We must do
everything in our power, including leveraging the
fragile progress made in Stockholm, put an end to
the conflict and help lift up a people who have been
severely battered.

