Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes to express
its heartfelt condolences to the delegations of Egypt
and Somalia and to their Governments and peoples
on the appalling terrorist attacks committed in their
countries. We strongly condemn these criminal acts
and reiterate our absolute rejection of such actions
by terrorist groups. We also call on the international
community to come together once and for all to put an
end to this scourge.

We wish to extend our congratulations to the
delegation of the United States on presiding over the
work of the Security Council this month. We also
welcome the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honore, whose work at the helm of the
Mission has been guided by her firm commitment and
dedication to bringing about stability and development
for the Haitian people. We also welcome the presence of
the representative of Haiti.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its commitment to peace and democracy in Haiti,
and we congratulate the Government and the people
of this brotherly country on the successful holding of
presidential, legislative, municipal and local elections.
In this connection, we congratulate the President of the
Republic of Haiti, Jovenel Moise, on his election.

The peacebuilding process in Haiti benefited
from resolute support on the part of the international
community and from the good offices of the United
Nations and the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States. These forums have over the past few
years taken diplomatic and logistical measures to bring
about stability and well-being for the Haitian people,
supporting this brotherly country in strict accordance
with the principles of sovereignty, independence and
self-determination.

Despite these encouraging developments, serious
challenges remain on the economic, social and structural
fronts in Haiti, reflections of a history plagued with
political turbulence and interference, which have
led to institutional fragility and undermined social
justice in this brotherly Caribbean country, the first
to obtain its independence in the Latin American and
Caribbean region.

Therefore, in this new phase of the institutional
life of Haiti, we must continue to provide support
to its authorities, with a View to achieving the goals
agreed upon within the framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals and ensuring that no one is left
behind. It is for this reason that we encourage the
international community to continue to cooperate with
the Haitian people unconditionally and in a manner
devoid of any political pressure, focusing on its social
development agenda, especially in terms of eradicating
poverty and reducing inequality, and with emphasis
on the consequences of the natural disasters that Haiti
has suffered.

Over the past few years Haiti has been impacted by
large-scale natural disasters that have had a devastating
effect on its people and on its economic and institutional
structure. The January 2010 earthquake and Hurricane
Matthew caused the country's general situation to
deteriorate even further, especially on the humanitarian

front. In addition, Haiti has faced the repercussions of
the cholera outbreak and the spread thereof since 2010.
This tragic context requires a sustained commitment on
the part of the international community to strengthen
its cooperation mechanisms aimed at assisting the
Haitian people.

We also must devise a robust and timely response to
help the Haitian authorities to strengthen their cholera-
elimination plan by 2022 so as to help bring about a
transition from urgent humanitarian interventions to
programmes geared towards development in Haiti. It
is also necessary to translate into concrete action the
new focus of the United Nations in the fight against
the spread of cholera under the programme approved
by the General Assembly in its resolution 71/161.
We hope that the budget cuts will not affect these
humanitarian programmes.

We are at a critical time at which we must reflect
on the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in the context of the end of MINUSTAH's
mandate in mid-October this year. Venezuela recognizes
that to date the Mission has helped to achieve stability
and to achieve important objectives in Haiti, but the
Security Council must also be aware that it has made
mistakes. We must therefore question the pre-eminence
of a security-based vision that has sidelined the
strengthening of the institutional capacities of the
Haitian State.

In this context, we welcome the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his report
(S/2017/233) and the conclusions of the strategic
assessment mission, which carried out its work
following the elections. We deem appropriate the
caution expressed in the recommendation that there be
a phased, orderly withdrawal of the military contingent
in Haiti, which will help to fulfil the mandate of
supporting the efforts of the Haitian authorities to
ensure the country's stability in the process of the
strengthening of their democratic institutions.

The close of MINUSTAH must mark the beginning
of a new phase of political stability in Haiti and the
end of military interventions focused on security in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The United Nations
successor mission to support justice in Haiti must be
focused on helping its authorities strengthen the rule of
law and social development.

Venezuela, as the second most active country in
the region in terms of bilateral cooperation with Haiti,
is fully committed to development, political stability
and social stability in a free and sovereign Haiti. The
Bolivarian Government of President Nicolas Maduro
Moros has continued the legacy of Comandante Hugo
Chavez Frias, providing sustained assistance to the
people ofHaiti on the basis ofthe principles ofsolidarity,
complementarity and reciprocity. In the framework of
the Petrocaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement and the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, we
will continue to support various initiatives and projects
that have been given priority by the Government of Haiti
targeting the areas of social development; humanitarian
assistance; infrastructure construction, rehabilitation
and maintenance; and education.

Finally, I should like to point out that the people
of Haiti, the homeland of Pe'tion, from which Simon
Bolivar drew inspiration to liberate our America, are
dignified and brave people that have fought tirelessly
for their freedom, self-determination and indepedence.
All Haiti wants and needs from the international
community is cooperation, in a spirit of solidarity, free
of conditions or political blackmail - the only kind of
cooperation that will enable Haiti to move forward and
determine its own destiny in a sovereign manner.

