Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, as well for
convening this interactive debate on children in armed
conflict. We are also grateful for the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General, prepared by his
Special Representative for Children and Armed

Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. I should like to
thank the Special Representative for her
comprehensive presentation of the report and for her
dedicated efforts, together with the members of her
Office, to help eliminate all forms of violence against
children in armed conflict.

Egypt has been pleased to extend all necessary
support to the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict since the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005), which established the Working Group to
monitor all violations perpetrated against children in
armed conflict. Egypt has regularly participated in all
open debates held by the Security Council on the
matter to join in evaluating efforts to protect children
in armed conflict and to step up international efforts to
that end. In so doing, I would like to reflect on some
elements presented in the report.

First, Egypt supports the Secretary-General's
approach in preparing the report before us and fully
understands the methodology used to interpret the
mandate of his Special Representative, especially in
monitoring all forms of violence against children in
armed conflict, including compliance in ending the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict and
other grave violations. Such violations include the
killing and maiming of children, rape and other sexual
violence, abduction, denial of humanitarian access to
children, attacks on schools and hospitals by parties to
armed conflict, and forced detention in violation of
international law and international humanitarian law,
which also apply equally to children suffering under
foreign occupation.

It is therefore necessary for the mandate of the
Security Council's monitoring and reporting
mechanism to be extended to cover situations related to
children in occupied Palestine, as reflected in the
report, to an extent equal to its coverage of the
suffering of Lebanese children from Israel's extensive
and unprecedented use of cluster bombs during the July
2006 conflict in southern Lebanon, which took place
under the eyes of the Security Council. All violations
should be treated on an equal footing, and no child
should be abandoned in such conflicts or any other
without international protection.

Secondly, Egypt supports most of the
recommendations made in the report of the Secretary-
General, especially the recommendation that the
Security Council consider giving equal care and
attention to children affected by armed conflict in all
situations of concern listed in the two annexes and
equal weight to all categories of grave violations,
including not only the recruitment and use of children,
but also the killing and maiming of children, rape and
other grave sexual violence, abduction, attacks against
schools or hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access
to children. Egypt also supports the recommendations
aimed at making available adequate resources and
necessary funding by donors to national Governments,
the United Nations and partners to support the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children in armed
conflicts and to address immediately the grave
humanitarian, human rights and development
consequences of cluster munitions, particularly for
children. However, we also believe that the annexes
should have included a reference to Israel's violation of
its commitments as an occupying Power, as stipulated
in the Fourth Geneva Convention, particularly those
related to guaranteeing peace and security for children
in the occupied Arab territories in Palestine, Lebanon
and Syria.

Thirdly, Egypt expresses its appreciation for the
extensive efforts of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, pursuant to its
current mandate, without the suggested expansion to
include, as recommended, imposing targeted measures
and monitoring the implementation of such measures
by parties to armed conflict who commit grave
violations against children in all situations of concern.
The proposed expansion of the mandate of the Working
Group could affect the necessary balance in addressing
all aspects of situations of concern listed in the
annexes, whether or not they are included as items on
the Security Council's agenda, without concentrating
heavily on a certain aspect at the expense of others.

Finally, if it is to meet all its goals, the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict should coordinate with
the new Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children, which
was created under General Assembly resolution
62/ 141, particularly with respect to violations
stipulated in the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention on the worst forms of child labour,
in order to achieve the needed complementarity and to
fill any legal or practical gaps in dealing with all
situations of the use of children in armed conflict.
