Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome to the Security Council today the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Eamon
Gilmore, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland. Like its European
partners, France shares his vision and will to
concentrate on a limited number of well-identified
priorities with a view to the ministerial conference in
Dublin in December.

The OSCE is a unique model for cooperation
based on the conviction that ensuring the security of
the European continent must go hand in hand with the
promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. At the Astana summit in 2010, the participating
States made important commitments and reaffirmed
their shared objectives for regional security, economic
and human development, and respect for human rights.

The threats to fundamental freedoms and human
rights are a reality that concerns and motivates us. In
that regard, the revolutions in the Arab countries have
reminded us of the universality of those principles. We
must see to it that these values are not thrown into
doubt in Europe as well.

From that point of view, we support the choice of
the Irish chairmanship to stress the human dimension
and its will to prioritize respect for commitments made
in the area of human rights, especially respect for
fundamental freedoms over the Internet. The freedoms
of expression and of the media are challenges that
mobilize the United Nations as well. In that regard,
fruitful synergies can certainly be found between the
two organizations.

We trust that the chairmanship will not neglect
other dimensions covered by the OSCE. Indeed, from
Central Asia to Afghanistan, as well as the Balkans, the
OSCE has demonstrated its essential role in conflict
resolution and the promotion of peace in the region,
and hence its ability to act in concert with other
regional organizations, for example in Kyrgyzstan
alongside the United Nations and the European Union.

Accordingly, the decision taken in Vilnius to
strengthen OSCE capacity in the area of conflict
prevention is a step forward that we believe should be
strengthened. Encouraged by the resumed 5+2 talks on
Transdniestria, we remain engaged in the collective
effort to resolve the Nagorno Karabakh conflict as co-
Chair of the Minsk Group. In 2008, the Georgian crisis
also proved that war between two participating States
of the OSCE was possible. France therefore supports
the Geneva talks, which is another good example of
cooperation between international organizations in the
service of peace.

With respect to the politico-military dimension,
significant progress is expected in the implementation
of a security community, as expressed at the Astana
summit. From that point of view, it is important to
continue updating the Vienna Document. As a
participating State of the OSCE, France is prepared to
consider those issues and to discuss them with other
States at the annual meeting on security questions in
June. We also expect the OSCE to remain committed to
the struggle against transnational threats, especially
human trafficking, the fight against organized crime,
money-laundering and corruption.

Finally, from a longer-term perspective, I recall
that, at the Ministerial Council of the OSCE in Vilnius
on 7 December 2011, to which my German colleague
referred, France announced the launch of an initiative
to create a network of French, German, Polish and
Russian think tanks with a view to organizing, during
the first half of 2012, four seminars on the
implementation of a Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
security community. The second of these seminars will
be held in Paris in April.

I again thank the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland for
participating in this meeting, and again assure him of
our full support throughout his chairmanship. We count
on him to strengthen the links between the OSCE and
the United Nations in line with our shared objectives of
peace, stability, security and respect for human rights.

