Mr. Danforth (United States): Thank you, Mr.
President. We welcome the Secretary-General's latest
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) and thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his presentation. We would also
like to recognize the work of the Secretary-General's
new Special Representative for UNMISET, Sukehiro
Hasegawa and the Mission's progress towards helping
the East Timor Government achieve self-sufficiency. In
particular, we note with satisfaction the adoption of key
legislation establishing legal and institutional legal
frameworks in East Timor, progress and voter
registration and establishment of the office of the
Provedor for the Human rights and Justice.

While we applaud the progress made by the
Government and the people of East Timor in the
development of a civil administration, the East Timor
administration continues to have limited capacity. It is
critical that UNMISET advisers transfer skills to their
East Timor counterparts before May 2005 . In this context,
we hope that the Government of East Timor appoints civil
administrators, especially in the Treasury and the Banking
and Payment Authority, as soon as feasible. The
Government should also work to promulgate relevant
laws, rules and regulations to guide the administration.

In his report the Secretary-General states that the
justice sector continues to be confronted by a shortage
of qualified personnel and limited infrastructure. We
commend the work of UNMISET in helping to
establish a judicial training centre that will help
develop the human resources necessary for a
functioning judiciary.

In the area of serious crimes, we remain
concerned by the number of indicted individuals -
279 accused - assumed to be outside of East Timor
and therefore outside the reach of the Serious Crimes
Unit. As I emphasized to the Council last February, the
human rights violations committed in East Timor in
1999 have not been forgotten and the process of
accountability for those atrocities should achieve justice.

While outside the mandate of UNMISET, the
recent rulings by an appeals court in Indonesia, in
overturning four Ad Hoc Human Rights Tribunal
convictions, directly impacts on the larger issue of
achieving accountability. The decisions and the overall
ad hoc tribunal process were seriously flawed and
failed to provide a full and credible accounting for the
abuses that occurred in East Timor in 1999. It is critical
for the development of democratic institutions in both
Indonesia and East Timor that there be some level of
accountability for the 1999 atrocities. Given the limited
jurisdiction of the Serious Crimes Unit and the failure
of the Indonesian Ad Hoc Tribunal process, additional
remedial measures may be required to achieve justice. We
believe an independent international truth commission,
composed of international experts, should be seriously
considered as one option for accountability.

Finally, we are encouraged to hear that the
security environment in East Timor remains stable.
UNMISET should continue its training with East
Timor's police and military in order to further develop
Timorese capacity in the security sector. UNMISET
will transfer responsibility for all aspects of security to
the Timorese by May 2005 and, therefore, the Timorese
national defence forces (F-FDTL) and the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) must receive further
training in order to address effectively all security threats.
We appreciate the bilateral assistance provided by the
United Kingdom and Australia in this regard as well as
the hard work by our colleague here from East Timor who
does a terrific job in representing his country's interests.

