Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to associate ourselves with the
previous speakers in warmly congratulating the
President-elect of East Timor, Mr. Xanana Gusmao,
and Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and the
comprehensive and detailed report he has presented on
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). We would also like to thank
Mr. He'di Annabi for his comprehensive presentation
this morning. Of course, we cannot fail to pay tribute to
the efforts by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, his
team and the entire staff of UNTAET in East Timor. I
would also like very sincerely to congratulate our
brother Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, who will be
leading the future successor mission to UNTAET. We
are all familiar with his ability, wisdom, and
competency. We wish him every success in carrying
out this happy mission for the East Timorese people.

The success achieved by the United Nations in
arriving where we are today in East Timor should not
preclude our understanding that the task is not yet
complete. There remains a great deal to be done in
terms of providing support to that country. In that
connection, we must commend the Special Committee
on Decolonization, which worked hard for many years
to bring about the independence of East Timor, for its
contribution.

My delegation is also pleased to note the progress
achieved as described in the report of the Secretary-
General, in particular with regard to consolidating the
political and institutional structures of the new State.
That progress is reflected in the adoption of the
constitution, the election of the first President and the
devolution of many executive functions to the people
of East Timor. The international community must
continue to follow developments in post-independence
East Timor in order to guarantee stability and to
consolidate the achievements of the Transitional
Administration.

Preparations are under way for the celebration of
Independence Day on 20 May 2002, the historic
occasion when the flag of East Timor will be raised and
when the new President will take up his functions. It is
worth mentioning that once East Timor enjoys security
and stability, it will make an important contribution to
the stability of the entire region and will complement
the efforts made by the region to overcome the political
and economic problems it now faces. We must
therefore view the start of bilateral and trilateral
discussions between East Timor, Indonesia and
Australia against the background of the satisfaction
expressed by the Secretary-General at those talks. We
feel that a close dialogue of this type must be pursued
for the sake of promoting friendship among these
countries in the future. We greatly appreciate the words
we heard this morning regarding the participation of
the President of friendly Indonesia in the dialogue, as
her participation is extremely significant.

My delegation supports the mandate, plan,
principles and operational elements proposed in the
report for the successor mission. As for the role of the
United Nations in the post-independence period, we
must emphasize the need to continue providing
development assistance and to provide all the necessary
support in the first three years after independence. That
will be necessary to create in East Timor a police force
and a defence force able to fully defend East Timor and
insure stability and prospects for a better future.

In conclusion, my delegation will have the
honour of participating in the 20 May celebrations,
when we all celebrate Timorese independence. We will
be sending a delegation to represent the Syrian Arab
Republic on that historic occasion. Let us hope that
God blesses the people of Timor and the Government
of East Timor.
