Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to convene, during
Azerbaijan's presidency of the Security Council, this
first informational meeting on the partnership between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic

Cooperation (OIC). I also thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the

OIC, Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, for their statements,
which have so well illustrated the links that are
developing between the United Nations and the OIC. I
also welcome the presence among us of the Secretary-
General-elect of the OIC, Mr. Madani.

Luxembourg recognizes the contribution of the OIC
and its member States to the activities and objectives
of the United Nations. Regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts,
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations is
thus not only desirable, but also necessary. The meeting
held in Geneva in May 2012 between the secretariats
of the United Nations and the OIC showed the great
potential that exists for cooperation in many areas of
common interest, including conflict prevention and
mediation, human rights, humanitarian assistance,
intercultural dialogue and the fight against terrorism.
It is undeniable that the activities of the OIC and its
members in support the goals of the United Nations are
crucial in many crisis areas around the world, whether
in Afghanistan, the Sahel, Somalia, Syria or in Yemen.

In the field of preventive diplomacy, we encourage
the OIC to continue and step up its practical cooperation
with the United Nations, especially in supporting
Department of Political Affairs mediation teams.

In the area of conflict resolution, it is important
for the OIC and its member States to remain fully
committed to promoting a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
while direct negotiations between the parties aimed
at reaching the two-State solution were resumed this
summer under the decisive leadership of the United
States.

In the area of post-conflict peacebuilding, the
contribution of the OIC and its member States is also
appreciated, especially as religious authorities often
play a leading role in national reconciliation. I have
experienced that first-hand in my capacity as Chair
of the Guinea configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Following my field visits and exchanges
of views with religious leaders in the country, I am
convinced that cooperation between the United Nations
and the OIC could only benefit peacebuilding and
national reconciliation in Guinea. Moreover, we note
with interest the intention of the Republic of Guinea to
host the fortieth session of the OIC Council of Foreign
Ministers, from 9 to 11 December in Conakry.

Finally, in the field of humanitarian assistance,
we welcome the cooperation that has been developed
in recent years between the OIC and the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The OIC and its member States show their
solidarity by providing assistance to the Palestinian
and Somali peoples. They are also coming to the aid
of war-affected populations in Syria and, by extension,
in the neighbouring countries of Lebanon, Jordan,
Turkey and Iraq. Last Friday, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, asked the Security
Council to put the greatest possible pressure on the
parties to the conflict in Syria to promptly facilitate
free and unhindered humanitarian access to those
populations affected, especially to the civilians trapped
for months in besieged towns in Syria (see S/PV.7049).
As winter approaches, all parties, especially the Syrian
authorities, must give effect to the provisions of the
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council
on 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15). In that context, we count
on the active support of OIC and its member States. In
parallel, we must work together to achieve a political
solution in Syria through a political transition based on
the full implementation of the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

In conclusion, I would like to thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for having prepared the
presidential statement adopted today (PRST/2013/16).
We look forward to receiving the recommendations of
the Secretary-General in his next report with regard
to strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC in the interest of maintaining
international peace and security.

