Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I would like to begin by thanking
you for having scheduled this debate on an important
topic that is given relevance by the news every day.
We would like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy
Secretary-General, for his enlightening briefing, and
the journalists - Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa
Haji Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith Abdul-
Ahad - for having been willing to share with us their
experience in covering conflict situations.

In their presence, I would like to pay tribute on behalf
of my country to those journalists, media professionals
and associated personnel who devote themselves to
their task in respect for the rules of ethics in order to
enlighten public opinion on the reality of conflicts and
their consequences for civilians, particularly women
and children.

Today's debate follows the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1738 (2006), which marked
the start of a new phase in the process of raising the
international community's awareness of the challenges
weighing on the security of journalists in armed
conflict. More recently, in a presidential statement
dated 12 February (S/PRST/2013/2), the Council
demanded that the parties concerned immediately put
an end to violations of international law and reaffirmed
its readiness to adopt targeted and graduated measures
for the protection of civilians, includingjournalists. For
its part, the Human Rights Council adopted resolution
21/12 in September 2012, emphasizing the promotion
of a safe environment, enabling journalists to carry
out their profession in an independent manner. Finally,
UNESCO adopted the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which contains several provisions.

We must note that, in spite of all those measures,
the number of victims among journalists is continuing
to grow. The year 2012 alone saw 32 deaths. We hope
that today's debate will advance thinking on the best
ways to protect journalists in times of war, taking into
account the specificity and dangerous nature of their
work.

In a world quintessentially full of information, the
journalism profession has a vital, and unfortunately
dangerous role to play even in normal times, but even
more so in times of conflict, specifically in times of
internal conflict. The direct exposure of journalists to
the crossfire of parties to conflicts caused an African
journalist to observe that the life expectancy of a
journalist covering a conflict is a renewable 24 hours.

The coverage of conflicts is at the same time a
mission and a responsibility. First, it is a mission because
it allows journalists to bear first witness and provide
information objectively and without bias. It is also a
responsibility that requires integrity and impartiality
from the journalist, in order not to sacrifice journalistic
principles to the immediacy of the information or the
scoop. The protection of journalists, particularly in
times of war, is therefore an absolutely necessity, as it
embodies the respect of the freedom of expression and
the right to information.

The context ofconflicts exposesjournalists directly
or indirectly to every kind of danger. Competition,
exclusivity restrictions and the actions of the parties
to conflict contribute to making their mission even
more dangerous and likely to get out of hand. The
fundamental rights of journalists to life and to exercise
their profession in favourable conditions, in safety and
without constraint, must be guaranteed. Those rights
go hand in hand with the protection of their right to
freely express themselves and to have free access to all
areas where the human condition requires the presence
of journalists in order to report on the human condition
according to international standards.

We the Member States, international
non-governmental organizations and the international
human rights mechanisms are called upon to continue
to strive to ensure a free and safe environment for
journalists to be able to perform their noble mission
of informing, raising awareness and holding parties
accountable to bring about an end of conflict.

