Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also condemn
the attacks on civilians in Burkina Faso and convey our
condolences to the families. I thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his briefing.

Today we have an opportunity to identify where
peacekeeping reforms have already delivered a real
impact and where we need to redouble our efforts.
We are very proud to be among the 152 Member
States that have endorsed the Declaration of Shared
Commitments of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
initiative. It remains an important framework regarding
our collective efforts to make peacekeeping operations
fit for the future as well as our individual efforts as
members of the Council. We are also proud of the role
that we have played in the past year in advancing the
A4P commitments, including as champions in the
areas of politics, peacebuilding, women and peace and
security, and performance and accountability.

With regard to politics, as Security Council
penholders on the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, we have streamlined mission
mandates, making them clearer and more focused,
and we have continued the practice of engaging troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) throughout the process.
We are committed to continuing to work with Council
members, TCCs and the Secretariat to do the same with
regard to renewing other complex mandates, including
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in October. I would suggest to
my French colleague that France might like to rise to
the challenge in doing the same regarding the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo later in the year.

On the peacebuilding front, I think it important
that we mention UNAMID's mandate and the events in
the Sudan this year. It recalls the importance ofa focus
on the successful transition to peacebuilding sustaining
peace. That is what we have learned so well from the
peacekeeping operations that have taken place so far.
Recognizing the wider importance of transitions, we
have therefore doubled our annual contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund to some $20 million. It would be
good to see all members of the Council able to make a
contribution to the Fund so as to show the importance
that we collectively give to its work. In October we will
host a conference in the United Kingdom on improving
transitions, convening stakeholders from across the
peace, security and development nexus.

As penholder for resolution 1325 (2000), we will
also continue to champion the women and peace and
security agenda, including by maintaining efforts to
meet the United Nations targets for women's uniformed
participation. We were delighted to announce a
contribution of $1.2 million to the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations in March for uniformed
women and police in peace operations, and in July we
handed over the chair of the Women, Peace, and Security
Chiefs ofDefence Network to Canada, to which we wish
every success and which we will continue to support.

Looking ahead to 2020, we will be deploying
250 United Kingdom troops to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali to form a long-range reconnaissance patrol
task group. That is a multi-year pledge, responding
to a specific capability need identified by the United
Nations, and it will be complemented by a new training
office to partners deploying alongside us. As ever, we
will strive to ensure that the troops that we contribute in
Mali are well trained and well equipped and should be
held, of course, to the highest standards of performance.

We recognize the important contributions made by
regional and subregional organizations in preventing
and responding to conflict, such as the role played by the
African Union (AU) in Somalia. We recall our support,
in principle, for AU-led peace operations to be partly
funded from United Nations assessed contributions on
a case-by-case basis, and we look forward to continuing
discussions with Council members on a mechanism for
such support that in particular ensures that standards
are fully met. In that context, I would ask all Member
States to back posts designed to support AMISOM. in
that way in the Fifth Committee going forward.

In adopting resolution 2436 (2018), the Council
was clear that achieving the highest standards
of peacekeeping performance requires greater
transparency and accountability. We recognize the
challenges involved in providing detailed performance
reporting based on objective performance data. That is
why we have provided extrabudgetary funding to support
the development of tools such as the comprehensive
performance assessment system. Without better
performance reporting, we cannot properly assess the
impact that reforms are having in the field, nor can we
identify examples of outstanding performance and best
practices that could be replicated more widely.

We therefore look forward to the rigorous
implementation of the performance agenda set out in
resolution 2436 (2018) in the coming year, including
through more extensive and detailed performance
reporting. We owe it to our peacekeepers and the
civilians whom they protect to pick up the pace and
focus our efforts on the reforms that will deliver
maximum impact on the ground.

