Mr. Erdmann: Let me first of all join others in
thanking the Romanian presidency for having
convened this meeting, for taking this initiative and for
giving us the opportunity to present our views on
today's very important subject.

I represent an institution, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), which is 56 years old,
almost as old as the United Nations. During the first 40
years of its existence, NATO had a very specific role in
the historic context of what we call the period of the
cold war. Those times are long gone, and the once
static and passive alliance of European and North
American democracies has changed profoundly.

Today, NATO is no longer focused on deterrence.
Instead, we have embarked on a journey to turn the
alliance into a provider of stability in Europe and even
beyond. This journey began in response to a brutal act
of violence in the Balkans. Ten years ago, in 1995, the
Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia and Herzegovina
became the symbol of a tragedy that could have been
avoided if the international community had acted more
resolutely.

Srebrenica was a wake-up call. It was a turning
point for Europe, and it was a defining point for
NATO. Srebrenica has taught us that we have to face
challenges earlier. It spurred NATO allies to engage
themselves more resolutely in the search for a solution
to the Bosnian conflict. The result was a major
peacekeeping operation - first the Implementation
Force (IFOR), later the Stabilization Force (SFOR) -
the first even in NATO history.

In 1999, in the Kosovo air campaign, NATO had
already learned how to act faster, but we were still not
fast enough to prevent too many innocent civilian
deaths. Finally in 2001, in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, we were successful. We
managed to prevent a civil war from breaking out.

That is, so to speak, the past. NATO has become
an organization that defends the security of its
members and provides stability far beyond its own
borders. Although not a regional organization per se,
but an international intergovernmental organization,
the alliance has evolved over the years into a security
manager in a broad sense, first in Europe and now
beyond.

In 2003, under a United Nations mandate, NATO
established the International Stabilization Assistance
Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan in order to assist the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community in maintaining security within the Force's
area of operations. ISAF provided a safe and secure
environment conducive to free and fair elections. In
2004, under a United Nations mandate, NATO
established a training mission in Iraq, helping the Iraqi
Government to exercise its capability to address the
security needs of the Iraqi people by itself. And only
this year, on the basis again of a United Nations
mandate, NATO has started to provide support to the
African Union Mission in Darfur, complementing
efforts of other international players. Only last week,
NATO took quick action in response to the recent
earthquake in Pakistan by opening an air bridge for
providing humanitarian relief, in close cooperation
with the United Nations and the European Union.

(spoke in French)
All of that shows that NATO has learned its
lesson from Srebrenica 10 years ago. There is no
realistic alternative to a policy of engagement. But
there is another lesson that we have learned in order to
meet the new security challenges: the international
community must act together. The challenges of the
twenty-first century do not respect borders. In order to
meet them, we need the broadest possible international
cooperation. No nation and no institution can do it
alone.

We need this community of engagement based on
the particular experience of each institution. In this
context, the alliance has committed itself to
substantially improving its capacity to face up to new
challenges. A successful response requires not only
political determination but also appropriate military
capacity. Our partners - in the Caucasus, in Central
Asia, the Mediterranean Dialogue countries, the Gulf
Cooperation Council countries and the contact
countries, such as Japan, Australia and New
Zealand-have often contributed to our operations
and thus constitute a considerable portion of our
capacity. Besides promoting interoperability, the
alliance assists its partners with defence sector reform
and in addressing together the security and stability
challenges we are all facing, such as terrorism and
border security.

(spoke in English)

Cooperation with international organizations is
equally important, and here we return to today's
subject. Our experience on the ground in various
missions over the past 10 years shows that we all have
to work together and to play our respective strengths.
In a world in which managing security has become so
complex, it is essential that we develop a common
understanding. That is the first step towards finding
effective solutions. And that is why having regular and
structured relationships between NATO and the
European Union is so important. NATO is ready to
further enhance this relationship, which is already solid
in practice and which has matured in several theatres
on a more formal basis. As for the Standing
Committee, from our point of View it is an important
contribution to strengthening the mechanics of
cooperation, and we stand ready to engage ourselves in
its work.

There is no doubt that interaction will increase. It
is in everyone's interest to do so, as was highlighted in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome. Be it through a
structured dialogue, the Peacebuilding Commission or
the Standing Committee we will continue to address
pertinent issues for sustainable peace and security.

Here, I would use a concrete example of the need
for closer cooperation - Afghanistan. In three months'
time we will all meet in London to coordinate the
development of a post-Bonn process for that country.
That will be a real challenge, but it is also an excellent
opportunity to show that our organizations are sharing
the responsibility for the daunting job ahead of us.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Romanian presidency of the Security Council once
again for having taken the initiative to organize this
important exchange of views.

