The President: I thank Ms. Cook for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Voronkov
and Ms. Coninsx for their briefings on the report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da'esh
to international peace and security (S/2018/770). We
would also like to welcome Ms. Joana Cook and thank
her for sharing the key findings of her report on Da'esh
women and minors, which shows the value of inviting
civil society and researchers to inform our discussions.

In the summer of 2014, Da'esh swept down the
Tigris and Euphrates valleys, capturing thousands of
square miles of Iraq and Syria and imposing its pitiless
rule on millions of people in an area that was once the
cradle of civilization. Over the next three years, attacks
that were directed, inspired or enabled by Da'esh
would claim more than 30,000 lives, including 181
attacks outside Iraq and Syria. The world responded
by forming a global coalition to defeat this threat, and
military action by many countries, including my own,
has driven Da'esh from almost all of its domain and
liberated millions from its oppression. But the point I
wish to emphasize today is that Da'esh has not been
vanquished, and that the root causes of its emergence
have yet to be resolved.

Britain shares the assessment of the Secretary-
General's report that Da'esh is responding to the loss
of territory by evolving into a covert terrorist network,
with branches as far apart as Afghanistan, Libya and
Yemen. Da'esh takes advantage of ungoverned space
and weak States. Its terrorists do not necessarily
require central direction, and they have demonstrated
their ability to strike in Europe and South-East Asia.

The report of the Secretary-General estimates that
as many as 20,000 Da'esh fighters remain in Syria and
Iraq, among them citizens of many countries. Around
900 people with links to the United Kingdom have
travelled to join the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. Around
40 per cent returned to the United Kingdom in the early
days Da'esh's so-called caliphate, and some 20 per cent
are believed dead. The rest are still in Iraq, Syria or
elsewhere. Our response to this enduring threat should
fall into two parts.
First, we must press on with military operations
against Da'esh. British forces continue to play their
part as members of the global coalition, and the
United Kingdom leads in the vital area of strategic
communications against Da'esh. This year the British
Government has committed another £20 million to
counter-terrorism projects in countries we assess to be
most at risk from returning foreign fighters.

Secondly, we should renew our focus on prevention
by addressing the root causes of the emergence of
Da'esh, which means doing more to support peace
and reconciliation in Iraq and a lasting political
settlement in Syria. It also means responding to
specific humanitarian problems. For example, up to
20 per cent of foreign fighters globally are women and
girls. Almost 10 per cent of the 40,000 individuals who
travelled to join Da'esh were minors, many of whom
have witnessed or experienced horrific violence and
been exposed to radicalization. Some will be suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder. We need to act to
prevent those minors from becoming the next generation
of terrorists.

The United Nations has a vital role to play in
the struggle against Da'esh, consistent with the
responsibility of the Security Council to address threats
to international peace and security. The Council made
air travel more secure by adopting resolution 2309
(2016), the first-ever resolution on aviation security,
and it addressed the threat from foreign fighters in
resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). Earlier, in
2005, the Council adopted resolution 1624 (2005),
condemning incitement and repudiating all attempts to
justify or glorify acts of terrorism. The Council should
be willing to consider further action in order to counter
the use of the Internet by terrorists for propaganda
and fundraising.

Prevention is a key pillar of the United Kingdom's
approach to counter-terrorism. Our aim is to identify
anyone at risk of radicalization. We seek to reintegrate
them into society. Agencies and local Governments,
from health, education, social services and the
police, routinely meet to identify individuals at risk
and refer them to programmes run by specialists in
deradicalization. That approach, which focuses on
prevention rather than prosecution after a crime has
been committed, has caused more than 500 people to
turn away from terrorism in the United Kingdom. We
have learned lessons over the years and refined our
"prevent" programme. We stand ready to share our
experiences with countries that face similar problems.
Societies that are confident in their beliefs and
values and hold Governments to account are societies
that are resistent to the virus of terrorism. The key to
success is partnership among many nations. We must
not lose sight of the importance of those partnerships,
even as Da'esh loses its grip on Syria and Iraq. I look
forward to our discussion today on how we can act
together to prevent and counter the evolving threat
from Da'esh.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

