Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Special Representative, Martin
Kobler, for his briefing and for his ongoing efforts and
those of his team in a particularly difficult context.
We would like also to thank Ambassador Olof Skoog
for his report on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

We take note with satisfaction of the near-
normalization of the payment of salaries in the country
and the recent successes achieved in the combat
against terrorism.

However, more than a year after the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement, we continue to see a lack of
meaningful progress in the political transition process
following the formation of the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord. The support
that the Government has received within the Libyan
political system has been minimal, which hinders the
possibility of stabilizing the country in the short run
and bringing it back onto the path of normality, as well
as that of providing basic services for the people and
ensuring their security.

The painful reality is that the authority of the
Government barely extends beyond the buildings
in which it is working in Tripoli. Paradoxically,
the Political Agreement and the Government of
National Accord have received more support from the
international community than they have from within
their country. It is essential that the new Government
garner broader support among the population so as
to achieve full legitimacy. Otherwise, it will be very
difficult for it to ever govern the country or even the
major part of its territory.

In the meantime, the violence and the fighting
continue to spread; the dozens of militias on the ground
are the ones who hold the true power in Libya. They are
reaping benefits from the power that they do have and
are working to further their economic interests in an
attempt to control the oil business and the illegal traffic
in migrants.

We are concerned at the fact that the deadline for
the Tobruk House of Representatives' endorsement
of the Libyan Political Agreement continues to be
pushed back. A way should be found for this to take
place and thereby leave aside once and for all a factor
of institutional uncertainty and instability. To that
end, every effort must made to achieve broad national
reconciliation, taking account of the requests of and
proposals by all parties. Today more than ever, dialogue
is vital, as are negotiations. This is the only path to
unity and stability.

In this context, the grave humanitarian situation of
the Libyan people is worsening by the day, with more
than 1 million people in need of urgent assistance. The
situation of migrants for whom Libya is a country of
origin and of those - the majority - for whom it is a
country of transit to Europe, who are fleeing hunger, war
and political crises on the African continent, remains a
source of despair. On a daily basis, we witness tragic
episodes that kill dozens or even hundreds of people,
including women and children. Hundreds of thousands
of people are currently in Libya waiting to try to cross
the Mediterranean. They are subject to mistreatment
and to the gravest violations of their human rights.
We condemn the activities of the mafias that engage
in the illegal trafficking of migrants, a business whose
volume appears to be continuing to grow in Libya.

Just a few days ago, the International Organization
for Migration announced the existence of a slave
market in which sub-Saharan migrants are trafficked
for a few hundred dollars. This cannot and should not
be tolerated in any form in the twenty-first century.

Despite the measures adopted in 2016, the number
of migrants who drown when their rickety boats sink
continues to grow. For this reason, in considering
solutions to this problem, priority should be given
to the human rights of migrants and refugees. Only
a stabilization of Libyan political institutions will
make it possible to significantly reduce the number of
occurrences of this phenomenon and to set up adequate
and more effective controls.

I wish to reiterate our support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and for the role
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and
we encourage the Special Representative to continue
with his work jointly with Prime Minister Serraj and
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord. This will be pivotal in order for the Government
of National Accord to acquire legitimacy throughout the
country and tackle urgently the tremendous challenges
that Libya faces, which include the combat against
terrorism and the severe humanitarian, economic and
security crisis that is affecting millions of people.

Against this backdrop, we deem it important to
exercise great care in drawing up the new mandate of
the Mission. To do so, it will be important to conduct
a strategic review of the Mission, as envisioned in
resolution 2323 (2016), which we believe would
represent a valuable opportunity to bring the presence of
the United Nations in Libya into line with the political,
operational and security realities on the ground.

