Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The conflict between Israel and Palestine has escalated,
and the situation there has deteriorated to an extremely
dangerous degree. The Chinese Government has
expressed its deep concern and preoccupation in this
regard. We condemn the suicidal acts against Israeli
civilians; such acts of violence by a few individuals run
counter to the aspirations of the Palestinian people for
peace and to the efforts of the international community
to promote peace in that region. Yet still more alarming
are the massive military offensives by Israel against
Palestinians, in which the compound of Chairman
Arafat was attacked, his guards wounded and innocent
Palestinian civilians killed. As some commentaries
have pointed out, such actions are no different from a
declaration of war against Palestine, which will bring
very serious consequences.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Annan, also pointed
out, very wisely, that destroying the Palestinian
Authority will not bring peace; it will bring the region
even closer to war. We oppose and condemn the
barbaric aggression of Israel against Palestine and call
on Israel to immediately stop its military actions and
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories.
Events have demonstrated time and again that
countering violence with violence does not help but,
rather, that it will lead to an escalation of tensions and
fuel hatred between the two sides.

The Arab League summit, which has just
concluded, adopted an Arab peace plan, inspired by the
Saudi peace proposal for the Middle East, which has
facilitated and contributed to the efforts aimed at peace
in the region. The Chinese leader and the Chinese
Government have expressed their appreciation and
congratulations in that regard.

In his statement today, the Secretary-General said
that the summit has created a new opening for peace.
The international community - including, of course,
Israel and Palestine - should take advantage of this
new opportunity for peace in the Middle East and take
practical steps to cooperate with all the peace
initiatives. Given the present circumstances, the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, should
play a more active and effective role so as to prevent
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict from escalating into a
full-fledged confrontation. Peace must be restored to
the region. Only through peace can Israel and Palestine
live side by side. To this end, it is imperative to
implement Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle of land
for peace.

We strongly appeal to Israel and Palestine to
exercise the utmost restraint, immediately stop all acts
of violence, return to the negotiating table and work
with the international community to advance the
momentum for peace in the Middle East.

