Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): At the
outset, I would like to thank United Nations Special
Envoy Jan Eliasson and Mr. Guehenno for their
reports. I appreciate the efforts of Mr. Eliasson and
African Union Special Envoy Salim Salim, along with
all participating parties and supporting States of the
Darfur peace talks in Libya.

The continuing and urgent situation in Darfur has
kept this issue at the top of the Council's agenda for a
long time. In order to make progress, the political,
humanitarian and security tracks must move forward
urgently. These tracks require sustained commitment
from all the key players: the Government of Sudan, the
rebel groups, the troop-contributing countries, the
United Nations and the African Union. There are
shortfalls that each must address, to which I will now
turn.

Regarding what the Government of the Sudan
must do, the Government of the Sudan is key to
progress, particularly on the security track. It
absolutely must demonstrate, through its statements
and its actions, its intent to accept and facilitate an
effective peacekeeping mission in Darfur. Based on
what we heard today from Mr. Guehenno, it appears
that the Government of the Sudan has thus far failed to
do so. First, Sudanese officials have, without any basis,
delayed agreement on force composition. The proposed
force is clearly primarily African in nature, as the
Government of the Sudan requested. We in the Council
should act in union to urge the Government of Sudan to
demonstrate its seriousness by immediately approving
the list of troop-contributing countries provided to it by
the Secretariat almost two months ago. Furthermore,
the Government of Sudan has failed to take the steps
necessary to facilitate the peacekeeping force of the
United Nations-African Union Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and conclude an acceptable status-
of-forces agreement.
We have heard today, and in numerous other
reports, of obstructing access to land and water,
impeding the granting of flight clearances, changing of
visa procedures and bureaucratic delays in processing
arriving material. Taking together, these facts belie an
affirmative commitment to the peacekeeping mission
itself and are serving to frustrate and delay it.

I was particularly alarmed to hear from
Mr. Guehenno today of the counter-offer made by the
Government of the Sudan on the status-of-forces draft
demanding the right of the Sudanese Government to
suspend or interrupt communications or to have prior
notification of movement of forces. The Government of
Sudan's record so far shows a lack of good faith in
supporting the deployment of an effective force into
Darfur. We in the Council must be unrelenting the
demanding that Sudan commit itself to the
peacekeeping mission and take all necessary measures
to facilitate its immediate deployment.

With respect to what the rebels must do, on the
political track, in order for the peace process to
succeed, the rebels must engage in the political
process, establish a unified position and agree on a
negotiating team. The Security Council should not shy
away from being tough on those groups that stay
outside of the dialogue. We should also demand that
the rebels not impede the security track. Like Mr.
Guehenno, I find it highly alarming to hear that threats
have been levied against the Chinese engineers who
have been deployed to Darfur as part of the United
Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID).
We appreciate China's early contribution to UNAMID
and will not tolerate threats against any contributing
country.

As to what the troop-contributing countries must
do, on the security track, we are increasingly
concerned by the lack of contributions for helicopters
and heavy transport units. Mobility is critical for a
force the size of UNAMID in an area as large as
Darfur. We will work bilaterally and in coordination
with other Security Council members to urge
contributions of these assets. We repeat our call for
nations that have air support capability to answer the
call of the United Nations. We in the Council must
continue to support the efforts of the Secretariat to
identify potential contributors and to impress upon
them the importance of meeting these demands.

Finally, we believe it critical for the United
Nations to appoint a United Nations-African Union
chief negotiator and a long-term director of the Joint
Mediation Support Team to oversee the peace process
on a day-to-day basis to assist the Special Envoy. We
also encourage the Secretariat to move swiftly in
contracting for additional accommodations for
peacekeepers in order to assure that logistical
challenges do not further delay the implementation of
this important mission.

In conclusion, stepping back, we must also bear
in mind that progress on Darfur depends on full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). Only if we proceed on all fronts can
we hope to move towards some comprehensive peace
in the foreseeable future. The United States is
committed to leading international efforts to spur
forward the CPA, which is strongly linked to any
successful end to the Darfur conflict.

Once again, I thank our colleagues for their
presentations here today and urge that we not miss the
opportunity to take a hard and close look at how we
can remove obstacles to make progress on all three
fronts: the political, humanitarian and security tracks.

