Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that that I take the floor under
the United States presidency, allow me at the outset
to thank the presidency for convening this important
meeting on the Ebola crisis. It comes at an opportune
moment. Let me also congratulate the President on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of September. Rest assured that you will have the full
support of the Burundian delegation throughout your
mandate. Moreover, the signs of a remarkable success
have already appeared as witness to your unparalleled
leadership in the work to combat the Ebola crisis.

Likewise, my delegation welcomes the holding of
the upcoming high-level consultations on the Ebola
crisis on 25 September and the recent appointment of
Dr. David Nabarro and of his assistant for the Ebola
cr1s1s.

Clearly, I cannot but welcome today's adoption of
resolution 2177 (2014) on the Ebola crisis. Burundi is
very proud to have co-sponsored the resolution.

Like other African countries, we are very
concerned about the rapid spread of the Ebola virus,
which was brilliantly described by Dr. Nabarro at the
informal meeting of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission on 8 September,
in which my delegation actively participated. Indeed
we believe that at the current pace, the international
community's degree of mobilization around the crisis
that is affecting Africa has not yet achieved the level
expected, especially as the disease appears to be
spreading faster than the efforts against it.

The situation is serious - in fact, extremely
serious. The international community must not hesitate
to take action through improved coordination and
organizational efforts aimed at saving those human
lives in danger. Tomorrow will be too late because the
disease may spread even beyond the continent. That
probability is already very high.

We can never say it enough: the magnitude of
the outbreak of the Ebola virus requires from the
international community an even more robust response
that will involve not only more resources and medical
expertise in the countries but also more preparation
at the regional and subregional levels. Beyond the
regional dimension, the main development partners that
support interventions in the affected countries must be
prepared to redouble efforts to significantly increase
their assistance.

Meanwhile, we believe that a much greater
involvement of local communities is really essential for
an effective response. In fact, if grassroots communities
take matters into their own hands, take ownership ofthe
fight, in particular in rural and semi-rural areas, and
implement their own solutions and protection measures
in the context of public health services, transmission of
the Ebola virus could considerably slow down.

For their part, the countries already affected and
the neighbouring countries should strive to mobilize
communities and to improve communication among
people so that they know how to prevent infection and
what they should do, especially if they fear that they
have come in contact with the virus.
In terms of peacebuilding, the risks of a backslide
in the gains already made in countries affected under
the Peacebuilding Commission are increasing daily.
The international community must redouble its efforts
to assist countries whose capacities to deal with the
scourge are extremely limited. With regard to the
measures to be taken against the Ebola crisis, the
international community must prevent any isolation of
the affected countries because that could do more harm
than good. We must avoid treating the two situations in
the same way. The isolation of affected individuals and
the isolation of affected countries are two diametrically
opposed things that far from complement each other.

In our humble opinion, isolating those countries
would be tantamount to denying them access to basic
humanitarian assistance. Quarantine could have a very
negative impact on the already fragile economies of the
affected countries, which depend in part on the provision
of certain basic commodities from outside. In order
to support the global action against the current Ebola
outbreak in West Africa, we launch a strong appeal
to the countries neighbouring the affected countries
to kindly agree to open humanitarian corridors to
facilitate the transport and arrival of international staff
and supplies to the affected countries.

The widespread panic created by the Ebola crisis
in affected countries does not allow people to go about
their normal daily productive activities. That could
ultimately give rise to a food crisis that would compound
that of the Ebola virus currently facing them.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to join its
voice to that of other delegations in sincerely thanking
those countries that have already provided assistance to
the three worst affected countries.

