Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and
thanking Ambassador Heller for his excellent
presidency of the Council last month.

The United Kingdom very much welcomes the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2009/221) on the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN). We are
also grateful for today's briefing by the Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Karin Landgren.

We are deeply concerned by recent developments
on the ground and share the Secretary-General's regret,
expressed in his 4 May statement, at the events leading
up to Prime Minister Prachanda's resignation. But, like
the Secretary-General, we are also encouraged by the
Maoist party's assurances of its commitment to the

peace process and by the comments from across the
political spectrum stressing the importance of
proceeding on the basis of consensus.

Given recent developments, it is all the more
important that we hold all the political parties in Nepal
to commitments made under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. All of us in the international community
have a role to play here. We must support Nepalese
efforts to resolve this crisis in a way that does not
jeopardize the important gains made since the
Agreement was signed in 2006 - gains rightly
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report.

We will need to monitor the situation very closely
in the coming weeks and months. An objective
assessment of the situation on the ground will be an
important part of the Council's deliberations ahead of
the end of UNMIN's mandate on 23 July. In that
regard, we believe that it is important that the
Secretary-General's next report include analysis of the
implications of recent developments for the future of
the peace process and for the role played by the United
Nations and wider international engagement in Nepal.

However, it is important that we not seek to reach
such conclusions prematurely. Our and UNMIN's
immediate efforts must be focused on helping the
Nepalese peacefully to overcome this crisis and to
move forward. Even if a solution can be reached
quickly, it is clear that much remains to be done. Even
before the current crisis, the Nepalese authorities'
prediction that the integration process could be
completed by 15 July looked unrealistic. In our view,
that is and remains a substantial process involving
complex decisions that require political commitment
by all parties in the spirit of the peace process
agreements.

For our part, we will continue to offer our full
and active support to the people of Nepal and to the
peace process.

