I would like to thank the Niger for organizing this meeting and choosing to focus one of its signature events on the humanitarian impact of climate change, a subject which needs more attention in our discussions on climate and security. I thank the briefers for their very informative presentations. Climate change is impacting our environment. That is an indisputable reality based on scientific data. Growing climate disruption and environmental deterioration are increasingly affecting populations across the globe. However, such an impact, even though global in nature, is not felt equally by all populations and is not affecting our lives in the same way. In fact, the most severe impact is greatest in areas, such as Somalia, Yemen, the Sudan and the Sahel, where people's ability to cope with and adapt to these changes has been severely reduced. As clearly described by the briefers, the most vulnerable populations, including displaced people, refugees and people living in conflict zones or already afflicted by dire economic conditions, are disproportionately affected by the impact of droughts, floods, storms and heat and have limited capacity to adapt to these extremes and additional risks. Combined with violence and armed conflicts, in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, climate change and environmental degradation exacerbate existing vulnerabilities and add to the plight of these people making their lives even more miserable and aggravating the humanitarian disasters that they are facing. A hunger catastrophe is looming in Yemen. When climate disruption collides with conflicts, it can only worsen food and economic insecurity, aggravate health disparities and limit access to basic services and resources, while weakening at the same the capacity of Governments and institutions to provide support to local populations. In the Lake Chad region, where more than 10 million people already depend on humanitarian aid, climate change heightens tensions around the use of water and land, which contributes to more forced displacement especially in a context of limited ability of central authorities to control territories, manage resources and resolve tensions. The impact of such overlap is very high from a humanitarian perspective and requires us to adapt our response and action to people's conditions and priorities beyond immediate needs and early action in a more sustainable way that helps conflict-affected communities become more resilient to environmental deterioration and to adapt to a changing climate. Such response needs to rely on a deeper understanding of the short- and long-term climate risks. It needs a better knowledge of the regional implications of a changing climate and more coordinated actions across several sectors and in many different countries, especially because climate change also presents challenges that can aggravate existing situations of armed conflict and other situations of violence. This climate change and security nexus has become more obvious and increasingly recognized at the international level and should be considered further by the Security Council as the effects of climate change increasingly interact with root causes of conflicts and act as risk multipliers. Today, in addition to the context-specific approach, we need to pursue an integrated and systematic approach to climate-related security risks in order to enable appropriate responses by the Security Council. We also need to integrate long-term climate risk factors into the assessment and management of threats to peace and security at the national, regional and international levels. To prevent conflicts related to climate risks, we need also to develop forecasting tools and early warning systems, in addition to strengthening the United Nations system database with scientific data and relevant knowledge. Finally, Tunisia, as a member of the like-minded group on climate and security, would like to reiterate that these issues need to remain on our agenda and require a more in-depth discussion by the Security Council.
