Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to read out a statement by Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of
Egypt. The statement reads as follows.

"I wish at the outset to express the
appreciation of the Government of the Arab
Republic of Egypt for the important initiative
taken by the brotherly United Republic of
Tanzania in convening this meeting during its
presidency of the Security Council. Egypt's
appreciation is based on its great interest in the
cause of security, peace, development and
democracy in the Great Lakes region. That region
is a strategic centre and the cornerstone of
security in the African continent and its
subregions and of Egypt's national security.

"The leaders of the Great Lakes region
outlined their vision for the future of their region
in the Dar es-Salam Declaration of November
2004. They reaffirmed their commitment to
ownership of their future. They also emphasized
their awareness of the need for genuine
international support for national and regional
efforts aimed at meeting the aspirations of all
African peoples for a better future, a future of
integrated, mutually reinforcing peace, security
and democracy based on Africa's own priorities.
To that end, Egypt is convinced that this vision
must remain the primary framework for all efforts
to achieve peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.

"It is based on that conviction and on
Egypt's sense of responsibility towards the Great
Lakes region that I will focus my statement on a
number of ideas pertaining to the institutional
aspects of collective international and regional
action to define the modalities of a
comprehensive approach to peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. I have been guided in this
regard by the concept paper previously
distributed by the Tanzanian presidency.

"First, in order to effectively address the
priority issues in the Great Lakes region, we will
need increasing institutional integration. To that
end, we need to enhance the roles and tasks
performed by all relevant parties in implementing
the collective vision of the countries of the region
based on their own strategic priorities for security
and development. It is evident that we need more
coherence among the various institutions and
bodies involved in the region. The Security
Council should perform its role, consistent with
its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, through its
mandates for peacekeeping missions in Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan. Meanwhile, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union should perform its
role as the primary regional body concerned with
continental security. The relationship between the
two bodies must be governed by the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter and guided by the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution
1631 (2005). In that context, Egypt welcomes the
development of a consultative institutional
mechanism between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, including by
exchanging visits and holding ongoing periodic
consultations on most relevant peace and security
issues for Africa.

"However, our experience indicates that
peace in the Great Lakes region cannot be
confined to its conventional political and security
aspects. Rather, we need a more comprehensive
approach that takes account of socio-economic
and development aspects, which contribute to
promoting and sustaining security. These fall
within the purview of other United Nations
bodies, programmes and specialized agencies,
which together constitute an integrated system for
dealing with the major socio-economic needs of
the African States in general, in particular during
the post-conflict phase. That inclusive vision
should be implemented by those bodies and
programmes, in cooperation with their
counterparts in the African Union, through quick-
impact projects on the ground, which can provide
an immediate peace dividend for the peoples in
question, contrasted with the negative effect of
war and conflict.

"Secondly, the operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission is closely linked to
the realization of such a comprehensive approach
to peace, as that body could serve as a unique
institutional focal point for the coordination of
international and regional efforts in support of the
transition from conflict to reconstruction and
development. There is no doubt that the
Peacebuilding Commission will focus directly on
States emerging from conflict in the Great Lakes
region, in particular Burundi, where genuine
cooperation is needed between the national
Government and the United Nations, based on the
priorities currently being developed by the
Government, and with which the necessary
support of the international community. The
Peacebuilding Commission must also focus the
necessary attention to and mobilize international
support for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as the current transition period comes to
an end. The Peacebuilding Commission is
expected to help countries emerging from conflict
in the Great Lakes region to implement the
provisions of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration and
other regional and international initiatives aimed
at addressing multifaceted cross-border
challenges in the post-conflict environment. That
can be accomplished only by deepening bilateral
and multilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and the countries of
the Great Lakes region.

"In this context, I would like to reiterate the
firm position that Egypt expressed during the
consultations preceding the adoption of the
Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on the establishment and
operationalization of the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is important that any international
peacebuilding effort respect and reinforce the
concept of national ownership of such efforts as a
primary condition for success in order to
maximize the benefits of any type of external
support. In this connection, I would like also to
recall that Egypt presented its candidature for
membership in the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission on the basis of its
conviction that the Committee is an important
forum through which Egypt can support peace
and stability in Africa and other regions of the
world.

"Thirdly, the key to any breakthrough in the

situation in the Great Lakes region is to focus on
a number of critical issues relating to conflict
prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding, including by encouraging
confidence-building among the Governments of
the region, capacity-building in the area of border
management and monitoring, establishing
effective channels of communication and
information exchange among national authorities
and coordinating programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and for the
return and resettlement of internally displaced
persons. Other measures that need to be
addressed as a matter of priority include security-
sector reform, which is the key to the extension
of a State's authority throughout its territory, in
keeping with the social characteristics of the
region.

"In this context, I would like to emphasize
that the international community should adopt a
unified vision with respect to breaking the link
between the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and armed conflict in the Great Lakes
region and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. To that end, Egypt is of
the view that the elements contained in General
Assembly resolution 60/223, on the causes of
conflict in Africa, and those in Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005), relating to the prevention
of armed conflict, particularly in Africa, together
constitute an important conceptual framework
that should be duly complemented by the
adoption of measures focusing the attention of the
international community on addressing the causes
of conflict in the Great Lakes region, in keeping
with the preliminary steps adopted by the
Security Council in resolution 1649 (2005) aimed
at countering the threat posed by foreign armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in addition to other
measures formulated and supported by the
African Union.

"In this regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to call on all relevant parties in the
region to take the measures necessary to halt the
cross-border attacks perpetrated by all armed
groups, particularly the attacks by the Lord's
Resistance Army and by the Forces

democratiques de liberation du Rwanda on
Ugandan and Rwandan territory, respectively.

"Finally, I would like to assure the Council
that Egypt will spare no effort in promoting
international and regional efforts to achieve peace
and stability, in the most comprehensive sense, in
the Great Lakes region. Egypt is committed to
working through all the relevant bodies and
mechanisms of the African Union and the United
Nations on the basis of our deep sense of loyalty
to Africa, our historical commitment to its
peoples and our faith in the unity of purpose and
destiny of the continent."

