Mr. Cardi (Italy): In my national capacity, I would
once again like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman and Ambassador Adamson for their briefings
on the activities of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). I thank all
members for the kind words addressed to me and
my team after the European mandate and the year of
chairing the facilitating mechanism.

Once again, we have before us a very comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1030). Italy
believes that every effort should be made by the
relevant parties, and the international community as a
whole, to ensure that the JCPOA continues to represent
a success story in the global effort to uphold the
integrity of the non-proliferation regime. It is crucial
to us that the Security Council display unity on such
a significant topic, and the accurate and thorough
report of the Secretary-General provides a good basis
to work towards that important objective. We strongly
appreciate the reference in the report to the JCPOA
as "a major achievement in nuclear non-proliferation
and diplomacy in addressing issues that could have
an impact on regional and international peace and
security" (S/2017/1030, para. 1). We are convinced that
all participants, including the Iranian people, should
continue to benefit from the JCPOA. Certainly, we
strongly support the Secretary-General's call on all
participants to remain steadfast in their commitment to
the full implementation of the agreement.

At the same time, Italy believes in the importance
of the full and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) in all its aspects. In that respect,
we also take good note ofthe preliminary findings ofthe
Secretary-General, contained in the report, regarding
ballistic missile-related issues. We look forward to the
outcome of the investigation that has been announced.

The implementation of the JCPOA and of
resolution 2231 (2015) has made significant progress
to date. We wish to echo the appeal of the Secretary-
General to work through differences and challenges
in a spirit of cooperation, compromise, good faith and
reciprocity. We encourage all stakeholders to promptly
resolve issues of concern by exploiting all the relevant
mechanisms set out in the JCPOA. The Security Council,
of course, plays a key role within its competencies and
responsibilities in that respect.

Italy reiterates its full trust in, and support to, the
International Atomic Energy Agency in discharging its
verification task in relation to the J CPOA, and commends
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for her leadership in coordinating the Joint
Commission established by the JCPOA.

Finally, as this is my last national intervention on
this issue, let me thank all members of the Security
Council for the kind words and cooperation that they and
their teams, who worked very professionally within the
2231 format, for the support and the full collaboration
that we experienced and that they extended to me and
my colleagues during the year. That, I must underscore,
allowed for a constructive atmosphere of cooperation to
prevail in all our meetings. I and my team are grateful
for that.

