The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Demetrius
Perricos, Acting Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission, and to Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen,
Representative of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
Director of the IAEA Office at United Nations
Headquarters, New York.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2007/390, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Demetrius Perricos, Acting Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission, and by
2
Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen, Representative of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) to the United Nations and Director of the IAEA
Office at United Nations Headquarters, New York.

I now give the floor to Mr. Demetrius Perricos,
Acting Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission.


