Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
respect the request which you made, Sir, at the
beginning of your presidency to provide short, focused
interventions. I have to thank you for ensuring that the
Council deepens its understanding of this important
subject. Presidential statements from February 1999
onwards and resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000)
have all been recognized as important benchmarks.
Therefore, we welcome this discussion and the
production of the aide-memoire to move us forward
from the general expressions of interest in the subject
of protection of civilians in armed conflict that we have
had in past discussions.

The commitments made by heads of State or
Government in the Millennium Declaration are also
very relevant to this discussion. In that Declaration,
Member States pledged to "expand and strengthen the
protection of civilians in complex emergencies"
(General Assembly resolution 55/2, para. 26). That was
an important step forward, and the Secretary-General's
statements on this subject since then have noted the
importance of that commitment. His report in March
2001 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2001/331) called for the establishment of a culture
of prevention, a concept which gives life and purpose
to the need for an aide-memoire to aid our forward
thinking.

I am not going to comment this morning on
specific instances around the world. The very useful
presentation that we had from the Under-Secretary-
General gives some illustrations of where things are
going wrong.

We would very much like to thank the Office for

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
its United Nations partners for their efforts in preparing
the aide-memoire we have now. But the point is that it
marks a step forward in the practical action that we can
take over and above the rhetoric in which we have
engaged in previous debates. While the Council is
becoming steadily more informed about many of the
issues contained in it - the special role of women and
children in conflict comes to mind here - I would
suggest that we sometimes overlook many others. The
insidious effects of landmines on civilians are one
example. The role of the media and information is
another. The exploitation of natural resources and their
effect on prolonging conflicts, and so the effects on
civilians caught up in those conflicts, is yet another.

As recent and ongoing conflicts show - and the
Under-Secretary-General has given us examples this
morning - each of these issues has the potential to do
much damage to the protection of civilians. But their
specific effects are not often well understood, and often
we realize how they have impacted on protection of
civilians only when it is too late to take remedial
action.

It is important to understand that each of the
primary objectives contained in the document is of
interest not only to the humanitarian wing of the
United Nations. Because of the complex interaction
between these issues and the conduct of conflict, they
are also important in the context of maintaining peace
and security. By definition, therefore, they demand the
proper attention and consideration of the Security
Council. The aide-memoire helpfully underlines that.

To provide one example, recent allegations
surrounding the conduct of United Nations workers in
West Africa has outlined the possible value of the aide-
memoire in highlighting relevant protection concerns
and, in so doing, enhancing a more systematic
approach to our planning process. On the training of
security forces and other United Nations staff charged
with carrying out the work of the Organization, we
need to have codes of conduct that give substance to
the Secretary-General's call for zero tolerance in cases
of abuse of civilians by United Nations personnel. We
need to understand what this means for the system. In
the view of the United Kingdom, such a code of
conduct must have a system-wide application, affecting
all who work under the blue flag, including United
Nations humanitarian agencies and implementing
partners associated with United Nations programmes.

Such codes of conduct need to be transparent,
clear and credible, underlining the need for
accountability, and they should be properly regulated.
They could also assist in preventing the development
of a climate of impunity fostering an environment in
which terrible crimes and abuse can take place - a
point made very specifically to us recently by the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, in the case of Sierra Leone, when
she talked to an Arria formula meeting the other day.

Having enumerated the issues pertinent to the
protection of civilians, we need to ask how the system
is to work these into its planning processes. Clearly,
strengthening the planning and strategic capacities of
the United Nations will be important in
operationalizing much of the thinking contained in the
aide-memoire. I am glad to hear from Mr. Oshima
about the workshops planned to spread good practice
amongst United Nations personnel.

I, too, would like to draw attention to the
President's letter of last June (S/2001/614), which
called for the establishment of a cross-cutting team
between OCHA and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. This would be a clear step forward towards
the integration which the United Kingdom is always
calling for.

The Under-Secretary-General has given us useful
details this morning of measures in all these areas
which the Secretariat is taking. I hope he will keep us
informed on progress on mainstreaming the concerns
set out in the aide-memoire. We would welcome future
joint briefings from Mr. Oshima and Mr. Guehenno in
that respect.

We also need to be careful that there is
consistency and synergy between our aide-memoire
and the road map of recommendations arising from the
Secretary-General ' s report of March 2001
(S/2001/331), and which we also requested in the
President's letter last June to the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, let me draw attention to the
covering letter which very sensibly sets out the aide-
memoire's purpose and which we will adopt this
morning as a presidential statement. It is not meant to
prescribe or to limit the Council's actions, or to treat
selectively any aspects of the wide concerns captured
in the many resolutions cited in the aide-memoire. So it
is not meant to be an inflexible constraint on our work.
Rather, it is intended to be a compendium of issues
which may be relevant for the Security Council's
consideration. The aide-memoire should be updated as
necessary, so that it can be used, on a case-by-case
basis, as a tool kit in designing appropriate responses
to the situations which come before us.

That is the spirit in which the United Kingdom
will be using this document. We encourage other
Council members to do the same.

