Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Ijoin in
thanking Mr. Guehenno, Mr. Fall and Ms. McAskie for
their important briefings.

The situation in West Africa, as described in this
morning's briefings and in the excellent report of the
Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa (S/2001/434), is
most alarming. It threatens to grow beyond control if it
is not resolved as a matter of urgency, especially
because it could spread, in a domino effect, which
would endanger the stability and security of the entire
subregion, as the Inter-Agency Mission rightly
observed.

The exceptional complexity of this precarious
situation in terms of security, humanitarian, economic,
social and political matters can no longer be addressed
through piecemeal, sectoral or ad hoc responses. We
have consistently advocated a comprehensive,
integrated, multidimensional approach in order
effectively to address the many challenges to peace and
security, especially in Africa; we endorse the regional
approach advocated by the Inter-Agency Mission and
by Ms. McAskie, who enlarged on this idea in her
briefing. We note too that Mr. Fall stressed the
importance of restoring dialogue among the heads of
State of the subregion in order to resolve this situation.

In our View, the Mission's recommendations
should be implemented with all due diligence in the
framework of coordinated joint action among all those
involved. In that connection, we consider that the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), under the leadership of President
Konare- whom we vigorously support in his
sustained efforts to resolve the problems facing West
Africa- should be fully involved in any activities in
the subregion.

That is why my delegation fully supports the
recommendations of the Inter-Agency Mission
regarding the provision of assistance to ECOWAS to
strengthen its institutional, logistical and financial
capacities to enable it to shoulder its weighty
responsibilities. The United Nations and the Security
Council are in fact called upon to support the initiatives
of that subregional organization under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, particularly its initiatives
to settle these problems by political means and to put
an end to the unprecedented humanitarian crisis that
the subregion has long been experiencing.

One of the first measures to take in that
connection is to help ECOWAS to deploy an
interposition force along the borders of Guinea, Sierra
Leone and Liberia in order to ease tension and help the
movement or voluntary return of refugees, whose
situation remains a matter of concern, in conditions of
full safety and security.

The Security Council is actively seized of this
matter, and it should focus its efforts on preserving
what has been attained in Sierra Leone and on
preventing an escalation in the subregion. There are
four goals to pursue.

First, the Council should support ECOWAS
mediation efforts and encourage the leaders of the three
countries to engage in constructive dialogue with a
view to resolving pending problems.

Secondly, it should reiterate its appeal to the
States concerned to respect one another's territorial
integrity, disarm the armed groups that are on their
territory, and work to build a climate of trust among
themselves.

Thirdly, it should follow closely developments in
Liberia, especially the humanitarian crisis that affects
hundreds of thousands of Liberian refugees. Here I
stress the need for regular assessments of the sanctions
and of their effects on the civilian population and on
the country's economy. We also consider it necessary
to establish an independent verification mechanism to
supervise the Liberian Government's compliance with
the Council's demands; the Liberian Government itself
has proposed the establishment of such a mechanism.

And finally, the Council should help find a
solution to the grave humanitarian crisis in the
subregion and should support the Mission's
recommendation that an international conference be
convened to mobilize donor support for these
countries, and especially for Guinea.

We hope that the working group set up by the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the Inter-
Agency Mission's recommendations can report on its
work in the near future.

