Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Your presidency this month, sir, has been
characterized by open debates on very important
issues. I should like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
very valuable statement on developments since 25
February. I would also like very warmly to welcome
Mr. Nebojsa Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and to thank him for
the very detailed statement that he gave to the Council
on the latest developments in Kosovo and the Balkans.

My delegation would like to express its
satisfaction at the endorsement by the Kosovo
Assembly on 27 February of Mr. Ibrahim Rugova as
President and at the formation of a Government in
Kosovo under the leadership of Mr. Bajram Rexhepi, in
accordance with the coalition agreement of 4 March.
This was the first important step in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) towards breaking the
impasse that has lasted for so long. It will allow the
transitional entities in Kosovo fully to carry out their
tasks in accordance with the Constitutional Framework.
It will also strengthen the cultural dialogue among the
many political parties in Kosovo, as Mr. Annabi
pointed out in referring to the fact that the coalition
Government is made up of representatives of all parties
but one, which decided not to join the coalition but
expressed its desire to participate. We hope that this
desire will be fulfilled as soon as possible.

It is also a cause of satisfaction to us that these
transitional departments are to become ministries. At
the same time, we hope that all groups and principal
ethnicities will enjoy equal and fair representation in
the Government so that stability may prevail in those
institutions. It is only right that we take into
consideration the concerns expressed by the Deputy
Prime Minister of the Yugoslav constituent Republic of
Serbia. In doing so, we will promote stability in
Kosovo in accordance with the agreements of
November 2001.

I wish to reaffirm the importance of focusing on
the security situation in the light of these positive
developments. This will require a redoubling of efforts
to establish conditions conducive to coexistence among
all the elements of society in Kosovo and to improve
relations among all communities there, thus
strengthening the reconciliation process. It will also
help to establish an equitable security and political
situation and lead to the continued economic and social
development of all sectors ofthe population in Kosovo.

As to the idea referred to by the Deputy Prime
Minister of building a five-meter wall separating
Kosovo from Yugoslavia, I found it very strange,
particularly given that we live in an era that has
rejected the erection of walls, such as the Berlin Wall,
and rejoiced in its destruction. How can we now accept
the erection of a new wall in that region?

We welcome the initiative of releasing Albanian
prisoners to Pristina, which has come about through the
efforts of the Yugoslav Government, particularly those
of Deputy Prime Minister Covie.

We also wish to highlight the issue of the various
ethnic minorities in Kosovo. These must be represented
equitably in political life if we truly wish security and
stability to prevail in Kosovo. In this regard, I am
pleased to note the declining murder rate, as pointed
out by Mr. Annabi, and the measures taken towards the
second weapons amnesty in Kosovo. While these
developments coincided with the formation of the new
Government and will promote security in Kosovo, they
do not resolve the issue of whether it is possible for
these conditions to prevail, particularly in view of the
extremism espoused by certain elements there. We
must find an answer to this very important question.

We support the efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner,
since he assumed the leadership of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to maintain
the rule of law and fully to implement resolution 1244
(1999). We hope that we will be able to hear a detailed
briefing by Mr. Steiner in April on the true direction of
and latest developments in the situation in Kosovo.

