Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this debate.

Costa Rica has read and studied carefully the report
of the Secretary-General on the issue of children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821), submitted in accordance
with resolution 2225 (2015). My delegation endorses
the statement delivered by the representative of Norway
on behalf of the group of countries supporting the
Safe Schools Declaration and by the representative of
Panama on behalf of the Human Security Network.

Costa Rica shares the View that all parties to
armed conflict have a particular obligation with regard
to the protection of children and that this obligation
emanates directly from international law, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
numerous resolutions of the Council. That is why Costa
Rica also endorses the Safe Schools Declaration and
the statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.

The statements we heard this morning from
Ms. Gamba and Mr. Shaikh described with devastating
clarity the horrors suffered by millions of girls and
boys as a consequence of armed conflict. Additionally,
the asymmetric attacks committed by non-State armed
groups have a particularly severe impact on children,
particularly when they take place in densely populated
areas and are carried out against schools and hospitals.
Children continue to be exposed to Violations of
their rights, sexual violence, maiming, recruitment
as fighters, including to commit suicide attacks,
and killings. Those who are able to survive have an
uncertain future, growing up in countries devastated
by war, without any education and with very limited
possibilities for developing their individual potential.

States have the primary responsibility to provide
protection and assistance to children and therefore must
strengthen their national capacities to attend to their
needs and keep them far away from armed conflict,
Violent extremism and recruitment by non-State
armed groups. This is why my country believes that
we coordinated international efforts must be made on
prevention and early warning, because this is the most
effective way to meet our international obligations in
this area.

However, we also acknowledge the existence of
conflicts and the imperative need to ensure that in this
context the norms of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and international humanitarian law do not
become a dead letter. It is unacceptable that girls and
boys are used as soldiers and that the parties to armed
conflict interrupt the provision of drinking water,
electricity, gas, food, medicine or humanitarian aid to
the civilian population, placing them in a situation of
even greater vulnerability.

States must adopt protection measures and
ensure that schools are safe and welcoming places,
including under the most difficult circumstances,
and that Government assistance plans incorporate a
humanitarian response and the educational framework
in general. We need to ensure the protection of schools
as well as of the educational infrastructure. In 2015
Costa Rica was one of the 38 signatory countries to the
Safe Schools Declaration, signed in Oslo, a number that
today has increased to 70. We invite those that have not
yet done so to join this initiative.

We also urge that the listings of those who commit
such serious Violations be drawn up on an impartial,
independent and evidence-based manner. We believe
that there needs to be a uniform, consolidated and
more effective strategy for monitoring, reporting
and responding to grave violations of the rights of
children in the field, including the sustainability of
the capacities of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions.

Finally, Costa Rica urges that children recruited by
armed groups be considered as victims and that they
be provided protection and access to child-protection
services at all detention centres where they may be
located, and that an end be put to impunity for those
who commit these serious violations.

