Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): The aggression which Israel is perpetrating
against Lebanon must be halted immediately and the
occupied territories must be returned. The Security
Council must reaffirm all the provisions of resolution
425 (1978) and take the measures necessary to bring
about its implementation.

The situation of acts of aggression against Lebanon
is untenable. A growing loss of human life is being added
to the material costs. Air-, sea- and land-based attacks on
all parts of Lebanon, which violate international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, are bringing new
suffering to the Lebanese civilian population, which is
most affected by these attacks. To the numerous civilian
casualties an increase of more than 600,000 in the number
of displaced persons has been added.

Life in southern Lebanon, already permanently
affected by continued Israeli occupation, is becoming
even more precarious under current conditions. More than
50 villages and cities have been evacuated; areas near the
capital of Lebanon are being attacked, and the city of
Tyre is threatened with bombardment - some of its
archaeological zones have already been damaged by
Israel's attacks. No part of the country has escaped these
acts of aggression; even Palestinian camps in the north of
the country have been bombed.

 

The targets being bombed are civilian and of economic
importance to Lebanon. We wonder whether these
belligerent actions also represent an attempt to thwart
Lebanese economic recovery, which was on the right track
after years of war, or to terrorize the civilian population and
create movements of refugees in order to create more
difficulties for the Lebanese authorities in the process of
rebuilding the country.

Cuba considers that the actions unleashed today
against Lebanon, which constitute an unacceptable violation
of the sovereignty of that country, increase the corollary
danger of an escalation that would be difficult to control
and could have unforeseeable consequences for the region.
The attacks on Lebanon endanger the peace process in the
Middle East as a whole and place one more obstacle in its
way, especially when they are added to the actions taken
against the Palestinian population, which were denounced
in the Security Council earlier today. Only the withdrawal
of Israel from the occupied territories can ensure the peace
and security of the region.

Cuba rejects terrorism in all its forms. The Cuban
people have been victims of terrorist acts for over 35 years.
These acts perpetrated by Israel, instead of ending the
escalation of violence, will tend to provoke more violence.
Instead of mitigating tension, they will exacerbate it.
Instead of promoting confidence, they will inevitably
magnify distrust. The Security Council must unequivocally
condemn Israeli aggression against Lebanon, against its
civilian population, its infrastructure and the archaeological
sites that have been proclaimed the common heritage of
mankind. It must take all necessary measures to halt this
aggression. To fail to do so would be like decreeing
impunity for Israeli actions against Lebanon, which would
have a harmful effect not only on that country and on the
security of its population, but also on international peace
and security. It would set a precedent making it possible to
launch attacks on and violate the sovereignty of a State, to
kill and destroy with impunity if one has the right friends
and if they wield enough power in the Security Council.

If ending aggression is important, it is also important
to achieve the approval of an integral programme of
cooperation with Lebanon to provide its Government with
the necessary resources to heal the wounds caused by the
aggression. Furthermore, the Security Council should
remain in session until this new and dangerous threat to
international peace and security comes to a halt.

