Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for their briefings.
I am grateful to our colleagues from Turkey, Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq for their valuable insights. I thank
you, Mr. President and the Government of France
for initiating this meeting, which I believe should
stir the conscience of the whole world. The need for
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people is urgent
and it is growing. Over 200 people are currently dying
every day. More than 1 in 10 Syrians is now in need
of United Nations assistance. Close to 230,000 people
have fled the country and, as we have heard, many
more are waiting at its borders.

It is right that the Security Council show leadership
in addressing the consequences of the conflict. But we
cannot forget that we have so far failed in the Council in
our responsibility to address the causes of the conflict.
It is a welcome fact that, months ago, we adopted
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). But we have
failed, on three occasions, to adopt a resolution that
throws the full weight of the Council behind a plan to
end the violence. We have not turned the desire for peace

into a binding obligation to bring it about. We are now
seeing the consequences of that failure. When calling
for a resolution we warned that the Syrian Government
was bent on violence and was not committed to a
political process. We have seen whole cities laid waste
and the cold-blooded slaughter of civilians. We warned
of the risk of civil war in Syria and the creation of
refugees on a vast scale. In August alone, 50,000
new refugees have sought sanctuary in neighbouring
countries. We warned of the threat to international
peace and security and the risk of extremism. there is
now a danger of instability spreading to Lebanon and
other neighbouring countries.

We condemn any attempt to use Syrian territory
as a base for terrorist attacks in neighbouring
countries and we deplore the sectarian violence that
has happened in Lebanon. Lebanon has paid a price in
blood higher than any other country, due to decades of
coercion by the Al-Assad family. It must be allowed to
pursue an independent, sovereign future free from the
assassinations and interference of the past. We support
the efforts of the Government of Prime Minister Mikati
to maintain Lebanon's peace and stability. We hope
that other United Nations Members will increase their
support to the Lebanese Army, as we have done in the
United Kingdom.

Like many colleagues here have already mentioned,
I have seen the plight of Syrian refugees at first-hand.
In Jordan with my colleague the Foreign Minister of
Jordan, a few weeks ago I met innocent people who had
played no part in the conflict, but whose families and
livelihoods were being torn apart. I spoke to women
refugees whose relatives had been killed and their
homes destroyed, who had witnessed atrocities and
who had walked for weeks to escape from the country. I
saw the bewilderment and fear of children, who should
be safely at home preparing for the new school year but
who are, instead, refugees. And I saw the sheer scale of
the effort to provide safe shelter, sanitation, warm food
and medical attention to those desperate people.

I applaud the Governments and the people of
Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq for their generosity,
in particular the kindness of many families who have
taken refugees into their homes. I also pay tribute to all
of the United Nations agencies for their work.

The Security Council's responsibility to act now
is even greater than before. We will have to return
to those fundamental responsibilities in the coming
weeks. Today I believe that we should take a stand on
five issues.

First, we should call upon all countries to contribute
funds to the United Nations relief effort and we should
set a strong example of generosity ourselves. The
United Kingdom is the second largest bilateral donor of
international aid for the Syrian people, having already
committed $41 million. Today we are announcing
a further $4.5 million, to bring the total level of our
humanitarian assistance to $46 million. That will
include £2 million for life-saving medical aid for the
worst affected areas in Syria and £1 million to provide
clinical care and counselling to Syrian refugees in
Jordan, in particular for women who have suffered the
horrors of sexual violence.

At the General Assembly next month, the United
Kingdom will set out our plans to use the presidency
of the Group of Eight next year to help tackle sexual
violence in conflict.

In June, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) appealed for
$193 million to respond to the crisis. Three months later
that appeal for funding has not been met adequately,
while the need for it has grown. That should be a
matter of shame. The conflict has worsened. If the
bombardment of cities such as Aleppo continues, we
could see a dramatic increase in the number of refugees.

I call on all nations to make the contributions
needed to save innocent lives in Syria and to support the
neighbours of Syria. I urge citizens around the world to
ask their Governments to do what they can do to help.
To that end, the United Kingdom proposes a meeting of
development ministers with United Nations agencies to
encourage increased donations. We urge all members
of the Security Council to call on all parties in Syria
to allow the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
full access to areas of need inside Syria. We condemn
the disturbing reports that medical stocks, humanitarian
personnel and aid centres in Syria are being deliberately
targeted. We hope the Syrian Government will hear a
clear message from the Security Council today that it
must meet its humanitarian obligations.

Secondly, the Council should express its
commitment to supporting justice and accountability
for the Syrian people. The Human Rights Council's
Commission of Inquiry has reported human rights
violations on an appalling scale by the Syrian
Government and its shabiha militia, as well as abuses
by some armed groups. The Government of the United
Kingdom strongly believes that the Commission's
mandate should be extended so it can continue its vital
work, and that the Security Council must be ready to act
on its findings. We also support the Swiss Government's
initiative to build momentum and support for a referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court, and urge others to join those efforts. Those
responsible for crimes in Syria should be left in no
doubt that they will be held accountable.

Thirdly, we must face up to the need to prepare
support for Syria as it emerges from conflict. The
international community must plan now if we are to
ensure rapid support for a future Syrian Government.
This is necessary in order to minimize the risks to
regional and international security, to protect civilians
inside Syria and to lay the foundations for longer-term
stability. A new Syrian Government will face many
challenges, from reforming the security and justice
sectors and ensuring public safety to restoring health
and education services. That cannot be left to chance.
The United Kingdom will continue to work closely
with the Syrian political opposition, encouraging them
to develop their vision for a stable, democratic Syria
where all communities are respected and secure.

Fourthly, the people of Syria live in the shadow
of the threat of the Syrian regime's stock of chemical
and biological weapons. All Security Council members
should demand that Syria adhere to its obligations to
secure and account for those stocks, and call on the
Secretary-General to ensure that the investigation
mechanism into allegations of the use of chemical and
biological weapons can be readily deployed.

Fifthly, the best way forward in Syria remains a
Syrian-led political transition, on the basis of the plan
set out by Kofi Annan and endorsed by the Geneva
Action Group, including members of the Security
Council. I thank Kofi Annan for all his tireless work.
I welcome the new Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the Arab League to his role and offer him
the full support of the United Kingdom as he takes this
work forward.

The implementation of a transition plan should now
be required by the Security Council through the adoption
of a resolution, with clear consequences for a failure to
implement the terms ofprevious resolutions. Ifit is not,
the scene is set for months of greater bloodshed, greater
suffering and greater danger to international peace and
security. Since the Council has not yet decided to do
everything it can to end the violence, today we must
at least do what we can to mitigate its effects. That
is our focus today; but our primary aim must be the
determined and united effort to end the conflict that
this crisis demands and that the people of Syria deserve.

