Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to provide an
update of developments in Kosovo since I briefed the
members of the Council on 16 and 24 May.

First, I would like to speak of the establishment
of inclusive provisional institutions of self-
government. A welcome development since the
Security Council was last briefed has been the
completion of the Kosovo Government, following the
nomination at the end of May by the Kosovo Serb
Return Coalition of Kosovo Serb representatives for
the positions of Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and
Rural Development and Inter-ministerial Coordinator
for Returns in the Office of the Prime Minister.

The assumption of office by the Kosovo Serb
representatives coincided with the Government's first
100 days in office. On 12 June, all members of the
Government swore an oath of office, pledging their
commitment to work for the benefit of all communities
in Kosovo. The oath-taking ceremony marked the third
anniversary of the arrival of the international
community in Kosovo.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has continued to work
with the provisional institutions of self-government to
ensure that those bodies respect the division between
reserved and transferred responsibilities. As external
relations and foreign policy are powers reserved to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Steiner has issued guidelines for agreements of the
provisional institutions of self-government with
Governments of States and with international
organizations. The guidelines were provided to the
Kosovo Government in order to ensure that actions by
the Kosovo governmental authorities are in compliance
with the basic laws governing Kosovo and duly take
into account the reserved responsibilities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The liaison
offices of States and offices of international
organizations in Kosovo were also requested to ensure
that their actions vis-a-vis the Kosovo provisional
institutions were in accord with these guidelines.

At the same time, UNMIK and the provisional
institutions of self-government have enhanced their
consultations during the reporting period. The
Economic and Fiscal Council, under the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has been
constituted and already plays an important role in
coordinating policy between UNMIK and the
provisional institutions on economic and fiscal issues.

The Council has held its first two meetings,
discussing such topics as the Kosovo Trust Agency, the
Kosovo Pension Savings Trust and draft legislation on
public financial management and accountability.

I would like to say a few words about municipal
elections. Preparations continued for the municipal
elections scheduled to take place on 26 October. On
10 June, Mr. Steiner promulgated regulation 2002/11
on the municipal elections in Kosovo, which defined a
four-year mandate for Municipal Assembly members.
UNMIK has focused efforts on ensuring the
participation of all communities in the upcoming
elections. The prospects for multi-ethnic participation
are encouraging, as UNMIK has so far received a high
number of applications from minority community
political parties seeking certification for the municipal
elections. By 14 June, the mid-point in the certification
process, more than 40 per cent of all applications
received had been submitted by minority communities.
It should be noted that in the 2000 municipal elections,
only 26 per cent of those running for election were
from minority communities.

The Mission has taken further steps to strengthen
the rule of law in Kosovo. On 18 June, UNMIK police
arrested four former members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA). The following day, a further two former
KLA members handed themselves in to UNMIK
police, and all six were brought before an international
judge. Three of the six are active members of the
Kosovo Protection Corps, and one is currently
suspended from it. The six men are charged with
unlawful detention and causing serious bodily injury in
relation to an incident in June 1999 during which they
are alleged to have beaten and tortured five other
former KLA members as a punishment for defection to
a rival command, and in relation to a noted incident in
June 2000, in which they are alleged to have broken
into a house and participated in an exchange of gunfire
with persons in the house. On 20 June 2002, an
international judge opened an investigation into all six
suspects in connection with these charges, and ordered
that they be detained for 30 days. UNMIK has also
convened a panel of international judges to hear any
appeal which the suspects might make against the
judge's orders.

I must point out that, contrary to allegations from
the head of the Kosovo Protection Corps that UNMIK
police used unnecessary force in the arrests, internal
investigations suggest that the operation was carried
out in a professional manner with a proportionate use
of force. In contrast to the widespread protests that
were triggered by the arrest on war crimes charges of
three former KLA members at the end of January, these
recent arrests have thus far generated only a localized
public reaction. Hundreds of Kosovo Albanians have
demonstrated over the past few days in Djakovica and
Decani. In one case, KFOR anti-riot and quick reaction
units were deployed to calm the situation down. In
another, KFOR had to fire warning shots to disperse an
aggressive crowd. Comments received by Mr. Steiner
from the audience during a local television talk show
seemed to indicate general support for UNMIK's recent
actions aimed at upholding the rule of law.

In the same vein, a number of successful anti-
smuggling operations have taken place during the
reporting period. UNMIK police and the Kosovo Police
Service have seized substantial quantities of gasoline,
alcohol and cigarettes at border points. An illegal
cigarette factory in Kosovo was raided, yielding more
than 20 tons of tobacco and counterfeit cigarette
cartons. The Gate 1 checkpoint used by the UNMIK
customs, UNMIK police and KFOR, which is located
at the northernmost point of Kosovo, was moved closer
to the administrative boundary in order to eliminate the
use by illegal traders of the no-man's-land along the
boundary.

Within the framework of the High-Ranking
Working Group, on 31 May UNMIK signed a Protocol
on Police Cooperation with the Governments of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia as part of
its strategy to combat organized crime and terrorism.
The Protocol will facilitate information exchange
between the UNMIK police force and its Serbian and
Yugoslav counterparts and will provide for enhanced
cooperation in relation to the policing of returns,
movement across administrative boundaries and the
identification of missing persons. UNMIK has also
initiated negotiations with the relevant authorities in
Albania and Montenegro in order to further develop
regional police and justice cooperation. During the
South-East European Cooperation Process meeting in
Belgrade on 19 June, Mr. Steiner proposed the
establishment of enhanced regional cooperation
mechanisms to fight organized crime and terrorism in
the region. His proposals were well received by the
participants.

I would now like to turn to the very important
issue of sustainable return. Spontaneous returns have
occurred in various locations in Kosovo, bringing the
total number of returns to 874 in the first five months
of 2002, 43 per cent of them being Kosovo Serb
returns.

At the end of May, the Senior Adviser on Returns
joined the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General following his nomination which I
mentioned earlier - by the Kosovo Serb Return
Coalition. He resigned his seat in the Kosovo
Assembly to assume that position. Working within
UNMIK and the Government, respectively, both the
Senior Adviser and the Inter-Ministerial Coordinator
for Returns will seek to assist in fostering returns and
in stabilizing the minority communities in Kosovo,
thus stemming their outflow. It is also hoped that their
presence in UNMIK and in the Government will
strengthen the credibility of the returns programme in
the eyes of internally displaced persons and refugees.

Following the release of the concept paper on the
right to sustainable returns by Mr. Steiner in late May,
UNMIK has increased grass-roots efforts to support
minority returns. Municipal working groups on return
have been established in 24 of 30 municipalities,
marking an improvement in the awareness of the
returns issue on the part of local authorities. UNMIK
has also worked with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/ Serbia Coordination Centre and other
actors to reach internally displaced persons in Serbia
proper through public meetings and Internet-based
information systems. The use of the media for outreach
to internally displaced persons was also facilitated by
agreements reached during a two-day conference on
bridging the information gap, which took place in
Pristina on 28 and 29 May, with media representatives
from Kosovo, Montenegro, Serbia and other parts of
the region.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to deal with issues relating to
freedom of movement. Another outcome of the meeting
of the High-Level Working Group on 31 May was the
conclusion of a technical agreement between UNMIK
and the Serbian rail network for the extension of the
network between Belgrade and Kosovo. The first rail
link between Lesac - the first station that is
encountered upon entering Kosovo from the north -
and Belgrade will open on 27 June. The practical
implementation of this agreement could improve the
freedom of movement of Serbs in Kosovo, as well as
help in Kosovo's long-term economic development.

Freedom of movement in general has been
strengthened as a result of decisions taken by
neighbouring States. The Albanian Government took a
unilateral decision to ease the border controls on
Kosovo residents, which means that they can now go
overland to Albania with an UNMIK identity card
instead of a national passport, or with travel papers
issued by UNMIK. It is also a matter of note that the
Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia decided to abolish the visa requirement for
those holding travel documents issued by UNMIK.

I would also like to make some observations
about the missing. The Special Representative, Mr.
Steiner, has promoted continued dialogue between
associations of the missing in Kosovo and in Serbia
proper, which is considered essential for further
progress in this very sensitive area. Therefore on 22
June Mr. Steiner organized a meeting with
representatives of the families of the missing Kosovo
Serbs and Kosovo Albanians. Despite the obvious
difficulty of such a meeting, both sides agreed to
cooperate, to help each other. UNMIK will continue to
hold such inter-ethnic meetings on this issue, which
profoundly touches both communities.

UNMIK has also begun preparations to exhume
Victims' gravesites in Kosovo in order to attempt to
identify the remains. Such preparations are also under
way in Serbia proper. The number of identifications in
Kosovo in the first months of 2002 has already
exceeded the number made in all of 2001, and this was
the result of enhanced cooperation between the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Committee for Missing Persons, as well
as of a restructuring of UNMIK operations in this area.

I have a few comments on relaunching Kosovo's
economy. The regulations establishing the Kosovo
Trust Agency and the associate special chamber of the
Supreme Court were signed into law on 13 June. The
new Agency will be able to sell commercial assets
currently held by collectively owned enterprises to new
owners through transparent procedures and to hold the
proceeds in trust until creditor claims are settled
through a judicial process. The Kosovo Trust Agency
will also assume control over some State-owned
enterprises and public-utility service providers.

In the economic sphere we also see that there has
been significant improvement in the range of banking
services available in Kosovo, including in minority
areas. On 15 June the first bank branch to be located
wholly within a Kosovo Serb area was opened in
Zvecan, in the Mitrovica region. This branch of the
American Bank of Kosovo will operate predominantly
in euros, although it will also have facilities dealing
with Yugoslav dinars. The Microenterprise Bank plans
to open automatic cash dispensers in some minority
enclaves.

With regard to the situation in Mitrovica, UNMIK
remains fully committed to implementing a
reunification policy for the town. The Special
Representative made this clear in public statements
during his recent Visits to both the northern and
southern parts of Mitrovica. UNMIK and KFOR have
continued to implement a series of initiatives to meet
the needs of Kosovo Serbs for security and services
which a unified city should provide, without having
parallel structures. Recent UNMIK measures have
included doubling the number of UNMIK police in
northern Mitrovica, supported by an increase in the
KFOR presence, launching a public campaign
promoting Serb participation in the Kosovo Police
Service, and discussions with the Kosovo Albanian
leaders to ensure their support.

President Kostunica and Foreign Minister
Svilanovic have expressed to Mr. Steiner their support
for a policy of zero tolerance for crime in all of
Kosovo, including northern Mitrovica.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
recent arrest of suspects in cases pending from June
1999 and June 2000 illustrate UNMIK'S zero tolerance
for crime and are a clear sign that no one is above the
law. Crime in Kosovo hurts not only the victims
directly but Kosovo as a whole. Continued support for
UNMIK's fight against crime through criminal
investigation leading to arrests, building the capacity of
the local police and judiciary, and improved gathering
of information about crimes and better cooperation by
the people in bringing to the police useful information
on crimes - all this will benefit the people in Kosovo.

I also wish to emphasize in this connection that
crime knows no boundaries and that regional
cooperation plays an important role in the fight against
crime. Only by working together in a regional context
to promote cooperation, coordination and dialogue will
law and order be enhanced in Kosovo. Respect for the
rule of law is part of the process of normalization, and
it is this process that will lead Kosovo towards
becoming a fair and just society embracing all
communities in its political, institutional, economic
and social life.
