Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African members of the Security Council, namely, South Africa, Tunisia and the Niger, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). At the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and thank him for his briefing and his unwavering commitment to the stabilization of the situation in Mali. The deteriorating sociopolitical situation in Mali following the protests that led to the events of 18 August with the change in constitutional order are cause for concern for our countries. In the light of the negative impact that these developments could have on the stability and social, economic and security situations in Mali, and specifically on the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) imposed sanctions. Today we are happy to note the progress achieved towards normalization in Mali, including the publication of a transition charter, taking account of the decisions of the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS regarding the progressive return to constitutional order in the country. These positive developments allowed for ECOWAS sanctions to be lifted. Nevertheless, important tasks await the transition, namely, the fight against terrorism, the restoration of peace and security throughout the country, institutional reforms conducive to restoring social peace in the country and the full operationalization of the Northern Development Zone. The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains the best framework for these necessary and urgent institutional reforms and these priority tasks. Its implementation must be a priority. Continuing to implement the strategy for the stabilization of central Mali is also vitally important if the challenges in central Mali are to be overcome. To that end, we call on all Malian political stakeholders to resolutely commit to a genuine and inclusive dialogue within the framework of the agreement and the ECOWAS process in order to comprehensively address the challenges that Mali is currently facing. The A3+1 commends the ECOWAS communique of 5 October 2020. It expresses its full support to Mali and calls upon Mali's various stakeholders to support the new Malian civil authorities and to restore State control and authority across the nation and ensure the resumption of the provision of vital social services. We commend the continued efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in the implementation of those priorities as enshrined in resolution 2531 (2020), including its contribution to reconciliation and social cohesion in both central and northern Mali. Its vital support, which allowed for the redeployment of the new, reconstituted Malian Defence and Security Forces, must be commended despite the challenges that remain to be met. In that respect, in order to build on the progress already made, it is vital that we step up our efforts to resolve all remaining challenges so that the reconstituted and redeployed units can play their role and contribute more effectively to security in northern Mali, including in Kidal, and to facilitating the return of State authority in those regions. In the same vein, the A3+l commends the commitment and mediation efforts made by ECOWAS over recent months. This reflects its ownership and its leadership in the process of the peaceful resolution of the multidimensional crises that have the region in their grip. We encourage ECOWAS to continue to support the Malian people in the implementation of the road map in coming months. The quest for peace and stability in Mali requires that ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations must work closely together and pool their efforts to achieve lasting peace. The maintenance of peace, security and stability in Mali is vital to bringing about peace, security and calm throughout West Africa and beyond. Because the events of 18 August in Bamako are not new to the Malian people, there is a need to review the Malian political and governance model and the manner in which international development partners operate in the country. Development plans and programmes must be people-centred and foster inclusive participation and full ownership on the part of the Malian people. To that end, the Malian people must be the principal actors in restoring stability in their country. In terms of security, Mali and the Sahel remain vulnerable to the atrocities of terrorism. Violent extremism, intercommunal violence and organized transnational crime require greater attention. We remain worried by the continued attacks on civilians, MINUSMA peacekeepers and the Malian forces, and we condemn them. We reaffirm that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes must be brought to justice. We will continue to reaffirm that peace is a global public good. The threats to security in Mali and in the Sahel are spilling over borders and can have catastrophic repercussions on the rest of the African continent and the world as a whole. The efforts of the Sahelian States must be supported appropriately, both bilaterally and multilaterally, especially in their collective undertakings. The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force has made it possible to carry out several large-scale operations since its creation in 2017, in keeping with its mandate. In order to be more broad- based and decisive, its efforts require predictable and sustained support. The A3+1 commends the international community's support, in particular that of MINUSMA, for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We are encouraged by the progress made within the framework of resolution 2531 (2020) on improving support for the Joint Force. That will have an immediate operational impact on the Force. However, given the provisions of resolution 2491 (2019), which specifically state that support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force must not interfere in MINUSMA's performance, and given the recent sociopolitical and security in Mali, which requires that MINUSMA redouble its efforts and focus on the core tasks of its mandate in order to achieve its strategic priorities, we believe that it is high time for robust support to be extended to the Joint Force through a dedicated support office, as has been suggested by the Secretary-General on numerous occasions. In conclusion, the humanitarian situation in Mali and the Sahel remains of grave concern. The consequences of the coronavirus disease, flooding and food insecurity, which have increased at an alarming pace, require urgent funding of the humanitarian response plan for 2020. As of 31 August, only 35 per cent of the $474 million needed for its implementation had been received. In order to tackle sustainably the many challenges facing the region, we must adopt a holistic approach to address the immediate challenges facing Mali and the region in general, namely in the areas of development, poverty and unemployment. Against that backdrop, we call on Mali's international partners to step up their efforts to support Mali at this particularly delicate stage for the country in order to contribute to stabilizing the country and ensure its transition towards a fully stable and prosperous democracy.
