Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): First, we welcome the initiative of the French
presidency of the Security Council to convene this
open debate, particularly in the context of the current
humanitarian crisis. We also welcome the report
(S/2016/447) of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

The purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations are our criteria for the
foundations on which peacekeeping operations must
function. In that context, we believe it is imperative
that both the Security Council and the States Members
of the Organization, their capacity as parties to conflict
aside, contribute or should contribute to establishing
an effective system for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
With regard to the Security Council, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict should be clearly and
explicitly included in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Such protection, as we understand it,
must take priority in situations where civilians are
at a high risk of Violence, and must be explicit with
regard to both protection against sexual violence, in a
broad sense, and on the special protection of children
and adolescents in armed conflicts. For their part, the
existing mandates of peacekeeping missions must also
be adapted in that regard. The system for the protection
of civilians must be improved and, in that connection,
the role that can be played by education and training in
the area of international humanitarian law and human
rights law to halt and prevent acts of violence, attacks
and threats against civilians, we believe, is also critical.

Paraguay is currently contributing military
personnel to six peacekeeping missions. Paraguayan
military personnel receive general training on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, prior to their
deployment in peacekeeping missions, and starting this
year, also receive specialized and specific training on the
subject in Paraguay's training centre for peacekeeping
operations. Paraguayan military peacekeeping
personnel also receive training on civilian-military
coordination and on violence and gender inequality.

In response to the Secretary-General's reports on
children and armed conflict and on conflict-related
sexual Violence, our delegation urges the troop-
contributing and police-contributing countries on the
lists in those reports to uphold specific commitments
and concrete plans to address such violations. Likewise,
we believe the contribution of universal political and
legal frameworks for the protection ofcivilians in armed
conflict is also relevant. In that regard, Paraguay urges
Member States to adhere to the Oslo declaration on
safe schools adopted in 2015. We also call upon States
to reaffirm their commitment to the Rome Statute,
to ratify it and to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court in a comprehensive manner.

We cannot fail to mention the link between
the topic of this debate and the illicit trade in light
weapons and ammunition. In that context, Paraguay
calls for the explicit inclusion of ammunition in
the regulatory frameworks of small arms and light
weapons and in their implementation, and calls upon
Member States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty. Lastly, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal to Member States to constructively
participate in formulating a political statement on the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
With regard to the current humanitarian crisis, the
delegation of Paraguay supports a comprehensive and
holistic response by all stakeholders focusing on the
protection of civilians in the framework of the principles
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1).

Finally, the Republic of Paraguay deplores the
disregard of the basic standards of international
humanitarian law and human rights by parties to
conflict, in particular through practices, such as the use
of the starvation of civilians as a weapon of war and
subjugation, restrictions on humanitarian access and on
the protection of civilians, and attacks on the institution
of asylum and the principle of non-refoulement.

