Ms. Wensley (Australia): Mr. President, Australia
welcomes your initiative in holding this open debate on
a topic which is of particular relevance to the way that
the Security Council sets mandates for United Nations
operations. This should be a debate about considerably
more than the terms on which the Council decides to
conclude an operation. What my Government wishes to

see from the Council is a more consistent approach to
planning operations in the first place, one in which
planning for the end of an operation is an integral and
indispensable aspect of all Council decisions to
authorize deployment of peacekeepers and other United
Nations personnel.

Australia strongly agrees there should be no exit
without strategy, but also wants to stress that this is not
in itself sufficient. The Council quite simply should not
create operations without an exit strategy. Moreover,
any subsequent adjustment to the planning of a
operation's end date should be timely and transparent,
and should, as so many others have said, be the subject
of prior consultations with nations contributing troops
to that operation.

Developing an exit strategy requires a clear view
of the objectives of the operation. It seems to us that if
the aim, or aims, are clear to Council members, then
the conditions that need to be in place before the
Council declares the mission has been achieved can be
readily identified. Similarly, the operational
concepts - what actions are necessary to achieve those
conditions - can be developed more readily.

There is often a debate about the validity of
setting a specific date for the end of a United Nations
operation, or tying it to the achievement of a certain
event or outcome, such as a referendum or an election.
On the one hand, creating the conditions for such an
event to take place is in some cases the very rationale
of a United Nations operation. On the other hand,
experience has shown - for example, with the
Angolan election in 1992 - that simply setting the
date of an election or of the transfer of authority to a
legitimate Government as the trigger for the United
Nations departure can be too simple a formula if it is
taken without considering the broader political and
social context. The fact is that once the United Nations
has developed a significant role on the ground, its own
credibility is in part affected by the terms on which an
operation leaves, and the impact that that has on peace
and stability in the country concerned. So there is no
golden rule for the Council on how it specifies an end-
point for an operation, other than the importance that
the conditions for ending the operation be anticipated
in the original planning, and that the Council avoid
open-ended commitments for United Nations
operations.

In our view, exit strategies should take into
account not only the military end-state that the Council
wants to see achieved, but also the political and
economic implications of a pull-out or of a significant
reduction in the numbers of peacekeepers or other
United Nations personnel. Politically, that might
include such factors as the sustainability of political
processes once the United Nations presence has gone,
and also whether processes of reconciliation between
parties in conflict, or the re-establishment of the
conditions for an election or other significant national
event, are in place. It is only reasonable here that the
Council not be expected to set the bar too high; there
will rarely be a situation when the United Nations
leaves with a completely stable, fully functioning
polity achieved. Rather, the benchmark should be that
political processes are such that there is no longer a
threat to international peace and security.

Economically, the impact of the United Nations
exit can be negative or positive. In the short term, the
United Nations withdrawal can often mean the loss of a
significant source of demand and of income, but,
equally, we need to be mindful that a large-scale
United Nations presence can create distortions in a
local economy, especially if left in place for a long
time. In those cases where the United Nations has a
major impact on a national economy - for example,
because of the size of an operation or because, as in
East Timor and Kosovo, it has actually established a
transitional administration - those economic factors
need to be given weight by the Council. There should
be, to the maximum extent possible, a seamless
transition from high levels of United Nations-
stimulated economic activity and short-term project
assistance to medium-term projects that will work to
support the economy for the longer haul.

This will obviously entail the coordination of
planning and the implementation of medium-term
development assistance projects so that the termination
of the formal operation does not result in frustration or,
worse, in a renewal of tensions or a sense that the
United Nations has suddenly turned its back on the
country being assisted. In our view, the Council will
necessarily look to the Secretary-General and to other
United Nations organs and agencies, as well as to the
international community more broadly, to be the agents
for planning and implementing this assistance. Again,
we do not think there is any one formula to guide the
Council; rather, our point is that all of these factors
should be integral to exit strategies.

I suppose that many of the points that I am
putting forward can be summarized as an appeal to the
Council, often working more closely with other
principal organs of the United Nations, to address a
strategy of assistance to the country in which the
United Nations has mandated an operation for the
period after the Blue Helmets have gone. It is of course
desirable that "exit" equate successful achievement of
the goals set by the Council. But we recognize that this
will not always be possible. Sometimes, the Council
will have to withdraw an operation because it has not
succeeded in its mandated role. In such cases, however,
we would argue strongly that the withdrawal of the
operation should not be the end of the matter. In such
cases, the Council would need to develop new goals or
a strategy for reaching the desired end-state by other
means.

In the spirit of greater transparency and
effectiveness in the Council's work, the Council should
put a premium on developing exit strategies in
consultation with countries most directly affected by its
decisions. One obvious group of countries is those
contributing troops and police to an operation,
particularly where specific timelines are incorporated
for planning purposes. There is also, however, an onus
on individual contributing countries to give early
advice to the United Nations about their own plans for
length of deployment. The reality is that some of them
will be unable to maintain a presence throughout the
life of an operation, and this should also be factored
into mission planning.

One of the ways of improving the quality of the
Council's decisions - and this is surely what we are
all talking about - is to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations Secretariat to assist with planning,
including by enhancing the professional military advice
available at United Nations Headquarters. From
Australia's viewpoint, this is one of the most critical
elements identified in the Brahimi report, and one
which we have strongly supported in discussions in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

Australia has consistently sought greater rigour in
the Council's decisions to create new mandates. We
certainly hope that today's debate will influence the
way the in which the Council conducts its business. We
appreciate that speed and the pressure of many
competing demands are always constraints on how
much the Council can do. And yet the United Nations
and Member States' resources are limited, and we
should be prepared to make the additional effort to
ensure that United Nations operations are as well
planned as possible and that the Council does not
create operations without an exit strategy.

