Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Your Excellency
Mr. Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the friendly Dominican Republic, for presiding over
this meeting to address the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security. I would
like also to remind the international community of the
need to support the countries that are most affected.

I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Mr. Achim Steiner, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme; Mr. Pavel Kabat, Chief
Scientist of the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO); and Ms. Lindsay Getschel, Research Assistant
at the Environmental Security Program of the Stimson
Center, for their valuable briefings.

Climate change has been a major international
concern in recent years. Many important international
conferences have been held to discuss the best ways to
address that phenomenon. Those endeavours and tireless
efforts of the international community resulted in the
adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
in 2015 - a historic achievement to the upholding
and implementation of which we must be committed
in order to spare Earth further deterioration. Recent
scientific studies underscore that the deterioration is
moving at a pace faster than the steps we are taking to
protect and preserve the environment.

The adverse impacts of climate change are
evident. Millions of people are suffering across the
world owing to food insecurity, water scarcity and
other health hazards that affect people and living
organisms as a result of floods, storms, desertification
and rising temperatures and sea and ocean levels that
will threaten the very existence of a number of island
States in the Pacific Ocean in the coming years. Those
facts underline the fact that climate change is a cross-
border phenomenon and that no country will be spared
its impact.

In order to address that phenomenon, all of us have
a common but differentiated responsibility. However,
that would require political will, cooperation and
solidarity at the international and regional levels in
order for tangible measures to be taken in accordance
with the agreed frameworks aimed at addressing the
impact of the phenomenon. That includes measures
that would implement the principles and purposes of
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, as well as the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, in order to limit the global temperature rise to
less than 2°C or to 15°C, if possible, by 2020.

We are concerned about the assertion of WMO
that in 2015, 2016 and 2017 global temperatures saw
record increases. We hope that the climate summit
that the Secretary-General has called for convening in
September will make progress, mobilize the required
international support and complement the achievements
made in the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which was held at the end of last year in the
city of Katowice in Poland. Important agreements were
made at the Conference to promote transparency and
information-sharing on plans and programmes aimed at
reducing emissions and increasing financial support to
developing countries and those that are most affected by
climate change, so as to help them adapt, work towards
natural-disaster reduction and continue to implement
the guidelines related to the historic Paris Agreement,
which will enter into force in 2020.

United Nations estimates show that natural
disasters related to climate change are on the rise. They
account for 77 per cent of the natural disasters that have
occurred over the past two decades. The international
community is facing considerable challenges in
addressing the emergencies caused by such disasters.
They result in the deaths of 3 million people a year
and leave many injured and in distress, a number that
reached 1.4 billion people over the past two decades.

Climate change is one of the root causes of the
challenges and difficulties in the African continent,
particularly in the region of Lake Chad basin and the
Sahel. It has exacerbated socioeconomic difficulties in
a way that has fuelled conflicts and competition over
scarce resources, which has had an impact on security
and stability in the region.

International attention to climate change has been
accompanied by similar attention from the State of
Kuwait. The reality is that, like other countries, we
are affected by climate change. Therefore, my country,
Kuwait, has shared in the efforts of the international
community to address the impact of climate change.
We have spared no effort at the local, regional and
international levels, in particular since the start of
negotiations on the historic Paris Agreement, which we
have ratified. The State of Kuwait has paid particular
attention to renewable energies and to diversifying
energy resources through the use of wind and solar
power. That will help meet 15 per cent of the State's
energy needs by 2020. The oil sector has also developed
strategies to manage greenhouse-gas emissions, with a
view to reducing them in order to improve the efficiency
of environmentally friendly energy.

Kuwait has also promoted international cooperation
and collective work as part of the collective emergency
response at the governmental and public levels in the
area of humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation. We
have also extended a helping hand to peoples of countries
facing natural disasters and countries emerging from
conflict. That includes emergency relief as well as
development and reconstruction programmes. We have
assumed our international responsibility in addressing
and mitigating natural disaster-related crises. In fact,
climate change affects food security, biodiversity,
sustainable development, peace and security, the air
and water. More than ever, we need to take additional
steps and technological measures, adopt new patterns
of behaviour and be more ambition in implementing
Sustainable Development Goal 13.

In conclusion, we stress that we will continue to
support the efforts of various United Nations organs
in the areas of crises and disasters management,
peacebuilding and addressing climate change and its
impact on security, given the multifaceted nature of
the phenomenon. That requires broad discussion in
the context of sustainable development, because we
believe in addressing the phenomenon with common
but differentiated responsibilities in the area of
climate-change mitigation and adaptation, in line with
national priorities and capacities in order to meet the
aspirations of all our peoples.
