Monsignor Grysa: The Holy See is pleased that
the Senegalese presidency has chosen this important
topic for an open debate in the Security Council,
therefore increasing the attention paid to the issue by
the international community.

Water scarcity illustrates a paradox. While water
covers two thirds of the Earth's surface and is not used
up when consumed, it is clear that the availability of
fresh water is diminishing. With expanding deserts,
deforestation and increasing droughts, everyone should
be concerned about a potential worldwide calamity
caused by a diminished water supply.

Water has always been scarce in some places,
owing usually to geographical location. However, in
other places it is scarce because of mismanagement and
misallocation, which have caused waste and inequitable
distribution. Environmental degradation makes water
toxic, and climactic changes alter hydrologic cycles.
Underground water sources in many places are
threatened by the pollution produced in certain mining,
farming and industrial activities, especially in countries
that lack adequate regulations or controls. Industrial
waste, detergents and chemical products continue
to pour into our rivers, lakes and seas. Agricultural
production, the greatest consumer of fresh water, and
industries, the second-greatest consumer, demand more
water than ever, depleting aquifers much faster than
they can be replenished.

In many places, the demand for water exceeds the
sustainable supply, with dramatic consequences for the
short and long term, including implications for national,
regional and international peace and security. Water
poverty especially affects Africa, where large sectors
of the population have no access to safe drinking
water or experience droughts that impede agricultural
production and provoke fierce competition. The
migration of entire populations from regions that are
experiencing drastic water scarcity is seen as a threat
to populations in areas with water.

In brief, the implications of water for national,
regional and international peace and security can hardly
be overstated. Indeed, water experts and advocates
ominously predict that the Third World War will be
over water. When he visited the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in 2014, Pope
Francis said,

"[w]ater is not free, as we so often think. It is a
grave problem that can lead to war".
Water scarcity also has huge implications forjustice
and equity. As Pope Francis underlined in the encyclical
Laadato si', fresh drinking water is an issue of primary
importance given its fundamental role in health and
overall well-being. In that context, one particularly
serious problem is the quality of water available to the
poor. Every day, dangerous water-borne diseases, such
as dysentery and cholera, remain a leading cause of
death, especially among infants and children.

Moreover, a growing tendency to privatize water
and turn it into a commodity dictated by market laws
could seriously compromise access to safe water on
the part of the poor, making it conceivable, as Pope
Francis said,

"that the control of water by large multinational
businesses may become a major source of conflict
in this century".

While good water management implies expenditures,
as well as fees for water use to encourage its wise
consumption, it is even more important to remember
that access to safe potable water is a basic and universal
human right, since it is essential to human survival
and, as such, is a condition for the exercise of other
human rights. Pope Francis affirmed that our world has
a grave social debt towards the poor who lack access to
drinking water, because they are denied the right to a
life consistent with their inalienable dignity.

Water-related challenges to peace and security, and
indeed to life itself, must be considered not only as threats
but also as opportunities for nations to collaborate more
closely in efforts to come up with solutions, instead of
engaging in ever-fiercer competition for a diminishing
essential resource that could ultimately lead to wars and
conflicts. New technologies continue to emerge that
could enable us to avoid a sustainability crisis through,
inter alia, better methods of food production that require
less water and industrial manufacturing that minimizes
pollution of our aquifers and water systems.

Moreover, local and traditional solutions to water-
related challenges must not be abandoned in spite of
technological advances. My delegation wishes to
encourage both the public and private sectors to support
community-driven initiatives for water conservation
and water allocation. Local communities often know
their own water systems better and how best to conserve
and harness them. While the water shortage concerns
vast areas, local solutions are always key components
in coming to grips with the water problem.

Finally, education on the fundamental importance
of water is crucial. Water continues to be wasted and
polluted, not only in the developed world but also
in developing countries that possess it in relative
abundance. That shows that there is much to do in
educating individuals and communities on issues such
as water conservation, wise consumption and equitable
use of this universal common good on the part of all.
It is important to cultivate among peoples and their
leaders a conscientious awareness that considers access
to water a universal right of all human beings, without
distinction or discrimination. The water challenges that
are provoking peace and security threats are technical,
economical, political and social, but let us not forget
that ultimately they are ethical and moral issues as well.

