Mr. Koonjul: I would like first of all to thank the
delegation of Singapore for arranging this meeting and
for giving me, as Chairman of the Security Council ad
hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, the opportunity to brief the wider
membership on the Working Group's role, functions
and programme of work. I am very grateful to
Ambassador Mahbubani for bringing Africa back into
the focus of the Security Council's work. This meeting
is particularly significant, as it is taking place just a
few days before the celebrations of Africa Day. I look
forward to hearing the comments and proposals of non-
Council members with respect to the work of the
Group.

I am particularly pleased to note the participation
of Ambassador Ivan Simonovie, President of the
Economic and Social Council, and of Ambassador
Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer of the
Organization for African Unity (OAU) in this meeting.
Their presence bears testimony to the commitment of
the Economic and Social Council and of the OAU in
the field of conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

Mr. President, you have mentioned earlier that the
idea of the establishment of the ad hoc Working Group
on Africa was raised in January this year during the
public meeting on the situation in Africa under the
Mauritius presidency. In presidential statement
S/PRST/2002/2, adopted after the public meeting, the
Council indicated that it would consider the setting up
of an ad hoc working group to monitor the
recommendations contained in S/PRST/2002/2 and to
enhance coordination with the Economic and Social
Council.

The Security Council subsequently established an
ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa at the end of February, with the
following mandate: first, to monitor the
implementation of the provisions contained in
presidential statement S/PRST/2002/2 and previous
presidential statements and resolutions regarding
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa; secondly,
to propose recommendations on the enhancement of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, as well as with other
United Nations agencies dealing with Africa; thirdly, to
examine, in particular, regional and cross-conflict
issues that affect the Council's work on African
conflict prevention and resolution; fourthly, to propose
recommendations to the Security Council to enhance
cooperation in conflict prevention and resolution
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in Africa.

In establishing and drawing up the terms of
reference of the ad hoc Working Group, there was a
clear understanding among Council members that: first,
the ad hoc Working Group would not duplicate work of
the Security Council; secondly, the ad hoc Working
Group would assist the Council in dealing with specific
issues pertaining to Africa for which there could be a
value-added contribution; and thirdly, the ad hoc
Working Group would report to the Council whenever
appropriate.

At its first meeting, members of the ad hoc
Working Group held a brainstorming session in order
to reflect on how the Group could best implement its
mandate. There was a very rich exchange of views, and
the Chair was tasked with drawing up a programme of
work, bearing in mind that it should act selectively and
be pragmatic, concrete and active, especially in its
early stages.

Subsequently, the Group agreed on a concise
programme of work as follows: enhancing cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, as well as with other United Nations
agencies; confidence-building in the region of the
Mann River Union; enhancing the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa;
election observation and assistance to electoral
processes in Africa; the establishment of groups of
friends for specific conflict situations; cooperation with
the Organization for African Unity and with
subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the Southern
African Development Community, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Community of Sahel-Saharan States and others;
enlisting the contribution of non-governmental
organizations, universities and the academia in the
work ofthe group.
Let me now elaborate a little on the work
programme. With respect to the Economic and Social
Council, the importance of the economic rehabilitation
and reconstruction of a country emerging from conflict
cannot be underestimated. We greatly value the
decision of the Economic and Social Council to set up
an advisory group on African countries emerging from
conflict. The responsibilities of the Security Council in
a conflict situation and those of the Economic and
Social Council in the post-conflict stage should be
coordinated in a harmonized manner.

It is in this spirit that the ad hoc Working Group
will invite the President of the Economic and Social
Council and its bureau to discuss: ways of enhancing
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council; coordination between
the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa and the Economic and Social
Council's ad hoc advisory group on African countries
emerging from conflict; concentration on the post-
conflict situation in Guinea-Bissau and on the situation
in the Central African Republic; discussion of the
contribution of other United Nations bodies, the
subregional organizations and the Bretton Woods
institutions in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts.

With regard to confidence-building in the region
of the Mano River Union, the Group will look into
ways of encouraging cooperation between the countries
of the Mano River Union as a means of ensuring peace
and stability in that region. It will address the
important role that the United Nations Regional Office
in West Africa could play in promoting confidence-
building measures in the region of the Mano River
Union.

With regard to the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa, the
ad hoc Working Group considers that the Special
Representatives appointed by the Secretary-General for
conflict situations in Africa already shoulder a huge
responsibility in carrying out the Council's policy and
implementing its decisions. The Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General constitute a
vital link between the Council and the parties on the
ground. In this context, the Group contemplates
working to find ways to enhance the role of Special
Representatives in Africa. It intends to consider
institutional changes that could be enacted to help the
Special Representatives in Africa discharge their
functions more efficiently and effectively.

The Working Group has also discussed questions
relating to election observation and assistance to
electoral processes. In this regard, the Group proposes
that the United Nations Secretariat examine different
ways in which the United Nations could provide
assistance to electoral processes from start to finish, at
the request of Member States and in accordance with
the established United Nations electoral assistance
procedures.

The Working Group is also proposing to take a
fresh look at the establishment of groups of friends for
specific conflict situations. Drawing from the success
encountered by existing groups of friends and the
coordinating and drafting groups dealing with specific
conflict situations, the ad hoc Working Group would
see whether similar practices could be developed for
other conflict situations.

With respect to cooperation with the OAU and
subregional organizations, the ad hoc Working Group
felt that there is a general feeling among the members
of the Council that there is a lack of communication
and contact between the Council and the OAU. In order
to redress the situation, the ad hoc Working Group will
be holding meetings on a regular basis with the
Permanent Observer of the OAU - and eventually of
the African Union - in New York with a View to
improving contacts between the OAU/African Union
and the Security Council.

The Working Group will also discuss with the
Permanent Observer of the OAU/African Union how
the Working Group could contribute to the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. The Working Group will also look into
the possibility of establishing similar contacts with
subregional organizations.

The last point in the programme of work is to
enlist the contribution of non-governmental
organizations, universities and the academia in the
work of the Group. Taking into account the
increasingly important role and contribution of non-
governmental organizations, universities and the
academia in the field of conflict prevention and
resolution, the Group will consider the appropriateness
of holding working sessions with them as required, on
a case-by-case basis.

Even though the Working Group has been very
selective in choosing the issues that it is going to be
dealing with, the programme of work, as you can see,
Mr. President, is quite ambitious, and the ad hoc
Working Group is aware of the difficult task that lies
ahead.
The Views of the non-Council members on how
the Working Group can be operationalized to address
the situation in Africa in concrete ways will be most
welcome. We therefore look forward to the support of
non-Council members as we strive to meet our
objectives.

Before concluding, I would like to recognize the
presence in this room of Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the
Assistant Secretary-General. We are most thankful to
him for the interest and the commitment he has shown
for the work of the ad hoc Working Group. As
everyone is aware, Mr. Fall will be leaving New York
soon to take up his new assignment as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa. In his new role he will be involved in
enhancing linkages in the work of the United Nations
and other partners in the subregion, particularly the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Mano River Union, among others. We would like to
wish him full success in this new assignment. The
Working Group will look forward to continuing to
receive his valuable contribution from Dakar. We wish
him all the best.

