Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Brazil maintains strong
historical ties with both Syria and Lebanon. We host a
community of 10 million descendants of people of
Lebanese and Syrian origin. President Lula has been
keen to intensify our dialogue with the Arab world
through initiatives such as the summit of South
American and Arab countries held in Brasilia last May.
Issues such as the one we are discussing today touch us
directly.

Out of concern for possible undue interference in
a delicate internal situation, as well as for stability in
the region, Brazil decided to abstain in the voting on
resolution 1595 (2005). Subsequent developments have
created a new and troubling scenario.

Brazil condemned in the strongest terms the 14
February 2005 terrorist attack in Beirut, which caused
the deaths of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and
another 22 innocent people.

The international community was unanimous in
its support for resolution 1595 (2005), which pledged
assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their efforts to
clarify the circumstances of Rafik Hariri's death. It is
imperative that those responsible for that crime be
brought to justice.

We commend the International Independent
Investigation Commission, under the leadership of Mr.
Detlev Mehlis, for the serious work carried out in
establishing the facts related to the events of 14
February.

As the report points out, the investigation is not
yet complete. It is thus most appropriate that the
Council has expressed its support for the decision by
the Secretary-General to extend the Commission's
mandate until 15 December. The demand for greater
cooperation by those who have not been forthcoming is
entirely justifiable. In that regard, we note that Syrian
authorities have in recent days provided assurances to
that effect.
The initial draft of the resolution we have just
adopted went beyond the scope of the Commission's
report. Among other shortcomings, it did not include
language that ensured respect for the presumption of
innocence. We would not have been in a position to
support a text that sought to promote objectives other
than those strictly related to the investigation of the
Hariri assassination.

A number of our concerns have been dealt with in
the revised draft resolution. We pay tribute to the
sponsors for having spared no effort to arrive at
consensus. We have voted in favour of that text on the
understanding that any additional measures can be
taken only on the basis of a collective assessment by
Council members of the final conclusions of the
Commission. In other words, Brazil considers that the
reference to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations neither implies nor authorizes the application
of measures against Syria in the absence of a collective
decision by the Council based on a careful evaluation
of the facts.

The current situation in the Middle East is
marked by tension, on one the hand, and hopes for
peace, on the other. In such circumstances, the Council
must be guided by a sense of balance and realism. Our
decisions must reconcile a firm determination to bring
to justice those responsible for Prime Minister Hariri's
assassination and the pursuit of stability through
institutional and political progress. Indeed, the Council
must send a strong political message. The unanimous
approval of resolution 1636 (2005) has done just that.
But Brazil will not favour hasty decisions that may
lead to an undesirable escalation of the situation or that
will further endanger the stability of the region.

