Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Sweden for this well-conceived debate
and express its appreciation to our colleagues for their
timely insights for follow-up action. We express our
sincere appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his insightful and comprehensive briefing, as always.
We are concerned that the frequency and intensity
of individual conflicts in the wider region of the
Middle East and North Africa have heightened, with
grave consequences and with potential implications
for global insecurity. Those violent conflicts, ranging
from the Palestinian-Israel situation, Syria and the
Golan Heights to Yemen, seriously impact countries in
Africa, South and South-East Asia, Europe and other
regions. The only viable solution is to have greater
rapprochement, cooperation and confidence-building
among States Members of the United Nations and
members of the Security Council.

Due to the vacuum of functioning State institutions,
terrorist groups have found a firm foothold in unstable
areas. That has resulted in the massive exodus of
refugees from numerous countries, and the burden is
borne by host countries, like Jordan and Lebanon, that
require international support. We would like to thank the
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, Jamie McGoldrick, for visiting the Gaza
Strip. We call on the Israeli parties and the Palestinian
Authority to immediately act to prevent the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation resulting
from increased restrictions on movement. We were
heartened to learn that the Programme of Assistance
to the Palestinian People of the United Nations
Development Programme is launching innovative
income-generating initiatives in Gaza to mitigate the
impact of the harsh socioeconomic conditions and
conditions resulting from climate change.

We echo the concerns of Special Coordinator
Mladenov regarding the consequences of Israel's
decision to temporarily suspend imports and exports,
with the exception of basic humanitarian supplies,
through the Kerem Shalom crossing. We too urge the
authorities to reverse that decision as soon as possible
to mitigate hardship and calm tensions.

All parties to the conflict should come forward
to maintain calm, stop incendiary kites and
prevent other provocations. For the benefit of both
sides - Palestinian and Israeli - and others, all must
step back from the path of confrontation and escalation.
We underscore Mr. Mladenov's visit to Gaza on 15 July,
during which he made every effort to ensure that all
parties concerned step back from confrontation. We
call on the United Nations to continue its engagement
with Israeli and Palestinian counterparts, as well as
regional and international partners, to reduce tensions,
support intra-Palestinian reconciliation and resolve all
humanitarian challenges.
With regard to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), Kazakhstan reiterates the need to support
that most vital of mechanisms and urges avoiding
any shortfall. Kazakhstan endorses the concern
expressed earlier by the Special Coordinator about
the funding of UNRWA this year. We see the value
of convening the meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
of the General Assembly for the Announcement of
Voluntary Contributions to UNRWA held on 25 June.
Unfortunately, despite such extraordinary efforts,
as of mid-2018, UNRWA faces a financial gap of
$256 million. At risk are education, health care and
emergency and social services that contribute to the
dignity and hope of 5.3 million Palestine refugees.
More important, meeting human needs leads to social
content and subsequently to the stability of the region.

Lastly, today's discussion should help us
move constructively forward, through dialogue,
confidence-building measures and the equal
distribution of resources, as presented in profound
treatises and manifestos on war and peace. The crises
of the Middle East compel us to reach urgent political
settlements and development and security measures for
the sake of overall peace.

