Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
United Kingdom, I warmly welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2307 (2016) today, and I
congratulate the Government of Colombia on the
historic peace agreement reached with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) last
month.

"Historic" is a word that is sometimes overused in
this Chamber, and yet today it could not be more fitting.
Through this resolution, we have marked history - an
agreement that brings to an end over half a century
of fighting and that has taken almost four years to
negotiate. It is a process that is already bringing the
dividends of peace. Just this weekend, we saw more
children released into a new life - one without guns
and without fear. Both parties have shown great bravery
and leadership in giving those children and every other
Colombian genuine hope for the future.

It takes courage to lay aside weapons and
accept the protection of a former enemy. It took a
bold step - perhaps an unprecedented step - for a
Government to put its country on the Council's agenda.
In turn, the Council has shown great sensitivity and
flexibility in responding quickly to Colombia's request.
As the penholder on this issue, I am proud of the role
that the United Kingdom has played, both here and in
Colombia, in support of the peace agreement, and I
pay tribute in particular to Cuba and Norway, as well
as Chile and Venezuela, for their sustained support
throughout the process.

But resolution 2307 (2016) is notjust about tributes;
it is also about providing our own support to make sure
that this historic agreement turns into a historic peace.
Through the resolution, we have finalized the mandate
of the United Nations mission. We have authorized 450
United Nations observers to be there on the ground,
verifying the return of peace after over 50 years
of conflict. We have authorized the United Nations
mission to contribute, together with the Government
of Colombia, towards the camps for the FARC. And
we have committed to doing all that in a way that
maximizes the number of women in the mission.

Resolution 2307 (2016) is just one more milestone
in Colombia's long journey towards peace. Outside this
Chamber, generations of ordinary Colombians have
lived their lives knowing nothing but war, and they now
stand on the brink of peace. Next month, the people of
Colombia will have a momentous opportunity to choose
between a lasting peace or a return to years of conflict
and suffering. The choice is in their hands.

