Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham for their updates and for their committed work and unwavering cooperation with the Council and reaffirm our support for them. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen. At the same time, slow movement on the political track shows a deep divide between the current situation and a future of peace and prosperity for all Yemenis. However, we must not be discouraged. The Council and its members are well positioned to influence the course of events on the ground. It is clear that we need a Yemeni-owned dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, not military adventurism. The commencement of such a dialogue should not depend on the implementation of agreements but rather be geared towards building trust and confidence and, ultimately, easing the suffering of people. We acknowledge that the Stockholm Agreement was able, among other things, to avert a crisis at the arterial Al-Hudaydah port, and that the Riyadh agreement addressed the immediate threat of fighting in the South. However, to await further implementation of those agreements before beginning peace talks is tantamount to inaction. Without progress on the political front, the conflict will not be resolved. In the light of the urgent need to resume dialogue, we underscore the role of the international community and urge all States to encourage the parties to engage constructively. We call on the parties to the conflict to work towards a nationwide ceasefire, which would help to create an environment that can facilitate positive talks. As we seek to promote dialogue between the parties, the Council must, at a minimum, strongly discourage any actions that would jeopardize the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen. Lasting peace can only be achieved through an inclusive process that allows for the recognition of the aspirations of all persons for whom peace is secured. In our endeavours towards durable peace, we emphasize the significance of ensuring an inclusive and participatory process. Such an approach would strengthen the social fabric and facilitate positive sociopolitical transformation. The involvement of all groups is critical for supporting and bolstering sustainable peace. The importance of inclusion in addressing and defusing underlying tensions that have ruptured the social fabric cannot be overstated. To that end, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines encourages the unconditional creation of opportunities for the meaningful involvement of all groups, particularly the marginalized. Before concluding, I must once again express our concern about the continuing denial of access to United Nations staff to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We appeal for access to be granted in order to avoid an environmental disaster in the Red Sea. We close with a call for de-escalation and dialogue, with an immediate emphasis on saving lives and the longer-term goals of rebuilding Yemen, addressing underdevelopment and re-establishing the rule of law. Before I cede the floor, and since this will be the last time that we have the privilege of having our colleague, Ambassador Karen Pierce with us in the Chamber, I would also like to wish Ms. Pierce all the best in her next assignment. We will surely miss her. I had so welcomed the opportunity to learn from her vast experience, knowledge and wisdom. I will cherish the short time I did share with her and continue her work and her methods. She makes all women proud. She is our dame.
