Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

This year, 2014, marks a double twentieth anniversary
as we commemorate the genocide against the Tutsi in
April and the creation of the ICTR in November. As we
look back, we acknowledge the important role played
by the ICTR in the fight against impunity for genocide
and other mass atrocities. The Tribunal has produced a
substantial body of jurisprudence, including definitions
of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, as well as of forms of responsibility, such
as superior responsibility. In that regard, the ICTR Trial
Chamber, through its Akayesu judgement, established
that genocide occurred in Rwanda against the Tutsi
as a group. In the same case, the Tribunal also ruled
that acts of rape and sexual violence constitute a crime
against justice if committed with the intent to destroy
a targeted group. Since defence lawyers in Arusha had,
I am sorry to say, a bad habit of using genocide denial
as a defence argument, in 2006 the ICTR Appeals
Chamber issued a judicial notice deciding that the
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda occurred as a fact
of common knowledge.

Nonetheless, despite that clear and constant
jurisprudence, the Security Council and even
the Tribunal itself were reluctant to specify - in
resolutions, reports or other documents - that genocide
was committed against the Tutsi, opting for a general
formulation of Rwandan genocide. I would like to
recall that resolution 2150 (2014) of 16 April reminded
us that genocide was committed against the Tutsi
and that during that genocide, Hutu and others who
opposed it were also killed. In that regard, we note with
satisfaction that for the first time, the ICTR uses in its
latest report (S/2014/546) the language of resolution
2150 (2014). As Rwandans, we believe that the use of
such terminology, which names the targeted group, is
of paramount importance, since it contributes to the
fight against genocide deniers, who misuse the term
"Rwandan genocide" in an attempt to confuse the world
as to who were the targets of that genocide.

As the ICTR winds down, we note that 93 individuals
have been indicted for genocide; these are mainly
masterminds and national and local leaders who
had been out of the reach of Rwandan justice, as
they were international fugitives. We welcome the
recent condemnation of Matthieu Ngirumpatse and
Edouard Karemera, the President and Vice-President
respectively of the Mouvement revolutionnaire national
pour le de'veloppement, the former presidential party
that planned and executed the genocide. We regret,
however, that a number of other masterminds of the
genocide, including senior military leaders, cabinet
ministers and heads of local Governments, were
acquitted despite substantive evidence against them.
We also regret the ICTR's delays in its completion
strategy, as demonstrated by endless proceedings in the
Butare case. We strongly urge the Tribunal to ensure
that the case is completed as soon as possible.

Concerning the monitoring of cases referred to
national courts, we know that the cases of Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka and Laurent Bucyibaruta, referred to
French courts in 2007, are once again said to be in an
investigative phase, without any significant progress.
We are extremely concerned about these repeated delays
of proceedings in cases referred by the ICTR to France,
in accordance with article 11 bis of the Tribunal's rules
of procedure and evidence. In comparison, I would like
to point out that the two cases referred to Rwanda in
2012 and 2013, which are also under ICTR monitoring,
are far ahead in their proceedings, despite the fact that
their referrals occurred five and six years after the
cases referred to France. Sincejustice delayed is justice
denied, I call on the French authorities to ensure that
the remaining investigations are expedited.

In addition, Rwanda is still concerned about the fact
that nine ICTR fugitives remain at large, include the
top-priority three - Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana. In that regard, I would like to
recognize something that Prosecutor Jallow mentioned
earlier, the launching in Kigali on 24 July of an
international fugitives initiative, together with the
Office of Global Criminal Justice of the United States
Department of State and INTERPOL, The Prosecutor
General of Rwanda wishes to see that initiative followed
by tangible results. For that to happen, we reiterate our
call on United Nations Member States, especially those
of our region, to collaborate in arresting all remaining
genocide fugitives pursuant to resolution 2150 (2014).

In relation to outreach programmes, we note that
while the Arusha-based information centre of the ICTR
was visited by 437 visitors, the Kigali-based information
centre was visited by 42,000 visitors and that ICTR
mini-information centres attracted 23,000 visitors,
including high-level United Nations and Government
officials, academics, civil society and non-governmental
organizations representatives, and the general public.
That justifies our request, supported by all five States
of the East African Community - Tanzania, Uganda,
Kenya, Burundi and Rwanda - that ICTR archives
be transferred to Rwanda after the completion of the
International Residual Mechanism's proceedings. We
are hopeful that the handover of the management of the
Umusanzu Information and Documentation Centre to
the Government of Rwanda, along with 10 additional
provincial centres, will be an important step in the
handover of all ICTR archives.

Next year will mark the twentieth commemoration
of another genocide - the genocide of Bosniacs in
Srebrenica, as established in 2004 by the ICTY. We
commend the ICTY, which has arrested all of the indicted
fugitives and concluded proceedings against 141 of the
161 indicted individuals, for its achievements. We note
that the ICTY will not be able to complete its work by
31 December and we urge it, as we did the ICTR, to
expedite its proceedings. We take this opportunity
to express deep concern over the persistent scourge
of denial of the genocide in Srebrenica, including by
State officials, which is an additional and unnecessary
pain imposed on the survivors. We therefore call on
all leaders in the region to own their history and work
towards a genuine reconciliation and healing.

As we commemorate, for the twentieth time, the
genocides in Rwanda and in Srebrenica, we wish to
commend the ICTY, ICTR and the Residual Mechanism
for their continued efforts to ensure justice and
accountability for the most serious crimes. We urge the
Residual Mechanism and the international community
to ensure that the remaining ICTR fugitives are
apprehended and brought to justice, and the ICTR and
the ICTY to complete their remaining cases. Of course,
we hope that the French authorities will expedite their
proceedings in the seven-year investigations of the two
cases referred by the ICTR.

