Mr. Vueic' (Serbia): Once again, I am very thankful
to all participants and profoundly grateful to all those
who wanted at least to listen to us. I think that it
was very obvious that no one could refer to a single
provision, article or paragraph from which Pristina
derives its right to form its armed forces. Some people
said that that was not banned by resolution 1244 (1999)
but no one cited a single regulation, rule or article from
which Pristina derived its right to create its own army.
There is a very simple reason for that, since that article
or regulation does not exist. At the same time, I am very
grateful to the many people who, regardless of their
political attitude towards the Kosovo issue, wanted to
be objective and to analyse the reality.

I want to refer to just a few arguments used by
Pristina and some of the Ambassadors in the Chamber.
The representative of Pristina said that terrible ethnic
cleansing was committed by the Serb forces. Here are
the facts.

There used to be 1.4 million Albanians in the
southern Serbian province. Today there are 1.7 million
Albanian people in Kosovo, where there used to be
220,000 Serbs. There are still between 105,000 and
106,000 Serbs living in Kosovo. Those are the numbers.
Those are the facts. Who committed ethnic cleansing?
Is there anyone who can deny those numbers? I am not
saying that we have always been absolutely right in
everything. Not at all. I have to say, however, that that
kind ofbiased approach is not only killing the truth, but
it is also killing real chances for reaching a compromise
between the two sides.

At the same time, I heard something that I could not
understand. At least the two representatives of Pristina
and - I believe - the United Kingdom referred to
the Ahtisaari plan. What is that plan about? When was
that plan adopted, by whom, in which organization, by
which factions and by which parties? When they do not
have sufficient arguments, as they do not have enough
facts on their side, they then refer to something that does
not exist. It has never been put in force. Are we or are
we not speaking the truth? There are no real provisions,
articles, arrangements or agreements to which they
can refer. Someone here mentioned the use of force. It
was the Ambassador of the United Kingdom. I never
mentioned that, and we did not use any kind of force,
unlike the other side. It used force against the chief
negotiator - beating him up and trying to humiliate
him - merely because he was speaking loudly about
the Kosovo problem. He carried out his notifications
in accordance with all our arrangements with Pristina.

It seems to me that it is much easier for some
countries to blame Serbia for everything. It does not
matter whether or not we did something. We did not
impose taxes against them. We did not create any kind
of army in the north or within the Serb community. That
does not exist. We did not do anything, but we have
to be blamed because someone has to justify his own
wrong politics. And speaking about INTERPOL, the
representative of Pristina said here that only organized
crime benefited from INTERPOL's wrong decision.
No, I want Pristina to do much better with regard to
organized crime issues, but today that is the worst place
in Europe with regard to such an important issue.

Concerning the support of the Serb community
and the so-called Kosovo armed forces, they were
coming in tears complaining that we in Serbia were
exerting great pressure on them. All 10 mayors - all
of them - from all 10 Serb-inhabited municipalities in
Kosovo referred to Mr. Thaci's statement and said that
he was not telling the truth and that they are absolutely
against the formation of the Kosovo armed forces. They
see the formation of the Kosovo armed forces as a grave
threat to their survival. Who knows that better than
they do?

Once again, I am profoundly grateful to all
those people who have shown their support for the
territorial integrity of Serbia and resolution 1244
(1999). At the same time, I am also thankful to those
people who - although some of them recognized
the independence of Kosovo - wanted to see things
in a very objective way. They have my promise that
Serbia will do its best to keep the peace and maintain
tranquillity and stability. As everyone knows, the
Serbian people are a very proud and dignified people,
and we just want to avoid all forms of humiliation
targeting us, which we would not allow anyone else
in the world to suffer. It does not matter how big they
are or how small we are. We will resume and carry on
our dialogue as soon as they rescind their irresponsible
decision involving those tariffs.

I am not very optimistic. I am telling the Council
that my concerns and worries are even greater today
than they were yesterday. I believe that we have acted
and reacted so far in a very serious and responsible
way, and we will continue in the same manner.
Hopefully, one day, we will be able to reach a possible
arrangement with Pristina, but recently everything
that they have done has been extremely irresponsible,
taking us backwards five, six or seven years. We need
the Council's full support and for the United Nations to
play a larger role. We will strive to that end more than
ever by asking of the Council to support all processes
that will lead us to a possible arrangement.

I thank everyone once again for listening to us,
and, hopefully, nothing worse than what has happened
over recent weeks will happen in the future.

