Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): My delegation is
delighted that you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of the Gambia,
are presiding over these proceedings.
Zimbabwe sympathizes and empathizes with the
bereaved families of the victims of international terrorism.
My country has stated before, and reiterates today, its
deeply rooted stance against all forms of terrorism, whether
perpetrated in the air, on land or on the high seas. We have
also stated that we share the fundamental principle of
jurisprudence that a suspect is considered innocent until
proven guilty.

Today we are meeting following a historic ruling by
the International Court of Justice. The two decisions of the
Court on the dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
on the one hand, and the United States of America and the
United Kingdom, on the other, over the Lockerbie incident
constitute a turning point in this dispute and should pave
the way for a fair, just and peaceful solution.

Those decisions, in our view, have effectively ended
the diplomatic dispute concerning jurisdiction over the
Lockerbie affair and have provided a firm basis for the
removal of the sanctions, which have brought untold
suffering and hardship to the innocent people of Libya for
seven years now.

We have once more listened to the voice of Africa
through the representative of the Secretary General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). Previous speakers
have referred to the statement delivered to this Council on
25 September last year by the current Chairman of the
OAU, my own President, Robert Gabriel Mugabe. We in
the OAU have consistently invoked the universal trend
towards peace and detente in the post-cold-war era and
called for a peaceful resolution of all issues, including this
crisis. In the letter addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zimbabwe in his capacity as Chairman of the OAU
Committee of Five on this matter, the OAU renewed its call
on the Security Council to consider seriously the three
compromise options submitted jointly by the OAU and
the League of Arab States, and supported by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. Those options are
holding the trial of the suspects in a third and neutral
country to be determined by the Security Council; having
the suspects tried by Scottish judges at the International
Court of Justice at The Hague, in accordance with
Scottish law; and establishing a special criminal tribunal
at International Court of Justice headquarters at The
Hague to try the suspects.

The Government of Libya has proved flexible and
well disposed towards these compromise proposals. It has
even stated that it does not question the fairness of
Scottish law and the integrity of Scottish judges. The
Libyan Government insists on a neutral venue.

At this crucial stage we call upon the Security
Council to maintain the momentum generated by the two
historic International Court of Justice decisions by
removing the sanctions regime, which, besides causing a
great deal of suffering among the Libyan people,
continues to impart a confrontational rather than a
conciliatory tone to the whole dispute. It is time the
International Court of Justice was given a chance to
exercise its jurisdiction in order to bring this matter to a
definitive conclusion.

