Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-General
for Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. We welcome Mr. Griffiths's
assumption of the important post of Special Envoy.

Yemen's political process is currently at a stalemate,
military conflicts continue and the humanitarian crisis
remains serious. The international community should
step up its mediation efforts, encourage all parties in
Yemen to broker a ceasefire and return to the path to
a political solution in order to achieve peace, security
and stability in Yemen as soon as possible. A political
solution is the only way to achieve lasting peace in
Yemen. The international community should continue
to support Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. It is imperative to support the
meditation efforts of the United Nations, on the basis
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative, its Implementation
Mechanism and the National Dialogue Conference
outcome documents, and engage in dialogue and
negotiations in order to reach an inclusive settlement to
the issue as soon as possible.

The Security Council and relevant parties should
remain united, support the mediation efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths, strengthen efforts for peace talks and
negotiations and encourage all parties to the conflict
to break the stalemate as soon as possible in order
to resolve their differences through dialogue and
negotiations. It is important to support the Special
Envoy in his efforts to develop a road map or plan of
action as soon as possible towards a political solution
to the situation in Yemen. The international community
and countries of the region should provide constructive
assistance in that regard.

The current humanitarian situation in Yemen
is dire. Cholera persists and millions of people face
severe famine. The international community should
provide greater humanitarian assistance to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. China welcomes
the successful holding of the Geneva high-level
pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen in
Geneva. Through bilateral means and its cooperation
with the World Health Organization and the World
Food Programme, China has provided humanitarian
assistance to Yemen totalling RMBISO million, in
order to ease the famine and eradicate cholera. We will
continue to provide assistance to the people of Yemen
to the best of our ability.

Ensuring smooth humanitarian access to Yemen is
key to mitigating the humanitarian crisis. The relevant
parties should work together to provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to create the conditions
to ease the humanitarian situation in Yemen. China is
ready to work with all parties to support the work of the
Special Envoy and continue to play a constructive role
in the situation in Yemen.

