Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Ambassador Andrey Denisov, for his
comprehensive presentation about the work of the
Committee. As a member of the Bureau, I wish to
associate myself with his words - that will help me
shorten my comments. I also express appreciation to
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED), Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, for his statement.

Brazil participated in the consensus regarding the
adoption of resolution 1566 (2004) this year in view of
our firm commitment to counter-terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. That guiding principle of
Brazilian foreign policy is, since 1988, a constitutional
provision in Brazil. As we see it, no cause may justify
attacks against innocent people. I wish to reiterate our
deepest sympathies to the families of the victims of
terrorist attacks.

In our view, one of the most relevant tasks of the
United Nations consists in fostering a coordinated
response from the international community to
terrorism. In that context, the most important roles of
the CTC and the CTED are to persuade countries that it
is in their own interest to take advantage of the
valuable sources of cooperation made available to help
them prepare to counter terrorism. It is also the
obligation of the CTC and CTED not only to facilitate
the actual offering of cooperation, but also to make
sure that the assistance provided by third parties to the
countries through the CTC is fully satisfactory. In our
view, the CTC and the CTED are structured and
designed mainly to shelter States that are willing to
cooperate but that are, for various reasons, unable to do
so.

The CTC, and by extension the CTED, is not to
be likened to a sanctions committee. Therefore, we
would not only welcome but also strongly recommend
that all United Nations Members examine the
possibility of approaching the CTC and the CTED in
order to discuss possibilities and modalities for
increasing cooperation.

I wish to reiterate our view that the current
practice of the Council is one of excessive resort to the
use of Chapter VII of the Charter. In our view, by
limiting recourse to the provisions of Chapter VII to
the situations in which they are clearly called for, the
members of the Council would be strengthening their
commitment to both the spirit and the letter of the
Charter.

The fact that the entire operative part of
resolution 1566 (2004) remains under Chapter VII
suggests that not enough emphasis was given to the
possibilities made available by international
cooperative action. Such tendencies are, in our opinion,
both unnecessary and counter-productive, since the
potential for cooperation in the CTC and the CTED are
still quite underutilized.

It is a matter of specific concern that the appeal
to Member States to negotiate the terms of
international conventions is made under Chapter VII.
During the negotiations, that point was raised by other
delegations as well. In our view, no constraints should
be imposed on States' freedom to negotiate.

I would like to make brief comments on the
following specific issues. Defining terrorism falls
under the functions and powers of the General
Assembly, as foreseen in the Charter. In our view,
resolution 1566 (2004) reflects compromise language
that contains a clear important political message, but it
is not an attempt to define the concept of terrorism.

Brazil supports the establishment of an
intergovernmental working group to consider possible
measures regarding individuals, groups or entities
involved in or associated with terrorist activities not
encompassed by resolution 1267 (1999), regarding Al
Qaeda and the Taliban, as foreseen in resolution 1566
(2004).

In the absence of a common View on terrorism,
the development of a consolidated list of individuals
and organizations classified as terrorists could lead to a
politicization of the body and of the entire international
campaign against terrorism.

We welcome all efforts to bring about
transparency in the work of the CTC, and especially in
the activities of the working group. The monthly
briefings of the presidency of the CTC will constitute a
most welcome opportunity for Member States to follow
that process. The work of the working group is to be
carried out within the framework foreseen in
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004).
It is also our understanding that the need to observe the
provisions of international law and due process should
be taken into account during that process.

Finally, as regards a fund to compensate victims
of terrorism, if such a fund is to be created, we would
prefer that its resources, based on voluntary
contributions, be directed to victims in developing
countries. In addition, it must be pointed out that
expropriation of assets must also be subject to the rule
of law and due process.

