Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): At the outset, let me
thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting to discuss
our experience in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and explore ways of cooperation between
the work of the Commission and the Security Council.

I would also like to say that Croatia aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union. However,
as Croatia has been elected to the Peacebuilding
Commission from among those countries that have
considerable peacekeeping and peacebuilding
experience on the recipient side, I would like to say a
few words from that particular angle.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
by resolutions of both the General Assembly and the
Security Council in order to fill a gap in the
peacebuilding area of the United Nations system.
Croatia strongly supported that effort as, in our View,
improvement in that respect is much needed.
Therefore, we have to bear in mind that the
Commission is a new body which is not meant to
proceed in the business-as-usual way, but is supposed
to adopt innovative ways to resolve post-conflict
recovery. We consider it to be a work in progress.

The Peacebuilding Commission, as stated in
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) and General
Assembly resolution 60/180, was established to bring
together all relevant actors to marshal resources and to
advise on and propose integrated strategies for post-
conflict peacebuilding and recovery. It is aimed at
helping reconstruction and institution-building efforts
and at laying the foundation for sustainable
development. It also needs to provide
recommendations and information to improve the
coordination of all relevant actors within and outside
the United Nations. Those are very concrete tasks. The
country-specific meetings on the two countries that are
currently on the Commission's agenda have so far
shown that the Commission is on the right track in that
regard. However, more needs to be done. The
Commission needs to make sure to contribute to the
further stabilization of peace in other fragile States as
well.

In that regard, we believe that there should be a
stronger connection between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Therefore, cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is
of the utmost importance. The establishment of United
Nations Integrated Offices, similar to those established
in both Burundi and Sierra Leone, is an important step
in the right direction. There should not be a gap
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in the
peace consolidation process. Some peacebuilding
activities can be undertaken even while a peacekeeping
mission is still in place.

However, we have to bear in mind that each
country is a unique case and that in-depth knowledge
of a situation on the ground is a crucial prerequisite for
our actions. We are therefore very much encouraged by
the fact that the Peacebuilding Support Office has
started to fully function. Its support is indispensable to
the members of the Peacebuilding Commission in
providing them, among other things, with in-depth
information from the ground that will enable
substantial and knowledgeable discussions about
countries in question.

To that end, we believe that discussions on
peacebuilding activities both in the Security Council
and the General Assembly are exceptionally useful.
They have to ensure effective and productive bases for
programmes that should guarantee that a country in
question will successfully emerge from conflict and be
put on a sound and irreversible path to recovery and
sustainable development as soon as possible.

This debate in the Security Council is particularly
useful to the two countries that are on the agendas of
both the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council. We believe that the Commission needs to
produce a strategy and a road map with concrete,
achievable and realistic benchmarks. National
ownership of the peacebuilding process by the
countries in question is of the utmost importance and
should be the basis for that strategy. We believe that
continuous contact with those countries is an extremely
important feature of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. In that regard, the Security Council may
judge the Commission's findings useful to its own
consideration.

Let me conclude by saying that the value-added
role of the Commission will be measured, as has been
already said and repeated many times in different
United Nations and other forums, by its impact on the
ground. It is therefore important to work further on
consolidating and rounding up its practices, to which
Croatia, as a member of the Commission, is fully
committed.

