Mr. Djokie: In the early morning hours of 4 August
1995, the Croatian Government and the regime of
Mr. Tudjman embarked upon the final act to attain the goal
of Croatian extreme nationalists and fascists to exterminate
or expel the Serb people from Krajina. By the horrifying
indiscriminate mass artillery and missile bombardment of
predominantly civilian targets in all the towns of Serb
Krajina, Croatia unambiguously demonstrated that one of its
main goals, apart from imposing its sovereignty over
Krajina, was to inflict heavy losses on the civilian
population and by so doing incite a mass exodus of Serbs
in order to create an ethnically pure Croat state.
Regrettably, the Croatian strategy has been successful as
columns of more than 200,000 Serbs, almost the entire
population of the parts of Krajina seized in the latest Croat
aggression, are now fleeing Krajina into neighbouring
Bosnia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This no
doubt represents the most massive and shameless example
of large-scale "ethnic cleansing" since the crisis in the
territory of previous Yugoslavia began in 1991.

After more than 100 years, the final solution of
Croatian extremists espoused in the infamous maxim of the
leader of the Croatian Party of the Right, Ante Starcevic, in
regard to resolving the Serb question to annihilate a
third, expel a third and assimilate a third - is practically
being realized. The regime of Mr. Tudjman is on the verge
of achieving what the Croatian Ustashi fascists did not
achieve during the nightmare of the Second World War,
when 700,000 Serbs were slaughtered in the so-called
"Independent State of Croatia": the total extermination and
cleansing of the Serbs from their ancestral homes in
Krajina.

 

The overt genocide that the Croatian Government is
conducting against the Krajina Serbs, the mass murder of
civilians - women, children and the elderly - is telling proof
that the fear that Mr. Tudjman's regime, and its
checker-board flag under which so many Serbs were
mercilessly killed during the Second World War, instilled
in the Krajina Serbs was totally justified and that they had
no choice but to rebel against it.

Long before the aggression against the Krajina
Serbs, pressures and intensive preparations by Croatia had
begun for a confrontation with the Serbs. More than
350,000 Serbs from the territories which are under Croat
control had already fled. On the other hand, those who
attempted to remain in their homes were mistreated in
every conceivable way and many of them were forcibly
converted to the Catholic faith. Discrimination in all areas
of everyday life and work - eviction, lay-offs on
grounds of nationality, and illegal seizure of property and
gross violations of fundamental human and civil rights -
were rampant. During Croatia's aggression against the
Sector West United Nations protected areas in May of
this year, virtually the whole Serb population was
murdered, wounded, imprisoned or expelled from the
region.

By opting for all-out aggression against the Republic
of Serb Krajina, the Croatian Government not only
attacked the Serb population but also flagrantly violated
the Security Council resolutions which established the
United Nations protected areas in Krajina, with the aim of
protecting the local population, and breached the Vance
plan. The Croatian Government acted in total disregard of
the unambiguous and clear-cut demands by the Security
Council, set out in its resolution 994 (1995) and a number
of presidential statements, that it refrain from taking any
further military measures or actions that could lead to the
escalation of the situation, and particularly that it cease all
military actions in and around Sector South; and of
warnings that in the event of failure to comply with this
demand the Security Council would consider further steps
to ensure such compliance. In its massive onslaught the
Croatian forces have deliberately targeted United Nations
peace-keepers, murdering and wounding many of them. It
is no wonder that the Co-Chairman of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, Mr. Carl Bildt,
condemned the Croat offensive in the strongest terms and
raised the possibility of Mr. Tudjman's being indicted for
war crimes.

By mounting this aggression against Krajina, Croatia
has clearly shown that it represents the greatest danger to
peace in the Balkans. It is particularly noteworthy that
Croatia's brutal aggression took place at the time of the
resumption of direct negotiations between Knin and
Zagreb, in which the Krajina side expressed the greatest
readiness for a political solution to the status of Krajina,
making serious concessions and accepting the seven-point
plan for the urgent settlement of the crisis proposed by
the Co-Chairman of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia, Mr. Stoltenberg. As has been the case

 

on so many occasions when there was a possibility of
achieving a peaceful negotiated settlement to the crisis in
the former Yugoslavia, measures were taken to avert a
political solution, and the war option once again prevailed.

It is obvious that the Croatian Government would not
have dared decide to undertake such a broad and
meticulously planned aggression without the backing of
some major Powers. From the time of the German-led
premature recognition of Croatia and other former Yugoslav
republics, such support has not been lacking. These Powers
have decided to shun the only possible policy for a just and
lasting settlement of the Yugoslav crisis - the fully equal
treatment of all Yugoslav nations and their interests - in
favour of a policy of double standards and biased support
for some sides and unprecedented condemnation and
satanization of others.

It has not escaped the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia that the United States of America
has signed a military cooperation agreement with Croatia.
United States military advisers are lending technical and
logistical assistance to Croatian armed forces. The United
States has also strongly backed the Bosnian Muslim-Croat
Federation and its confederation with Croatia, in an attempt
to create an anti-Serb front in the Balkans. This cooperation
has now borne fruit in the aggression of Croatia against
Krajina. The Foreign Minister of Croatia himself confirmed
that the United States gave advice to Croatia on how to
execute the mass attack on Serb Krajina and tacitly
approved such an operation. It is also evident from the
ongoing aggression that the arms embargo against Croatia
has been a sham, since from its introduction Croatia has
been receiving the most sophisticated and modern
weaponry.

It is particularly worrisome and disconcerting that the
Security Council and the international community have not
condemned the brutal Croatian aggression. What should
happen for the Security Council to decide to act and put an
end to the cold-blooded aggression of Croatia against
Krajina and the enormous threat to peace and security in
the region, which could lead to an uncontrollable escalation
with unforeseen consequences?

After having previously committed seven armed
attacks on the United Nations protected areas since they
were established in 1992, in a brazen affront to the whole
United Nations operation in the previous Yugoslavia,
Croatia decided to do away with the protected areas and the
United Nations peace-keeping mission altogether. Moreover,
Croatia has totally ignored the calls of the international
community to give up the military option and to show
due respect for the United Nations representatives.

Can this be allowed to go unpunished?

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia expresses its
utmost concern in the wake of the dramatic humanitarian
situation caused by the Croatian aggression on Krajina.
For its part, it has taken urgent and energetic measures,
but we call upon the Security Council to engage all
Members of the United Nations and international
humanitarian organizations in providing urgent assistance
to alleviate the tragic fate of more than 200,000 Serb
refugees who were forced to flee Krajina. The most
urgent needs include food, medicines, medical supplies,
clothes, tents and blankets.

We hope that the international community will
demonstrate compassion and concern for the tragic
destiny of the Krajina Serb population and urgently
respond to the unprecedented humanitarian disaster, in
which the Serb people from Krajina have lost virtually
everything and are at the very limit of their endurance.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia urges the Security Council to make Croatia
allow access to the representatives of the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations to the territories of
Krajina recently occupied by Croatian military forces in
order to conduct a thorough and objective investigation
into the monstrous crimes committed against the Krajina
Serbs - massacres, torture, opening fire on columns of
refugees, using Serb soldiers, civilians and United Nations
representatives as human shields, as well as widespread
looting.

From the very beginning of the outbreak of the crisis
in the territory of the previous Yugoslavia, the Security
Council has directed its decisions and activities against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, imposing on it,
without any justification, the most comprehensive, harsh
and unprecedented sanctions in the history of the United
Nations. The following question must be asked: what
criteria is the Security Council now using, considering the
open aggression of Croatia against Krajina and flagrant
violations of humanitarian law?

Even without the sanctions, which have disastrous
effects, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would hardly
be in a position to effectively cope with the
overwhelming burden caused by the latest influx of tens
of thousands of new refugees regarding accommodation,

 

food supplies, medicines and clothes, particularly since
most of them are children, women, the elderly, the
wounded and the sick. This is just one more reason for the
legitimate request that the sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia be urgently lifted, since they stand
in the way of the overall political solution to the Yugoslav
(311818.  On the other side, the Security Council is regrettably
not endeavouring even to secure the implementation of its
own decisions and resolutions regarding the arms embargo
on Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the prevention of
"ethnic cleansing" and the prosecution of Croatian, as well
as Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat war criminals.

The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia notes with the utmost indignation and bitterness
that the international community has not undertaken
resolute measures to stop and "disenable" the monstrous
policy of Croatia against the Krajina Serbs. A week has
passed without the Security Council condemning by even
one word the massive bombardment of Krajina towns,
destruction of water supply systems, shelling of hospitals
and other civilian targets, premeditated killing of innocent
civilians and commission of war crimes against them.

Particular responsibility rests with the Security
Council, whose primary role, under Chapter VII of the
Charter, is to maintain peace and security and protect the
victims of aggression. The Security Council, which has
already admitted that such actions by Croatia seriously
threaten to escalate the conflict, must take concrete and
resolute measures against such criminal and genocidal acts
by Croatia.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is very
disappointed that the Security Council did not most
resolutely condemn the Croatian aggression and the crimes
committed, particularly "ethnic cleansing" and other gross
violations of fundamental norms of international
humanitarian law, human rights and the principles of
international law in times of war, in the light of the horrible
crimes that the Croatian army committed against Serbian
civilians and prisoners of war.

It is particularly distressing that the Council did not
demand that Croatian troops withdraw to the positions held
prior to the aggression of 4 August 1995 and that the calls
for the introduction of comprehensive sanctions against
Croatia were ignored. The resolution that the Council is
about to adopt represents a pale and totally inadequate
response to the drama that has been unfolding in Krajina.
Once again the Security Council has not managed to rid
itself of its persistent bias in treating the peoples of the
previous Yugoslavia in an unequal manner. The greatest
"ethnic cleansing" ever committed in the territories of the
former Yugoslavia, the virtual expulsion of the Serbs
from Krajina, has met with a much milder response than
when the Council has taken action regarding atrocities
committed against other peoples.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia reiterates its
firm commitment to a political and negotiated solution of
all problems in the territory of the previous Yugoslavia,
and particularly those that have arisen due to the
aggression of Croatia against Krajina.

Trusting that Europe and the international
community as a whole cannot accept the brutal creation
of an ethnically pure Croatia based on the expulsion of
more than 200,000 innocent civilians, we expect an
immediate and effective response by this Council. Should
it fail so to respond, the Security Council will become an
accessory to bringing about a tragedy for an entire people
who have lived in those territories for centuries, and it
will not be able to evade its responsibility for all the
consequences that may arise as a result of the brutal
Croatian aggression.

The time to take energetic action to reach a just
political solution in the territories of the previous
Yugoslavia is running out. With every day that is lost, we
will be faced with new challenges which will only make
the situation more complex and more dangerous - and
not only for the countries of that region. If the Security
Council sincerely wishes to avoid that, it must act
resolutely and immediately, without any further delay.

