Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): I would first like to
join others in congratulating you, Madam President, and
your delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) constitute one of the pre-eminent
threats to global collective security in the twenty-first
century. Acts of terrorism continue to pose a grave
challenge to humankind, as terrorist groups choose
their targets indiscriminately, change their modes of
operation and improvise more complex ways to carry
out their heinous acts with deadlier consequences.

The Council will no doubt agree that the use of
technology, information and social media, as well as
the existence of the nexus between terrorist networks,
non-State actors and transnational criminals with
varying motives but unremittingly lethal intentions to
acquire, target and use weapons of mass destruction,
poses new challenges to States' apparatus and the
traditional lines of national defence. Coupled with
these are the threats emanating from the rising
extremism and radicalization of various ideological
groups and networks that use indoctrination, terrorism
and violence as a tactic for attacking peace, democracy,
development and the peaceful coexistence of nations
and communities.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), to which
Bangladesh also contributed proactively as a member
of the open-ended group of the General Assembly that
negotiated the basis of the resolution, along with the
series offollow-up resolutions adopted subsequently, has
therefore been a watershed achievement. The resolutions
demonstrate the determination of the membership of
the United Nations to pursue comprehensive efforts to
address the nexus between WMDs and terrorism, and
to close the gap in international law regarding non-State
actors and WMDs.

Let me reaffirm the strong commitment of the
Government of Bangladesh to the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as we unequivocally support
all international efforts at promoting a more peaceful
and safer world. The Prime Minister of Bangladesh has
been a strong voice on behalf of the complete elimination
of all weapons of mass destruction and upholds her
own foreign policy conviction - "disarmament for
development" - and a nuclear-weapon and terrorism-
free world. Our commitment to a WMD-free world
is manifest in the fact that we are signatories to all
major multilateral disarmament treaties, including the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, the Certain Conventional
Weapons Convention, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty and the Arms Trade Treaty. We have also
maintained a zero-tolerance policy to terrorism and in
recent years adopted a number of bold, concrete steps
to combat terrorism, the financing of terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Bangladesh is well aware of its legally binding
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). It has already
fulfilled its reporting obligations by submitting two
reports to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). As part of efforts towards
better implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
last month our capital organized a workshop on its
implementation that was attended by focal points
of key national agencies as well as members of the
1540 Committee's Expert Group and representatives
from Office of Disarmament Affairs. The workshop
helped us to identify gaps in our legal, regulatory and
national coordination infrastructure and deficits in
our agency-wide capacities and experiences to enforce
various provisions of the resolution. The Government
of Bangladesh will be taking concrete steps to address
the gaps and factors that impede the implementation of
the resolution.

While countries such as ours are doing their best
to ensure the non-proliferation of WMD, concomitant
actions from others that possess WMDs towards
dispossession ofthose deadly weapons are conspicuously
absent. To be sure, as long as there remain WMDs at
the hands of some States, there will exist motivation for
other States to acquire them, the risk of their use, either
by accident or by design, and the grave danger of their
falling into the hands of terrorists. The only absolute
guarantee against the possible use, abuse or misuse of
WMDs and their acquisition by terrorists and non-State
actors is therefore their total abolition.

Unfortunately, hundreds of billions of dollars,
together with the human, technical and technological
resources, are spent annually on the manufacture,
maintenance and qualitative refinement of such
weapons. That represents a colossal waste of scarce
resources that could be freed up and diverted towards
saving millions of lives and addressing pressing
development needs. Obviously, the proliferation of
WMDs by new countries is unacceptable. But so is
the lack of progress towards the fulfilment of the
disarmament commitments by States with nuclear and
other weapons of mass destruction. Both disarmament
and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing and
should be pursued in tandem to make the world free
from the menaces of WMDs.

