Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank the
Austrian presidency for taking the initiative of
convening this open debate of the Council on the
important issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I thank the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
statements.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the Non-Aligned Movement to be delivered by the
representative of Egypt.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the Security
Council's consideration of the issue of protection of
civilians in armed conflict, we are encouraged by the
efforts of many Member States in establishing national
mechanisms and institutions to ensure better protection
of civilians. We commend United Nations entities in
general and, in particular, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
peacekeeping missions with mandates to protect
civilians, for their work in protecting and helping
civilians in armed conflict over the past years.

We remain concerned about the indiscriminate
and excessive use of force against civilians, the
widespread attacks against schools, hospitals and other
civilian targets, as well as other violations resulting in
numerous deaths, injuries and suffering of innocent
civilians.

We strongly condemn the use of civilians as
human shields during conflicts. It is alarming that the
number of refugees and displaced persons as a result of
conflicts now totals nearly 40 million, causing
considerable social and economic difficulties for the
host countries and localities. It is also alarming that, in
many cases, humanitarian access for civilians,
including access to food, fuel and medical care, has
been almost totally hindered, and that humanitarian
personnel continue to be attacked or prevented from
delivering humanitarian assistance to civilians.
We condemn all those inhumane acts against
civilians and call on all parties to conflicts to strictly
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to protect civilians
in armed conflict. To ensure favourable conditions for
and the effectiveness of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in armed conflict, we emphasize
the need to respect and strictly observe the principles
of neutrality, impartiality and independence in the
provision of such assistance.

Viet Nam reiterates its consistent view that States
bear the primary responsibility within their respective
jurisdictions to protect their own populations. The
United Nations, regional organizations and the
international community have an important role to play
in supporting and assisting Member States, particularly
through political mediation and humanitarian
assistance. In this connection, the engagement and
cooperation with national Governments is vital.
Coordination and cooperation among United Nations
entities should also be further strengthened,
particularly among OCHA, United Nations missions
and country teams.

We are convinced that the issue of protection of
civilians in armed conflict should be approached from
a holistic perspective. Measures to protect civilians in
armed conflict, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, can only be viable if the practical
needs of civilians, including those for subsistence,
education and health care, are adequately addressed. In
designing such measures, the methodologies used in
collecting accurate, timely and reliable information
from the field should be carefully considered to ensure
effectiveness and efficiency. The Council and other
United Nations bodies should adhere to their lines of
responsibility and make the best use of existing
mechanisms, with a view to avoiding duplication, thus
contributing to the best possible performance of the
entire United Nations system.

Resolution 1894 (2009), which the Security
Council has just adopted, constitutes another effort in
the international community's humanitarian cause of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. I would like to
thank you, Sir, and the delegation of Austria, for your
efforts towards the adoption of such an important
resolution.

