Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate Viet Nam on having recently joined the Security Council for the term 2020-2021 and on assuming the presidency of the Council. We also express our best wishes to the rest of the non-permanent members. Our country associates itself with the statement delivered by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Almost 75 years ago, as a result of the vast devastation inflicted by the Second World War, the international community decided to join forces to forge a tool to prohibit war in the conduct of foreign policy. The outcome was the Charter of the United Nations, a treaty that is today legally binding on 193 States and enshrines the basic principles and norms governing international relations. The Charter is an act of faith inthe best of humankind and a code of conduct for all States Members of the United Nations. The principle of the legal equality of States obliges all of us - without distinction between large and small, or weak and powerful - to respect it in letter and spirit alike. There is no scope for any State to proclaim itself to be exceptional or to decide when to comply with the Charter or to ignore it when convenient. Likewise, we are obliged to abide by the Charter in its entirety; we may not decide to accept some sections and reject others. All of us accept, for example, that the principles of political independence and the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, the peaceful resolution of disputes and the right to the self-determination of peoples, among other things, are essential for the maintenance of international peace and security. Today we are witnessing the resurgence of supremacist ideologies that deny the equality and diversity of humankind, driving the world to the brink of war with unpredictable consequences - an armed conflict with which one State, believing itself to be above international law, threatens the very existence of an entire civilization; a State that trumpets its military power and its exceptionalist ideology to impose its national sovereignty over the sovereignty of all the peoples of the world. This is a return to the darkest moments of the last century, when domestic national objectives combined with ambitions of global domination to fuel the use of armed force out no international legal controls. This is endless war as a method of oppression and expansion of power - a world with no Charter of the United Nations! We ask by what authority a Government may systematically violate, with impunity, the Charter of the United Nations by conducting indiscriminate bombings and extrajudicial executions; by violating the territorial integrity of or invading sovereign countries; by imposing coercive measures against more than one-third of humankind; by violating the principle of non-interference in internal affairs; by imposing collective punishment against civilian populations; by defending torture as a State practice; by threatening entire nations with naval blockades; by threatening to destroy the cultural heritage of a people; by violating the immunity of diplomatic headquarters; by conducting economic terrorism; or by preventing diplomats from States that do not obey its orders from exercising their rights in the United Nations? The answer is very simply - no Government has any such authority. No such authority exists. Our 193 States and, more specifically, the members of the Security Council, tasked with taking measures to maintain or restore international peace and security, must prevent the catastrophe that is war and uphold the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout human history there has never been a better alternative to the Charter. Ignoring its value and binding character is not only a betrayal of the past generations who bequeathed us this tool for peace but also a betrayal of future generations who deserve to live free from the unspeakable suffering of war. We cannot allow the United Nations to perish on our watch or for it to suffer the same fate as the defunct League of Nations. That failure led to the Second World War IJ, and it is our duty to prevent a third. Inconclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as aresponsible member of the international community, today reaffirms its commitment to the Charter and to the norms of international law. We put into practice the peaceful coexistence among nations, based on mutual respect. We are therefore announcing today our support for the establishment of a group of friends in defence of the Charter of the United Nations, with the purpose of safeguarding for all the peoples of the world the effective application of the most important legal, moral and intellectual instrument devised by humankind, which has succeeded since 1945 in preventing a third world war.
