Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I have the honour to
present the report (S/20l7/465) of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) . The report submitted to the Security
Council today lays out the current situation with respect
to peace and security in the Central African subregion,
as well as the activities undertaken by UNOCA since
November 2016.

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7828), political
tensions have persisted in some Central African
countries, mostly due to recent or future electoral
processes. Ongoing tensions have hampered progress
towards strengthening the rule of law, peace and
development and have posed a threat to human
rights, in particular the freedoms of expression and
assembly, while the political space continues to shrink.
I have maintained regular contact with stakeholders,
particularly Governments and policymakers, to
advocate for the peaceful resolution of disputes through
inclusive and frank dialogue.
(Spoke in English)

In Gabon, the national dialogue that took
place from 29 March to 25 May produced a series
of recommendations, including on institutional
and constitutional reforms in the legislative and
election-managementbodies. Two key recommendations
pertain to the responsibility of announcing the electoral
results, which is transferred from the Ministry of
Interior to the election-management body, and the
revision of the length of the mandate of the members
of the Constitutional Court, from seven years and
unlimited renewals, to a non-renewable nine-year
term. With regard to the President of the Republic,
the report recommends no changes to the length of the
presidential mandate - seven years - and does not
recommend instating a term limit. The outcome of the
national dialogue has been criticized by some of the
main opposition leaders. I will continue to use my good
offices to engage with all Gabonese stakeholders to
continue to defuse post-electoral tensions.

In Cameroon, tensions seem to be progressively
subsiding as a result of measures announced by the
Government to address grievances expressed by
lawyers and teachers of the English-speaking regions
of the north-west and south-west of the country, such
as reforms in the judicial and education sectors. In
addition, after a three-month interruption, Internet
service has been restored to the affected regions.
There is a growing consensus among the protagonists
that contentious issues need to be addressed through
peaceful means and dialogue for the sake of the
stability and national unity of Cameroon. I believe
that the Anglophone question and the related sense of
marginalization in the north-western and south-western
regions can be resolved only through genuine and
inclusive political dialogue.

However, I remain concerned that 27 civilians
detained in connection with the crisis in the English-
speaking regions, including three leaders of the
Cameroon Anglophone Movement, will be tried in a
military court under the provisions of recently adopted
terrorism laws for acts of terrorism and complicity to
perpetrate such acts, and may face the death penalty
if found guilty. In that regard, on 7 June the presiding
judge dismissed the request for the provisional release
of the three leaders of the Anglophone movement and
ordered the case to resume on 29 June.

In the Republic of the Congo, the unresolved

aftermath of the March 2016 presidential election is a
growing source of concern, with persistent humanitarian
and human rights ramifications in the Pool region, and
lingering political tensions between the Government
and the opposition. Last week, I returned from the
Republic ofthe Congo, where I continued to engage and
encourage all stakeholders, especially the Government,
to promote dialogue as the best way to address the
sociopolitical challenges facing the country, while also
ensuring humanitarian access to the Pool region.

As reported by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga yesterday (see S/PV.7965), the Secretary-General has launched an
action plan to respond to the evolving situation in
the Central African Republic, following last month's
increase in violence in the country's south-east.
UNOCA will work closely with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in support
of the rapid revitalization of the political process,
which is at the heart of the proposed action plan. More
specifically, UNOCA will pursue its engagement with
the subregion collectively, through existing regional
mechanisms and individually with key countries, to
ensure that they continue to play a constructive role in the
resolution of the crisis in the Central African Republic.

As the Council noted during its visit to the Lake
Chad basin region in March, the activities of Boko
Haram have undermined development and exacerbated
economic hardship in the region. Boko Haram remains
a serious threat to regional stability despite the military
progress achieved by the Multinational Joint Task Force
against the terrorist group. Last month, in line with
resolution 2349 (2017) of 31 March, two teams from
UNOCA travelled to Chad and Cameroon to assess the
impact of Boko Haram on the population, especially on
women and children. Threats by Boko Haram continue
to hinder humanitarian access to the affected areas,
further compounding the situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons. It is crucial, therefore,
to sustain international support to the subregion and
provide increased assistance, including equipment and
logistics, to the Multinational Joint Task Force in order
to strengthen its operational effectiveness.

The continued threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) to regional stability should
not be underestimated, especially as the Ugandan and
the South Sudanese forces have now disengaged from
the African Union Regional Task Force, along with the
United States special forces. I am concerned about the
impact of that withdrawal, as it will create a security
vacuum that may be exploited by the LRA and other
armed groups operating in the region. MINUSCA is
not mandated to conduct anti-LRA military operations
and the Central African Republic national security
forces, which could in the long run fill the gap left by
the exit of the Ugandan forces, still require training and
structural reforms. All training efforts will need to be
in line with the overall security sector reform process
and coordinated with other partners supporting the
Central African armed forces. I would like to express
my deepest gratitude to the Ugandan forces, those of
other contributing countries, and the military personnel
of the Regional Task Force for their dedication to
fighting the LRA. Collectively, there is a need to
remain focused on efforts aimed at the total eradication
of the LRA. UNOCA will remain engaged, including
by reviewing the United Nations regional strategy, in
order to address the threat and impact of the LRA and
to ensure coordination among the various stakeholders
working on the issue.

The 44th ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), held in Yaounde from
29 May to 2 June, assessed the peace and security
situation in the subregion, including elections-related
and socioeconomic tensions, the upsurge of violence
in the Central African Republic and its regional
dimension, including transhumance related tensions,
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. Twenty-
five years after the establishment of UNSAC, member
States found it fitting to evaluate its performance with
a view to enhancing its operations and effectiveness.
In that respect, Member States adopted, in the form
of a declaration, a number of measures on UNSAC's
working methods and on enhancing synergies with
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), and better addressing the evolving peace and
security situation in the subregion. UNSAC member
States also adopted a ministerial declaration on the
Central African Republic, reflecting their continued
concern for the situation in that country.

(spoke in French)

The Central African Convention for the Control of
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used
for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, also
known as the Kinshasa Convention entered into force
on 8 March. The Secretary-General congratulated the
States members of UNSAC on that achievement, while
encouraging those countries that had not yet done so to
ratify the Convention as soon as possible. UNOCA will
continue to encourage the Member States concerned
to do so and will continue to support subregional
disarmament efforts.

In the past six months, UNOCA has strengthened
its cooperation with its two main subregional partners,
ECCAS and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC). In particular, in
accordance with the framework for cooperation and
plan of action between UNOCA and ECCAS, we have
institutionalized quarterly technical meetings that
have strengthened our common understanding of the
situation in the subregion and enabled UNOCA to
bolster its support for ECCAS.

Among other things, ECCAS has asked for support
in revitalizing and operationalizing its Mediation and
Preventive Diplomacy Unit and in strengthening its
collaboration with civil society with regard to early
warning. In April, the Council of Ministers of ECCAS
also adopted a timetable and terms of reference for
institutional reforms to be implemented by December
2018, with the main goal of strengthening the political
role of the ECCAS secretariat and making it more
effective, while accelerating subregional integration by
merging the CEMAC with the ECCAS. UNOCA and
the Department of Political Affairs will continue to
support the process of institutional reform.

In order to ensure the coherence and coordination
of the work of the United Nations, UNOCA will
continue to enhance its collaboration with the Envoys
and Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
the Regional Directors of the United Nations system
entities and the Resident Coordinators in the subregion.
It will continue to mobilize the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, including the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Commission, with a view
to achieving the common goals of preventing conflict
and peacebuilding in Central Africa.

UNOCA looks forward to resolute commitment on
the part of the Security Council in efforts to promote
peace and security in Central Africa and reaffirms
its pledge to work closely with Member States in the
Central African subregion to achieve that goal.

