Mr. Kuchynksi (Ukraine): First of all, we would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. It provides an important
opportunity for the Council to listen to the views of the
Member States and to take them duly into account
before the Council takes appropriate action. Our thanks
also go to Ambassador Chowdhury for his
chairmanship of the Sierra Leone sanctions Committee
and for presenting such a comprehensive report.

I wish to take this opportunity to reassure the
Council that Ukraine will continue to support the
activities of the Committee and will contribute to the
collective efforts of the international community to
ensure that the measures taken by the Security Council
produce tangible results.

We particularly welcome the participation of the
members of the Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone
Diamonds and Arms at this meeting. We would also
like to commend their work in preparing an extensive
and comprehensive report, which embraces important
aspects of the implementation of the Sierra Leone
sanctions. At all stages of the Panel' s work, including
during the visit of a member of the Panel to Ukraine,
our Government fully cooperated with the Panel of
Experts in the fulfilment of their mandate. Ukraine is
prepared to maintain such a level of cooperation in the
sanctions Committee.

My delegation attaches particular importance to
the consideration of the report of the Panel of Experts
on Sierra Leone both by the sanctions Committee -
which is entrusted to consider information concerning
violations and to recommend appropriate measures in
response thereto - and by the Security Council proper.
We also believe that the active involvement of other
Member States in this process will be extremely useful
for the comprehensive, all-round examination of
various issues raised in the report.

The report and the findings of the Panel of
Experts represent an important source of information
with regard to the ways and means in which sanctions
are being violated and the sources of illegal financing
for the activities of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). We commend the efforts ofthe Panel to address
these issues, and we consider the recommendations of
the Panel valuable terms of reference for consideration
by the Council. We also note as a positive development
that a number of measures and initiatives stemming
from the recommendations of the Panel - including in
the fields of diamond certification and trade, arms and
air traffic control - have already been taken by the
countries in the region. In this connection, I would like
to draw the Council's attention to the recent decisions
by the Liberian Government to ground all Liberian
registered aircraft, and its proposal to establish for
Liberia a United Nations-supervised monitoring regime
for diamonds and the arms trade. As we understand it,
further measures are being considered at the regional
level by member States ofthe Economic Community of
West African States.

All these developments clearly demonstrate that
the work of the Panel and its report have already had a
visible effect on the turn of events surrounding the
Sierra Leone conflict. There is hope that these
developments, coupled with a responsible approach by
the Council, will help to advance the peace process in
Sierra Leone.

At the same time, I must say that a number of the
Experts' recommendations are of a rather controversial
character. In our view, they should be looked at from
the point of view of their consistency with both the
original mandate of the Panel and with the work being
done in other forums. As an example, let me refer to
the recommendation contained in paragraph 262 of the
report, which suggests that consideration could be
given to the Security Council embargo on weapons
exports from specific producer countries until
internationally acceptable certification schemes have
been developed.

We are convinced that this issue, as well as a
number of other issues of a general or global nature,
should be dealt with in the specific competent forums.
In this regard, we would like to recall the idea initially
put forward by Ukraine regarding the convening of an
international experts meeting of major arms-producing
countries with a view to elaborating effective measures
to prevent the reselling of arms by end-users to third
parties. I should also note in this context the ongoing
work in the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as the
anticipated convening at Budapest in April of this year
of a meeting on small arms. A similar observation
could be made with regard to the recommendation
regarding the establishment of a global certification
scheme for diamonds, as well as with regard to some
other recommendations.
Let me now turn to several points in the report in
which my country is specifically referred to. Relevant
comments in this regard were made by our delegation
in the sanctions Committee. I will therefore try to
recall briefly some ofthose comments.

The Panel extensively looked into the case of the
delivery of Ukrainian weapons to Burkina Faso in early
1999. The report confirms that a Ukrainian license for
the sale of the weaponry was granted after the
Ukrainian authorities had received an authentic end-
user certificate from the Ministry of Defence of
Burkina Faso. In that regard, I wish to recall that as far
as back as April 1999, and later on in June 1999, on its
own initiative and after its own thorough investigation,
Ukraine provided detailed information about that
shipment to the Sierra Leone sanctions Committee. The
results of the investigation, which were undertaken by
the competent authorities of Ukraine, proved beyond
any doubt that the delivery was made in full
compliance with the legislation of Ukraine and the
relevant requirements of the pertinent Security Council
resolutions. The Government of Ukraine expressed its
grave concern on several occasions about reports that
that shipment had been subsequently re-exported, in
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

As to the references in the report to allegations of
mercenary activities by Ukrainian nationals, I wish to
reconfirm that my delegation formally requested the
Committee's assistance in obtaining all relevant
information in the Panel's possession that would
facilitate a criminal investigation of the facts by
Ukraine. The Committee has also been informed that
mercenary activities are prohibited under Ukrainian
law, which provides for criminal prosecution of
offenders. In this respect, I also wish to recall that my
Government is now providing over 500 peacekeepers
and over 400 armoured personnel carriers and trucks to
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone. This is a
concrete illustration of Ukraine's commitment to assist
the Government of Sierra Leone and the international
community to bring peace and stability to that war-torn
country.

I would now like to say a few words regarding
the working methods of the Panel. My delegation
strongly believes that the following aspects should be
given the highest priority in order to ensure the highest
standards of credibility and effectiveness in the work of
the Experts.

First, the Panel's mandate should be pursued in
close cooperation and consultation with the
Governments concerned. In other words, we believe
that all relevant evidence should be brought to the
attention of the Governments so that they will have an
opportunity to provide their replies and other relevant
information to the Experts when their report is being
prepared.

Secondly, all statements or reports should based
on thoroughly investigated and corroborated facts.

Thirdly, in our view, the highest degree of
credibility should be extended to Governments that
bear the main responsibility for compliance with the
Charter ofthe United Nations and the resolutions ofthe
Security Council.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Ukraine's
adherence to strengthening the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime as an important tool to curtail the
ability of the Revolutionary United Front to wage war.
We are ready to work closely and actively with the
Council on the elaboration of workable measures to
achieve that objective.

