Mr. Pildegovics (Latvia) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I very much support the theme
of multilateralism.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this open debate in order
to reflect on the need to strengthen multilateralism. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his statement in
that regard.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

In an interdependent and globalized world
we can address and resolve global problems only
through multilateral means, including dialogue and
international cooperation. History shows that a strong
multilateral, inclusive and rules-based international
order is essential for the maintenance of global peace
and security. It must be our joint responsibility to
defend and strengthen it.

The United Nations was created because the world
had paid too high a price for the absence of a credible
and functional international system. It was necessary to
put an end to the world where might makes right, where
big Powers dominate and dismember their neighbours.
Latvia is convinced that only genuine respect for the
Charter of the United Nations can prevent the world
from plunging into chaos. The relations between States
must be exclusively based on law and dialogue, and not
on force and coercion.

Since regaining its independence and acceding to
the United Nations, in 1991, Latvia has been a strong
supporter of multilateralism. Latvia has always been a
staunch supporter of international law and a promoter
of international principles of democracy, human rights
and the rule of law. Those principles are fundamental for
maintaining international order based on predictability,
stability and the security of States. For us, the United
Nations is the core of the multilateral system 4 the
proper place for finding global solutions to global
problems.

Current pressing issues - such as conflicts,
terrorism, climate change and migration, to name a
few - serve to underscore the relevance and increased
interdependence of all three pillars of the United Nations:
peace and security, human rights and development.
They are even more relevant now as the United Nations
and its States Members advance the implementation of
the bold 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Goals.

Conflict prevention has its rightful place at the
centre of the United Nations agenda. Also, early
action by the United Nations in situations of concern
is critical. Latvia strongly believes that respect for
human rights, the rule of law and good governance are
key to maintaining peace and security. Therefore, it is
important to act early and effectively where serious
human rights law and humanitarian law violations take
place. They can be an early indication ofa descent into
conflict or an escalation of conflict.

However, the potential of the United Nations to
prevent the outbreak, continuation or resurgence of
conflicts has not been used effectively. Far too often,
the United Nations has been unable to prevent conflicts,
build peace or stop atrocities. Too often resources are
spent on responding to and managing crises instead
of preventing them. In that regard, Latvia champions
the Secretary-General's gender-responsive agenda,
including on conventional and light weapons. That is
why Latvia has selected gender-based violence as the
theme of its presidency of the Arms Trade Treaty.

The Member States of the Security Council have
a particular responsibility in maintaining international
peace and security. Inaction by the Security Council
when mass atrocities are taking place runs counter to
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.

Since permanent members ofthe Council are granted
a special privilege - the veto power- in order to protect
the Charter of the United Nations and the international
order, they also bear a special responsibility that this
power be used in the interests of common peace and
security. We also believe that Security Council reform
is long overdue. We should all focus on strengthening
the legitimacy of this important body.

In order to strengthen the role of the United Nations,
serious efforts should be made to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Territorial integrity and sovereignty, as enshrined in
the purposes and principles of the Charter, must be
respected by all Member States.

At the same time, the United Nations as an
Organization must be able to change in order to respond
accordingly to twenty-first-century challenges. Latvia
supports the reforms of the Secretary-General in order
to bring the United Nations closer to the people and
be able to respond to their needs for security and
well-being. The United Nations can and must be a
significant global player, a community of nations proud
of its values and committed to multilateralism and the
principles of international law.

Multilateral diplomacy can be challenging, but
even with differences between Member States great
compromises in the form of international agreements
have been achieved while putting people and our planet
at the centre of what we do. With more unity and
collective action, we can strengthen the principles of
multilateralism. We all have the obligation to overcome
the grim challenges of the present times and to make
the world a better place.

