Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to
welcome the Force Commanders to this meeting of the
Council and to thank them for presenting their insights
on various aspects of peacekeeping. We underline
the importance of such interaction with the heads of
the military components of peacekeeping operations,
which provides an opportunity for Council members to
listen to their perspectives and exchange views on the
current challenges confronted by peacekeepers in the
field.

Matters related to the increased effectiveness of
peacekeeping, as the flagship activity of the United
Nations, and its conceptual and operational evolution,
including on the military side, constantly require novel
ideas. I would like to share some brief thoughts on
certain issues raised in the presentations.

To start with Liberia, we note that the process of
the gradual reconfiguration of the uniformed personnel
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), as
authorized by resolution 2066 (2012), is being carried
out against the backdrop of the country's continuously
improving security situation. As the reconfiguration
envisages a significant increase in police personnel,
vis-a-vis a decrease in the military strength of the
Mission, the issues of predeployment training and the
subsequent in-mission assessment of formed police
units become more relevant. Meanwhile, it is essential
for the Government of Liberia to step up its efforts to
establish sustainable and effective security forces, with
a view to progressively assuming UNMIL's security
functions.

As for Cote d'Ivoire, the case of inter-mission
cooperation between the United Nations Operation in
cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and UNMIL has demonstrated
that close coordination between missions operating in
geographic proximity, especially on issues transcending
the respective areas of deployment, is becoming more
imperative in achieving efficient and cost-effective
execution of the mandates. Increased cooperation
between the two missions is essential to support
the efforts of the Ivorian and Liberian authorities to
effectively address cross-border threats and challenges
and to stabilize the situation in the border areas between
the two countries.

Concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the comprehensive political process - under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region * is currently
being accompanied by the strengthened offensive
posture against illegal armed groups by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The
provision of unmanned aerial systems will significantly
increase the Mission's surveillance capabilities,
including for the purpose of observing the movement
of armed groups, arms and related materiel, and will
help in obtaining tactical information, which is critical
to protecting civilians and ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers.

The deployment of unmanned aerial systems
to MONUSCO was agreed on a trial basis. In that
regard, we would be interested to hear the views of
the briefers on what kind of political, logistical and
operational challenges the use of that system - as part
of inter-mission cooperation - may pose.

Finally, through the Force Commanders present at
this meeting, I wish to pay homage to all of the men
and women serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, for their enormous sacrifices in order
to advance global peace and security. Azerbaijan
strongly condemns the recent spate of attacks against
peacekeepers in some countries. We stress that there
is no justification for such attacks whatsoever, and that
the safety and security of all peacekeepers must be
respected, guaranteed and ensured by all and under all
circumstances.

