Mr. Taula (New Zealand): The crisis in Libya
over the past five years has exposed its people to
grave violence and Violations of their basic human
rights. It has brought chronic instability and conflict,
and left the people at the mercy of armed militias and
violent extremists. The only way that this environment
of chaos and impunity can be brought to an end is
through the establishment of a legitimate, unified and
effective Government.

We welcome developments towards that goal over
the past six months. The conclusion of the Libyan
Political Agreement, the progress in establishing a
Government of National Accord (GNA) and the arrival
of the Presidency Council in Tripoli represent Vital steps
forward. It is essential, however, that the international
community, including the Council, stand ready to
swiftly provide necessary support to Libya.

Only by re-establishing Government authority
and strengthening core State institutions will it be
possible to make progress on restoring the rule of
law, protecting basic human rights and achieving
justice for past violations. That is equally true of the
implementation of the Security Council's referral
of Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Prosecutor Bensouda's report illustrates the challenges
of pursuing accountability in Libya. Taking forward the
ICC investigations has required patience, determination
and flexibility.

The security situation continues to make it
impossible for ICC staff to undertake investigations
on the ground. As noted in the Prosecutor's report,
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi is detained in an area
described as "unavailable" to the Libyan State. In those
circumstances, the Prosecutor's approach of engaging
directly with those detaining him in order to secure
his surrender to the ICC appears to be the only Viable
option. That will also involve practical engagement
with and assistance from the GNA.

We are pleased that the Prosecutor and the Libyan
Prosecutor General's Office have continued their close
collaboration. We expect that to continue with the
GNA, and look forward to engagement between the
Prosector and the GNA getting under way. We note that
the Prosecutor is likely to apply for additional warrants
in the light of newly acquired evidence. We will defer
to the Prosecutor's independent judgement on this,
but we would join her and other speakers in stressing
that the ICC is not a panacea for all the accountability
challenges facing Libya. The ICC is a court of last
resort. It was never intended to take the place of national
justice systems. Rather, it is complementary to those
systems, whether they be regular courts or transitional
justice mechanisms.

The only effective long-term solution is to
strengthen Libya's domestic capacity to maintain the
rule of law and address impunity. The international
community and the United Nations system need to be
prepared to respond promptly to the GNA's requests
for assistance in a range of areas, including the justice
sector. Domestic judicial options are likely to remain
constrained in the short term. We therefore support the
Prosecutor's suggestion that all involved in Libyan cases
develop a coordinated investigative and prosecutorial
strategy, prioritizing action against those who pose a
threat to Libya's stability.

Attacks on civilians, particularly by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), continue with
impunity in Libya. We note that the Prosecutor is
currently assessing the potential to expand ICC
investigations to cover such attacks. We would welcome
measures that could achieve accountability for the
horrific crimes committed by ISIL and other extremist
groups. We appreciate the practical challenges that this
presents and look forward to the Prosecutor's future
reporting on options in that regard.

Finally, when it comes to its relationship with the
ICC, as in all other matters, the Security Council must
follow through on its decisions. That is a basic question
of credibility and means providing the ICC with all
the necessary support for any referrals it makes,
including in relation to findings of non-cooperation.
It requires sustained engagement and political will.
As an ICC State party, New Zealand is well aware
of the substantial costs associated with Security
Council referrals. We therefore have sympathy for the
Prosecutor's call for additional resources if she is to
take on more investigations in Libya, especially any not
contemplated at the time of the original referral. If the
Council creates new responsibilities for the ICC, then
the United Nations cannot simply wash its hands of the
financial implications. At the very least, the Council
should not obstruct open discussions on the issue but
should defer to the General Assembly, which has the
prerogative and mandate to determine funding issues.

