Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me to welcome
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judges
Agius and Meron, as well as the esteemed Prosecutor
Brammertz. We thank them for today's briefings and
reports and commend their continued efforts to ensure
accountability for international crimes for which they
will continue to have Croatia's full support.

Croatia welcomes the delivery of judgements in
the appeal cases of Stanisie and Simatovie and the
trial case of Radovan Karadzic. Karadzie's rightful
conviction, including for the genocide in Srebrenica,
must serve future generations as a prime example of the
devastating consequences of a genocidal, expansionist
policy. Bearing in mind the fact that Karadzie himself
participated in four joint criminal enterprises and that
during most of the time under consideration he was
the President of the Republika Srpska, as well as the
Supreme Commander of its armed forces, his sentence
does not entirely match the extreme gravity of the
crimes committed, nor does it match when compared
to some of the sentences given to his subordinates and
co-perpetrators acting under his direct command in
those crimes. Accordingly, we hope that the Appeals
Chamber will carefully reconsider all factual and legal
elements of the crimes attributed to Radovan Karadzie
and appropriately assess his full responsibility.

On many occasions in this Chamber, we have
reiterated the importance of the completion of the
remaining ICTY trials. In that vein, we are deeply
troubled with the developments in the case of Goran
Hadeic. HadZic' is charged with 14 counts of crimes
against humanity and violations of the laws or customs
of war, with the purpose of the permanent forcible
removal of Croatians and other non-Serbs in Croatia
from a large part of Croatia, envisaged to become part
of greater Serbia. Although initially declared fit to
stand trial, with an expected verdict to come this fall,
HadZie's trial had been adjourned, and then suspended
in 2015. More than a year ago, he was provisionally
released due to his health. Regardless of the
prosecution's attempts and motions for the continuation
of the trial, the proceedings are now stayed indefinitely.
And we just learned today that the trial in on the road to
being terminated. It is difficult to understand the Trial
Chambers' logic in this case after realizing that, during
his provisional release, Hadzie had time enough, and
seemed to be fit enough, to plan for his second marriage,
on which the media repeatedly reported.

Igor Kacie was only 16 years old when, on
20 November 1991, he was taken from the Vukovar
hospital and executed, together with 259 other civilians
and prisoners. At that time, that was the largest single
massacre in Europe since the Second World War. Igor
Kacie's body was exhumed from a mass grave in 1996.
He still had on him a little dolphin that he carved in a
shelter during the three-month siege of his city, as well
as a couple oftoy cars. His life is lost forever, but we had
hoped that at least justice would be served. Therefore,
it is with deep regret that we come to realize today
that Goran Hadzie, just like his superior and mentor
Slobodan Milosevic, will never be held accountable for
Igor's stolen youth and the extinguished lives of many
others.

We are deeply disappointed, dismayed and
concerned with the first instance judgment in the
Seselj case. On this matter, the President of Croatia,
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic, wrote to this body
to alert it to the judgment and its consequences. The
judgment, issued by a majority only a week after the
Karadeic' decision, seems to totally ignore legal and
factual findings previously established by the ICTY.
We concur with the prosecution's assessment that the
Trial Chamber erred both in law and in fact, and expect
that the appeal trial will bring long-awaited justice for
Seselj's victims. At this point, allow me to quote the
dissenting opinion of Judge Lattanzi, who stated that in
reading the judgment she felt

"thrown back in time to a period in human history,
centuries ago, when one said [...] silent enim leges
inter arma".

Today we cannot allow the law to fall silent in times of
war and its aftermath.

We remain deeply concerned about Serbia's
continued failure to fully cooperate with the Tribunal
and execute the Tribunal's arrest warrants for three
Serbian indictees. We call again upon our neighbour
to comply with the Tribunal's requests without any
further delay, and we remind it that full cooperation
with the ICTY is an international obligation and an
essential political condition e as part of political
criteria for the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process - and legal condition - as part of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Serbia and the European Union - throughout the
accession process of Serbia to the European Union.

Croatia also shares the grave concerns of the
Office of the Prosecutor about the participation of
Tribunal-convicted war criminals in election campaigns
during the reporting period, where convicted persons
appeared at campaign events for Serbian political
parties or on public television. As recently as 9 May,
Veselin Sljivancanin, the war criminal convicted for the
Vukovar hospital massacre, was a guest at the official
military parade commemorating Serbian armed forces
and, paradoxically, the liberation of Europe. It is a
gruesome predicament that it was precisely Sljivancanin
who in 1991 pointed out Igor Kacie, the boy with the
little dolphin, separated him from his mother and sent
him to a horrific death together with hundreds of others.

Convicted war criminals have no place on
ceremonial stages or in public life. They belong on
the margins of society and civilization as an example
and eternal reminder of failed policies that led to
unspeakable atrocities. We have to prevent the demons
of the past and their toxic ideology from shaping our
present or our future. Generations to come and history
will be unforgiving of our failure to do so. Croatia
stands ready to cooperate with its neighbours and
assist them in overcoming the remaining obstacles in
facing the past as a precondition for lasting peace and
meaningful reconciliation.

I will repeat what I have stated on previous
occasions in the context of prolonged proceedings by
expressing our hope that in the case of Prlic et al., the
Tribunal will find ways not to prolong this complex
case, keeping in mind the targeted completion strategy.

With their contribution to international criminal
justice, the ICTY and the Mechanism, albeit being
temporal institutions, will undoubtedly leave behind a
permanent legacy. Their work is not over, as thousands
of victims and their loved ones are still waiting for
justice to be served and historical truth to be established.
On our part, we will continue to render our support and
assistance to them in completing their work.

Finally, the fact that I will not comment in any way
on Serbia's comments today in no way implies that
Croatia agrees with them.

