Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Ambassador Quinlan for presenting the quarterly
report on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We
value the work of Ambassador Quinlan as Chair of that
Committee.

Given that this is our first opportunity to participate
in a briefing by the Chairman of the 1737 Committee,
I would like to say that my country welcomes the
agreement between the P5+l and Iran of 24 November
2013 and the cooperation agreement between Iran and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). They
provide a unique opportunity for Iran to prove the
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

Chile welcomes with satisfaction the most
recent report of the Director General of the IAEA
of 20 February on the implementation of the NPT
safeguards agreement and relevant provisions of
Security Council resolutions in the Islamic Republic of
Iran. We particularly welcome the fact that the highly
enriched uranium reserves have been significantly
reduced pursuant to the 24 November agreement and
that the IAEA recognizes that Iran is meeting its
commitments to slow down its most sensitive nuclear
activities in exchange for the lifting of some economic
sanctions.

Our country follows such reports with interest, but
also with caution. Our country notes the issues raised
by the various delegations during the Committee's
consultations in the recent quarter. In particular, we
note the view that, in the context of the ongoing talks
between the P5+1 and Iran, it is not advisable to take
steps that could threaten the current momentum in the
dialogue.

Chile understands that we are not working in a
political vacuum and that any kind of action that could
be misunderstood by the parties should be avoided.
However, until a final and satisfactory agreement is
reached and endorsed by the Security Council, the
measures imposed by the United Nations with regard to
Iran's nuclear programme will remain in effect.

In that context, my country expresses its strong
support for the 1737 Committee and its Panel ofExperts,
and hopes that its work will not be impeded and that
it will able to fully fulfil its mandate in a timely and
effective manner. That is particularly relevant given
the recently reported incident in the Red Sea, where a
ship carrying ballistic missiles, apparently of Iranian
origin and destined for the Gaza Strip, was intercepted.
We hope that the Panel of Experts will be able to
begin to collect information on that case as soon as
possible in order to gather objective data to enable us to
decide whether or not it was a violation of the relevant
resolutions.

In conclusion, Chile expresses its vote of confidence
that the spirit of collaboration and commitment observed
on the part of the Government in Tehran in its dialogue
with the P5+l with regard to its nuclear programme
will be reflected in other equally pressing matters in
the Middle East, in which Iran plays an important role.

