Mr. Oshima (Japan): Madame President, the
Japanese delegation appreciates your convening this
important meeting today on Timor-Leste - a young
country struggling on its way to building a promising
nation and now suddenly finding itself in turmoil. I
thank Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing on the latest
situation, based on his active engagement on the
ground with the leaders of Timor-Leste. I also thank
the representatives of the four countries that have
deployed stabilization forces to Timor-Leste at the
urgent request of the Timor-Leste Government for their
statements.

We had hoped to have the presence of the Foreign
and Defence Minister, Mr. Jose Ramos Horta, at this
meeting today. However, we all understand how
difficult it would be for him to leave his country at this
critical time. My Government sent a strong message to
him and the other leaders of the Government of Timor-
Leste of Japan's continued strong support of them.

I also would like to take the opportunity to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and his team on the
ground for their tireless efforts, in particular for Mr.
Hasegawa's visits to many parts of the country with a
view to contributing to the progress of political
reconciliation.

Many in the United Nations and outside it have
believed and remarked that Timor-Leste is a proud
success story in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations - a model
of international peace and development cooperation in
which the United Nations and the rest of the
international community worked together with the
people of a territory to help them move from conflict to
making a successful transition to peace and nation-
building.

Throughout the period of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNMISET)
and the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL), the people in that land, guided by their
distinguished leaders, have demonstrated remarkable
resilience and a sense of ownership, and have made
steady strides towards sustainable development. Other
important actors, such as bilateral and multilateral
partners, joined forces to provide indispensable
supplementary assistance. Based on achievements in
the areas of public safety and order and reassuring
progress in the building of State institutions, our
collective judgment in the Council, until recently,
favoured bringing the engagement of the United
Nations, through UNOTIL, to a careful but gradual
close.

However, the events and disturbances we have
seen in the past few weeks in Dili and the rest of the
country have revealed the fragility of the present

S/l'V.5457

 

situation. Moreover, it is regrettable that the current
disorder was invited and worsened, in no small part, by
political conflicts among the leadership of Timor-
Leste.

In the aftermath of the turmoil, the most urgent
necessity has been the restoration of law and order in
society. Japan commends the quick action of the four
countries - Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal - in dispatching their troops and police
forces in response to the request of the Timor-Leste
Government, in order to stabilize the security situation.
That response by the four countries was not only
welcome but demonstrated, we believe, a level of
maturity in the commitment by countries with interests
in the region to addressing the question of peace and
welfare in the region as a whole.

At the same time, it is clear that resolving the
problems now faced by the Timorese must go beyond
immediately restoring public order and will have to
entail measures that address the underlying causes of
today's problem in Timor-Leste. In this regard, it is
important, first and foremost, that internal political
reconciliation be achieved through ownership by the
Timorese themselves. We believe that the United
Nations could play a useful role in facilitating this
process, but the process should be led and owned by
the Timorese, and not by the United Nations. It is our
hope that all the political leaders of Timor-Leste will
recognize their responsibility and strive to create a
constructive and forward-looking relationship among
themselves, putting unity and the best interest of the
country above all.

With regard to the request from the Government
of Timor-Leste concerning the establishment of an
independent inquiry commission regarding the violent
incidents in April and May, the possible involvement of
the United Nations and the manner and extent of that
involvement in such a process should be carefully
considered, taking into account, inter alia, the points I
have just mentioned.

I also would like to mention the humanitarian
crisis in the country, in which more than ten thousand
people have been internally displaced and forced to
live in dire conditions. To alleviate their situation, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) launched a flash appeal requesting $18.9
million yesterday. My Government has decided to
contribute $5 million in response to that appeal. We
call for a similarly quick and positive response from
other Member States.

In parallel with the political solution, we should
also look again at the underlying economic and social
problems faced by the Timorese that contribute to
fragility in their society and create causes for unrest.
Here, there are more lessons to be learned. Not least is
the acute problem of youth unemployment, which has
come under the spotlight. Efforts to alleviate these
social problems, including expanding employment,
may not be within the direct province of the Security
Council. Nevertheless, discussion on this issue cannot
be avoided because it has an impact on the outcome of
the United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities in Timor-Leste, as indeed is the case in other
instances of peacebuilding elsewhere in the world
where the United Nations is involved. Although the
international community has continuously provided its
support for the reconstruction and development of
Timor-Leste through bilateral and multilateral
channels, in our view this issue has not been addressed
sufficiently.

It is now important to effectively and efficiently
utilize these international assistance resources and seek
to comprehensively address the country's social
problems, in full respect, once again, of the concept of
ownership by Timor-Leste. The country's leadership
should focus on the root of the problems and ensure
appropriate distribution of resources. The significant
potential revenue from natural resources development
in the Timor Sea should be managed prudently and in a
transparent manner for the most efficient use of those
resources and for the greatest benefit to the Timorese
people.

We consider that Timor-Leste could be
considered as a case for study in the Peacebuilding
Commission at an early appropriate time.

The shape of post-UNOTIL United Nations
engagement should be considered in the light of those
aforementioned points. The international community
now needs to draw a lesson from this recent series of
incidents, conduct a review of the past United Nations
activities and consider ways to enhance the
Organization's role in Timor-Leste with urgency but
with a certain degree of caution. In order to allow such
a review and planning for post-UNOTIL engagement,
we support the proposal of the Secretary-General to

S/l'V.5457

 

once again roll over the mandate of UNOTIL for an
appropriate period of time.

Japan will consult with other members of the
Council, members of the core group on Timor-Leste
and other major stakeholders on a draft resolution for
the rollover. We also expect that the Secretary-General
will, reasonably soon, present recommendations to the
Council for its consideration on the follow-on mission,
based on the assessments of the field mission led by
Mr. Hasegawa and his team and the Special Envoy, Mr.
Ian Martin. We look forward to the timely issuance of
his report on that subject.

Finally, Japan has provided significant support to
Timor-Leste for the past seven years, since the start of
United Nations involvement in that country in all its
phases. That has included the dispatch of an
engineering battalion of our Self-Defence Forces, as
well as police advisers and civilian experts for
capacity-building. We also support a number of
assistance projects and programmes at the Government
and community levels. We will continue to work
closely with the Government of Timor-Leste and in
close consultation with the core group, multilateral
institutions, non-governmental organizations and other
key actors in the region and beyond.

