Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
commitment.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

The High Representative has painted a bleak
picture of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
negative trend of recent years has continued. Economic
performance remains below the country's potential.
Inter-institutional deadlock persists. Statements
made by Republika Srpska leaders questioning the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have become more frequent. Bosnian
politicians have failed to implement the reforms
necessary to move the country forward on the path
to European Union membership, even though such
membership is the stated objective of the leaders of the
country and desired by the vast majority of Bosnians.
The question of military property, which has been
pending for years, continues to prevent any progress
in the implementation of the NATO membership action
plan. Much remains to be done in the fields of the rule
of law, the fight against corruption and the protection of
human rights. Of particular importance in that regard
is the implementation of the judgement of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case in order
to ensure the equality of all citizens before the law.

Luxembourg shares the concerns expressed by
the High Representative, but we must not stop there.
We must look forward; hence the importance of the
ongoing concrete and multifaceted support that the
European Union provides to the institutions and citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This support focuses on
the rule of law, institutional reform with a view to the
establishment of efficient governance, the maintenance
of order and security, and economic reforms. The
events that took place in February in several several
Bosnian cities reflect the impatience of citizens calling
for an improved socioeconomic situation. All citizens,
especially the young, require new opportunities. The
political leaders of the country must create them.

The international community is ready to actively
support the efforts of the Bosnians. We welcome in this
respect the launch of the Compact for Jobs and Growth,
to take place on 26 and 27 May in Sarajevo with the
support ofthe European Union. The Compact is intended
to assist the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
define concrete structural socioeconomic reforms to
boost the economy and stimulate job creation in the
short and medium terms.

We appeal to the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to start listening to the public and to meet
the legitimate concerns of citizens in dialogue with
civil society. We share the hope expressed by the High
Representative that the increased civic engagement
embodied by the plenums - the civic groups that
formed as a result of the events that took place early
this year - will lead to greater accountability on the
part of Bosnian leaders at the local and national levels.
The prospect of the general elections in October should
encourage policymakers to intensify their efforts to
address the grievances of citizens.

It should be noted that the security situation
remained generally calm over the past six months.
Polls show that the vast majority of Bosnians feel safe.
The European Union Force has not had to intervene to
restore peace. That represents a trend to be welcomed.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that separatist
rhetoric intended to sow division has no place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Luxembourg reaffirms its deep
conviction that the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a sovereign, united, stable, prosperous and multiethnic
State is within the European family, like its neighbours.
We know that this belief is shared by the international
community, the countries of the region and the vast
majority of Bosnian citizens. Bosnia and Herzegovina
can count on the continued support of Luxembourg to
help realize its European destiny.
