Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you personally, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I would like to thank all the members of the
Council for inviting me to take part in it. I am grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General and the Assistant
Secretary-General for their briefings. I would like to
extend my gratitude to all who, in their statements,
expressed support for the territorial integrity of my
country and raised strong objections concerning the
illegitimacy of the referendum in Crimea. I will now
say a few words in Russian, as is becoming customary.

(spoke in Russian)

I should like to comment on a few elements of the
statement of my colleague from the Russian Federation.
It is very complicated and to a large extent unpleasant
to make comments regarding some of the statements
made by my Russian colleague. It is very difficult to
comment on what is blatantly false, because it puts one
in a position of having justify oneself.

Regarding the freedom of expression and access
to information in Ukraine, does Mr. Churkin know the
difference between freedom of expression and access to
information in Ukraine and in Russia? All the webcasts
of the Security Council are broadcast in Ukraine on
all channels, without editing. Not everything that was
heard here today will sound pleasant to the ears of
Ukrainians. There were a great many recommendations
made here today that contain elements critical of
Ukraine, but we are ready to listen to all of that.

The only things that are heard in the Russian media
are Russian statements. Yesterday, I met with a women's
non-governmental organization that participated in
the Women's Forum at the United Nations. One of
the women was from Odessa, another from Donetsk
and the third was from Chernihiv. All were Russian
speakers. They turned to me and asked: "How can
the whole world, watching on television, be told such
lies as are heard in many of the statements made by
representatives of the Russian Federation?" How could
I answer them?

The means justify the ends? That is probably the
only answer.

I have two comments that it simply behoves me
to make. My Russian colleague characterized as
blasphemy the decision of the Ukrainian authorities
yesterday to allow our military in Crimea to use
weapons in self-defence, following the death of their
fellow soldier. Today, we have heard that it is blasphemy
because they are raising their weapons against their
fellow countrymen. This is odd. The feeling one is left
with is that it is Ukraine that has launched an attack by
bringing its forces in, as opposed to the truth, which
is that Russia three weeks ago deployed its forces
throughout the sovereign territory of Ukraine - and
this at the beginning of the Orthodox Easter, at the time
when believers were to gather. I believe that there is an
excess of cynicism and untruth here.

(spoke in English)

Ukraine keeps saying that we are ready for dialogue.
We started with a request to our Russian colleagues
to hold consultations under the bilateral agreement.
We invited all guarantors under the Budapest
Memorandum to convene a meeting as provided for by
that document. The Russian Federation refused. We are
ready for further dialogue, and we acknowledge the
recent proposal made by the Russian Federation. But
what is disappointing is that these are not proposals;
they are ultimatums and demands as to how Ukraine
should build its future. We do not like these ultimatums
because they are open interference in our domestic
affairs. We would like to have dialogue.

We applaud the efforts of the Secretary-General
over recent weeks and we expect that his meetings in
Moscow in Kyiv will lead to some positive developments.
I thank my colleagues in the Chamber for their support.

