Mr. Somavia (Chile)(interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to express the great satisfaction
I feel at seeing you, Mr. Fernando Naranjo Villalobos,
presiding over the Security Council on behalf of your
country, Costa Rica. Chile being a friend of Costa Rica,
it is a great pleasure for me to sit with you at this table.

As we begin the third year of the implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement, we can see that significant
progress has been made. The latest reports of the High
Representative, like those of the Secretary-General,
provide information about the advances achieved without
overlooking the numerous and pressing challenges we still
face, primarily in the sphere of the civilian aspects of the
Agreement.

Chile is completing a two-year period as an elected
member of the Security Council. During this time, we
have emphasized the Council's humanitarian
responsibilities. We have emphasized the necessity of
directing sanctions against political and military leaders,
not against innocent people, and of ensuring respect for
humanitarian organizations and workers and facilitating
their access to this body. We have also stressed the need
to respect international humanitarian law and to seek truth
and justice when they are violated.

Since the Dayton Peace Agreement, the analysis of
the issue in the Council has focused primarily on the
normative plane, as concerns the implementation of the

 

Peace Agreement and its annexes. We have evaluated the
application of rules. From that perspective, the focus has
been the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its two
Entities and its three peoples.

On this occasion, I should like once again to bring to
this table a human perspective, a sensitivity to what is
happening to people. We would like to focus on another
plane: the perspective of the men and women who live
behind that collection of rules that we refer to as
international agreements - those who are in the end the
objects of rules that sometimes seem to them abstract and
impersonal.

I should like to focus my statement on the question
that is in the minds of many people: what is going to
happen in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the day when the
troops of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
withdraw? Today there are more than 35,000 such troops.
To what extent is the peace process self-sustaining?

How deeply has the Peace Agreement penetrated into
the hearts of the men and women of Bosnia and
Herzegovina? How deeply rooted is the ideal of
reconciliation, which is mentioned in the preamble of the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina itself? In short, can
there truly be reconciliation if peace depends on an
international military presence?

I raise these questions because in the Security Council
we are not accustomed to concerning ourselves greatly with
the personal dimensions of the reconciliation process. We
all know that the peace declared in the documents is not the
same thing as peace in people's hearts. We are know that
even the most successful implementation of political
understandings that bring an end to a conflict does not erase
the mistrust, doubts and resentment over atrocities
committed during the fighting.

In our judgment, a true peace cannot be based only on
a military presence and the mere implementation of
political and legal instruments. The emphasis must be on
achieving reconciliation, which is a process and the result
of an internal transformation. Only the moral force of
reconciliation will bring peace to the hearts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Unfortunately, the traditional instruments of diplomacy
are inadequate to the task of tackling this problem. That is
perhaps why we do not speak very much about this subject
in the Security Council. However, I believe that the United
Nations as a whole - not just the Security Council -
must be capable of helping with specific programmes and
projects to stimulate and promote national reconciliation
in this type of conflict.

In this regard, civil society and the local authorities
may have some lessons to teach national Governments.
There have been many experiences in many countries of
conflict resolution at the local level between people on a
given street, in a given community, in a given workplace,
to overcome racial, religious, gender or other kinds of
tensions. These experiences are far from the diplomatic
sphere, but they may be closer to the real life of the
people, in this case of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I should like to take this opportunity to officially
request the Secretary-General to place the subject of
reconciliation in conflict situations on the agenda of the
forthcoming meeting of the Administrative Committee on
Coordination of the United Nations organs, over which he
presides. The idea would be to advance an integrated
treatment of this subject system-wide and to bring about
proposals for actions by the corresponding
intergovemmental organs.

In speaking of national reconciliation, we are obliged
to call for a significant degree of responsibility on the
part of political and military leaders.

When Serbians, Bosnians and Croatians lived
peacefully on the same streets, in the same
neighbourhoods, in the same cities, what need was there
to poison their lives with messages of hatred and
confrontation as was done? Naturally there were historical
problems, memories of past conflicts, and certainly
discrimination in the here and now. No one denies the
problems that existed.

But what leader in his right mind can believe that
future peace and stability can be based on killing innocent
civilians, the use of rape as a tool of war, massive
expulsions of people and total disregard for human rights?

We must recognize that it is the leaders who have,
to a great extent, brought the peoples of these three
countries of the former Yugoslavia into conflict, and these
leaders constitute - not always, but very often - an
obstacle to reconciliation. One aspect of this, of course,
is that we cannot forget those leaders who are responsible
for war crimes and whose individual responsibility cannot
be confused with that of the people to which they belong.

 

It is extremely difficult to hope to see love and mutual
understanding in a society that has gone through the
fratricidal struggle that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
experienced. But such change can happen, and it must
come from the power of the heart, from men and women
who see the fulfilment of the peace process as a search for
a higher goal for them as human beings.

Throughout our time in the Security Council, Chile
has sought to untangle the ethical dimension present in each
conflict as a way of contributing to the conflict's solution.
Despite the obstacles, and we realize how great they are,
we must have faith that ethical values can bring about
important changes. Individuals have the capacity to raise
themselves above their society's conditioning factors and to
transform the lives of their communities. In individual
change and personal action lies the origin of the true
transformation of a society.

However, just as genuine forgiveness is necessary to
reconciliation, the latter cannot be achieved in a society
where justice is not practised. Reconciliation is not and
cannot be a synonym for forgetting. I come from a country
which, in other circumstances, had to meet the difficult
challenge of reconciliation. Today we are beginning in my
society to enjoy the fruits of that effort, having travelled a
road fraught with difficulties and many tragedies.

The United Nations and the Security Council can do
more to encourage those people in Bosnian civil society, in
community affairs, in the schools and in the workplaces
who have the inner strength to break the bonds of the
present and are prepared to assume the costs involved in
the search for reconciliation.

We all know that those who dare to forsake the
"official culture" always run risks in any society. That is
even more difficult, however, in a society in conflict, like
that of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Intimidating demagogy is
unleashed against them, because those who believe in
violence as a source of power deeply fear those who dare
to act as sane and sensible human beings, rejecting violence
and hatred in their own lives. An example of this are the
media - radio, television and newspapers - in which we
still see the desire to shape public opinion by discounting
one's opponents and perpetuating the spirit of conflict.

I have focused on only one aspect of the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina because many of us are convinced
that that region is symbolic in the context of this issue and
that, if the challenge of national reconciliation is met with
success, it will impart very important lessons to other
peoples in other situations brought to this Council's
attention. We trust that this will prove possible.

I wish to conclude my statement by referring to the
ideal of change embodied by one of the greatest figures
ever produced by the United Nations: Dag Hammarskjold,
who gave his life for the sake of an ideal of change. It is
incumbent on us today to follow his legacy: his faith in
political, economic and social change through conviction
and the transforming power of the spirit, and not only as
an ethical dimension of the way he lived life. As he told
us in his extraordinary book Markings, in our times the
road to sainthood necessarily leads through the world of
action.

