Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, I must note that the statement
by the Permanent Representative of Georgia at this
evening's meeting included many distortions and
contradictions. On the one hand, the representative of
Georgia said that the Russian Federation is controlling
everything in South Ossetia, but at the same time, he
alleged that the Russian military say that they are
incapable of controlling the separatists. If Russia has
aggressive intentions, as the representative of Georgia
alleged today, then why has the Georgian side, over a
long period of time, refused to reach an agreement on
the non-use of force in the Georgian-South Ossetian
and Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, which would protect
Georgia against any attempt to use force by anyone at
all. From listening to the Permanent Representative of
Georgia, it might appear that South Ossetian forces are
attacking Tbilisi; in fact, as we all know, the situation
is quite the contrary.

I would like also to comment on the point that
during Security Council's prior consultations today, the
Council was unable to work out a clear reaction to
today's events and was unable to send an unambiguous
message to both parties, primarily Tbilisi, on the need
to put an end to violence and on the need to reject the
use of force. The reason for the incapacity of the
Security Council to develop a clear reaction to these
events unfortunately lies in the absence of clear
political guidelines among a number of Council
members. This has been demonstrated again during this
evening's discussion in our open meeting.

Let me comment on another specific point. In
fact, I spoke of this in my statement today and it was
also heard in the statement by the representative of the
United States: that in recent days Moscow and
Washington have very much been in contact. It seemed
to us that there was a certain mutual understanding
with our United States colleagues about the need to
take steps which could put an end to the escalation of
the conflict. But in her statement today in the Security
Council the representative of the United States only
once used the word "condemn" - and that was against
South Ossetia, for its alleged failure to attend one of
the proposed meetings. And yet, they failed to find
clear political terms to describe the aggressive actions
of Tbilisi and of the Georgian armed forces attempting
to invade Tskhinvali.

It is precisely this inconsistency and this
vagueness in the political position that are among the
main reasons for the critical situation regarding the
South Ossetian-Georgian conflict.

Nevertheless, I hope that today's meeting of the
Security Council has been useful and that it will be
seen by Tbilisi as indicating that the Security Council,
one of the leading institutions of the international
community, is not prepared to accept the attempts to
resolve the long-standing Georgian-South Ossetian
conflict through armed aggression.

