Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and for
his comprehensive report (S/2016/911, annex) to the
Security Council, including the special report on the
referendum in the Republika Srpska.

Based on the briefing and the reports, my delegation
is deeply concerned about the developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the reporting period and
about the direction in which the country is heading.
Of particular concern to us is the viability of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the Agreement is being increasingly
challenged and violated. We can trace the various
political contentions in the country to its ethnic fault
lines, from the dispute over the 2013 census results,
the referendum on the Republika Srpska National Day,
the continuing failure to implement the ruling of the
Constitutional Court on the electoral system for Mostar,
to the secessionist agenda of some quarters in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

In that context, we recognize the crucial need for
the Council to send a united message via resolution 2315
(2016) to urge the parties to abide by the commitment
to cooperate fully with all institutions involved in
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and to
reaffirm the existence of two entities under the Peace
Agreement, as upheld by the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The holding of the referendum by the Republika
Srpska on 25 September was carried out in complete
disregard of final and binding decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
represents the latest act of defiance by the Republika
Srpska on the judicial institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in violation of the Framework Agreement.
We have seen persistent challenges by the Republika
Srpska to the State'sjudicial system in the past, including
its disregard of the Bosnian Constitutional Court's
decisions on the registration of defence property. More
recently, the President of the Republika Srpska chose
to ignore the summons by the State Prosecutor's Office
relating to the referendum of 25 September. It is simply
unacceptable for the Republika Srpska to pick and
choose which decisions of the State's judicial system it
is willing to obey. Such actions are in violation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the State's Constitution.
They also constitute a dangerous precedent, especially
in the context of divisive secessionist rhetoric and
increasing attacks on the authority of the High
Representative. Self-serving and divisive politics is a
dangerous game that gets played at the expense of the
future of the country, especially given its traumatic
history. We therefore urge all parties to renounce their
divisive politics and secessionist agendas and to abide
by the State's Constitution, the various relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Dayton Peace Agreement
for the sake of peace and stability in the region.
Malaysia is encouraged by some positive
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the reporting period. We particularly welcome the
progress made by the country towards integration into
the European Union (EU), which remains central to
the aspirations of its people. Malaysia also welcomes
the increase in foreign direct investments in the first
quarter of 2016. The Government must remain steadfast
in implementing its reform agenda, particularly in
addressing youth unemployment, fighting corruption,
instilling good governance and strengthening the rule
of law. It needs to remain focused on economic growth
and development and the creation of a promising future
for all. We also commend the ongoing commitment
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to countering violent
extremism, as can be seen in the recent sentencing
of seven individuals for joining or attempting to join
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant as foreign
terrorist fighters.

On the issue of the return of refugees and
displaced persons, we wish to see further progress by
the authorities in order to create conducive political,
economic and social conditions for their voluntary
return and harmonious reintegration and reconciliation.

Malaysia reiterates the need to intensify efforts
to fully implement the 5+2 agenda as a condition for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
That agenda seeks to promote collaboration among the
political actors and stakeholders, and not adversarial
politics. Until then, Malaysia reaffirms its strong
support for the Office of the High Representative, as
laid out in the Dayton Peace Agreement and as upheld
in various Council resolutions. We condemn the
intimidation and death threats levelled against the High
Representative and call for their prompt and thorough
investigation in conformity with the rule of law.

We also recognize the important stabilizing role
played by the EU-led multinational stabilization force
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore welcome
the renewal of its mandate and the Council's unity in
adopting resolution 2315 (2016).

In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to the independence, sovereignty, national unity and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
long supported the country in its reconstruction efforts
after the war and will continue to do so with a view to
strengthening the country's nation-building, inclusive
democracy, reconciliation and economic progress.

