Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking the President for giving us the opportunity
today to hear thought-provoking presentations from
the Force Commanders, whom we warmly welcome.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
participation and briefing.

Peacekeeping operations are a unique mechanism
and an indispensable tool for our collective actions
aimed at maintaining international peace and security.
As it is gradually transformed into a more complex
institution, peacekeeping is encountering a number of
challenges that have a negative impact on its ability
to effectively carry out its tasks. Matters related to
increasing the effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations,
and to their conceptual and operational evolution
and adaptation to a constantly changing political and
security environment, have been on our agenda for
a long time and constitute an area that continues to
require innovative ideas.

In that regard, I would like to underline the
importance of interactions such as today's with the
commanders of military components, which inform
Council members of the challenges and problems that
the Blue Helmets currently face in the field and lay out
their vision for the parameters and indicators involved
in the effective fulfilment of their mandates. In our
view, such useful practices should become a frequent
tradition.

For the sake of brevity, I would like to confine
myself to sharing our perspectives on some aspects
of peacekeeping. First, it is mandates that guide
peacekeepers and give them a clear vision of their tasks.
Mandates must be realistic, achievable and tailored to
the logistical and operational capabilities with which
peacekeepers are provided. At the same time, depending
on security developments on the ground, mandates
could envisage a certain amount of flexibility aimed at
achieving broader inter-mission cooperation and rapid
operational adjustments.

Secondly, the importance of continued trilateral
cooperation among the Council, the Secretariat and
the troop- and police-contribution countries has been
stressed. Indeed, it is vital for effective United Nations
peacekeeping, as is peacekeepers' cooperation with
host countries. Needless to say, coordinating action
and cooperating closely with host countries, especially
on the military side, is a prerequisite for the successful
implementation of mandates.

Thirdly, apart from the political and security
conditions on the ground, cultural and religious nuances
in host societies have an impact on peacekeeping's
success. The parties to a conflict and the public should
have trust in peacekeepers' efforts. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize the importance of a correct
public perception of the roles and responsibilities
of peacekeepers and of the strengthening of the
relationship between military peacekeepers and the
local population. To that end, military mandates should
prioritize the protection of civilians from the start.

Fourthly, United Nations peacekeeping is
dependent not only on the willingness ofMember States
to contribute but also on their ability to do so. When
it comes to equipment and funding distribution by
Member States for military, police and civilian forces,
the current situation is obviously not flawless. Special
emphasis could be placed on developing the military
and police peacekeeping capacities of individual
Member States, not only by the United Nations, but
also through bilateral assistance programmes between
Member States. However, such assistance should not
be predicated on States' subsequent involvement in
particular operations, which is undoubtedly a matter
to be decided at the national level. At the same time,
the United Nations can be instrumental in encouraging
and supporting the development of the peacekeeping
capacities of relevant mandated regional organizations.

Finally, in discussing United Nations peacekeeping,
we cannot pass over in silence the recent attacks on
peacekeepers that occurred in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Cote d'Ivoire. An attack on the Blue
Helmets is an attack on the United Nations, and thus
constitutes a grave violation of international law. We
pay tribute to all our peacekeepers for the enormous
sacrifices they make for the noble goal of peace and
security throughout the world. The safety and security
of all of them must be respected, guaranteed and
ensured by all and in all circumstances.

