The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms.
Kalajdzisalihovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a
place at the Council table; Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 8 September 1995 from the representatives of
France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the Secretary-
General, which will be issued as document S/1995/780.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the meeting
held under the auspices of the Contact Group in
Geneva on 8 September 1995 between the Foreign
Ministers of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of the Republic of Croatia and of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). It welcomes the joint statement issued
at the conclusion of that meeting and in particular
the agreement by the parties on the Declaration of
Principles. It strongly urges the parties to negotiate
in good faith and expeditiously on the basis of that
Declaration with the aim of achieving a lasting
peace throughout the region."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/45.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 8.30 pm.

