Mr. Oling Olang: First, allow me to express our
deep appreciation for the invitation to Save the
Children to participate in today's open debate on
children and armed conflict. We take it to reflect
increased interest by the Security Council in the reality
facing far too many children today.

I am the District Manager for Save the Children
for the Gulu district in northern Uganda, my home area
where I have lived and worked for the last five years.
Today I will share with you some of my experiences in
this war-ravaged area, knowing that not only do I speak
from our first-hand knowledge, but also that we
represent the situation of many, many more children
around the world, living during or in the aftermath of
crisis and conflict. Their situation is similar in more
ways than one, whether they live in different corners of
the world such as Afghanistan, Colombia, Nepal, the
occupied Palestinian territories or the Sudan, to name
only a few, or in my own country.

Save the Children welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2006/826) and its reflection of progress made to
date. However, there are three themes we believe are
neglected in the international community's response to
children in conflict: stronger pressure for humanitarian
access, special attention to girls associated with armed
forces and the funding that that would require, and
better response to reports of violations against
children.

In 2004 the Secretary-General reported that 10
million people were denied access to humanitarian
relief. As over half of the vulnerable population tends
to be under the age of 18, that means millions of
children are stranded without access to vital assistance
and protection. The lack of access or denial of access is
a fundamental problem that demands concerted
international pressure both on a country-by-country
basis and at global levels. Which diplomatic initiatives
have really tried to tackle this critical issue for children
and their communities?

We at Save the Children appreciate that the
Secretary-General makes a special note of the concerns
of girl combatants and girls associated with armed
groups. In our experience disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
(DDRR) have not at all been suitable for girls' needs.
There are lessons to be learned, and a better way to
find solutions is by asking the girls themselves. We
find that the girls, often young mothers, ask for
measures that will give them a true sense of belonging
and livelihood. We call on the Security Council to
ensure that DDRR activities reflect these realities.

Of course, if DDRR is going to work it requires
increased funding from donors for the rehabilitation
and reintegration phases. The international community
must open its eyes to this fact, and we must all tailor
our response to the special needs of girls. We concur
on the need to ensure that these measures are long term
and sustainable, rather than face the situation in which
we currently find ourselves, whereby we constantly
shortchange the programmes, thereby increasing the
chances of re-recruitment and harmful coping
mechanisms of extremely vulnerable children.

Tremendous progress has been made with the
new monitoring and reporting mechanism, but we now
have a better picture of the situations at hand. With that
knowledge comes increased responsibility; appropriate
and concrete responses to the reports should be the
next step. It is not enough to have access to an
emergency number if no ambulance or support will
come in response. The Security Council must come up
with stronger ways of protecting children on the
ground. The increasing number of United Nations
Child Protection Advisors (CPAs) being deployed into
crises is a start. The CPA system should be extended
and better supported if mainstreaming child protection
in missions is to become a reality. If not, the
monitoring risks become merely a hollow instrument.

Save the Children wholeheartedly endorses the
recommendation by the Secretary-General in his report
that the Security Council consider expanding the focus
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. The
Council should also devote equal care and attention to
children affected by armed conflict in all situations of
concern, and give equal weight to all categories of
grave violations beyond the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, including killing and maiming of children, rape
and other grave sexual violence.

What can be done for these children? Let me start
with a picture. A child today in northern Uganda is
likely to have lived his or her entire life in a camp for
internally displaced populations. Some Council
members have seen these camps - cramped, lacking
in services, short of water and electricity. The old
village system has broken down and children are left
without bare necessities, supervision, guidance and,
until recently, hope. We have found that education and
catering to protection needs in every humanitarian
response is key to successful interventions.

Save the Children, in our present worldwide
challenge - Rewrite the Future - is calling for
education for all children affected by armed conflict.
Education should be funded and programmed as part of
every humanitarian response, as it is proven to lower
infant mortality rate and increase children's resistance
to forced recruitment and exploitation, such as forced
prostitution. Education is a crucial part of a child's
survival strategy and also teaches life skills, such as
landmine awareness, protection from HIV/AIDS,
hygiene and disease prevention. In many societies,
reaching maturity without basic skills in literacy and
health can be a death sentence of gruelling work and
dying young.

I cannot help but to remind the Council that we
are talking about measures for children who are still
present, but what about the ones who are missing and
unaccounted for? We need to be creative and come up
with ways to account for them too. I have no easy
answers, but this issue needs to be resolved.

Finally, let me encourage the Security Council to
continue its ground-breaking path to correct the wrongs
for children affected by armed conflict, and invite its
members to continue their visits to places of gravest
concern, both to draw the world's attention to the needs
of these children, While establishing dialogues between
parties concerned, and to meet community and civil
society representatives on a regular basis, both here
and elsewhere. Save the Children is happy to continue
this dialogue and to work on finding proper responses
to make dramatic changes for children affected by
armed conflict.

