Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting my country to participate in
today's debate. It creates another useful opportunity to
take stock of essential developments in the area of
security sector reform (SSR) within the United Nations
system and to discuss what more needs to be done in
addressing this issue in a comprehensive, coherent and
coordinated way, with special focus on African
experience and needs.

I would like to commend Nigeria for organizing
this debate and to welcome the presidential statement
adopted (S/PRST/2011/19), which we see as a highly
useful contribution to the ongoing security sector work
in the United Nations system.

Slovakia is proud that the Security Council's
open debate organized under our presidency in
February 2007 (see S/PV.5632) set the tone for
advancing the security sector reform agenda, including
for the milestone report of the Secretary-General in
2008 (S/2008/39), and for the creation of the
institutional framework for security sector reform.

Capacity-building for security sector reform
within the United Nations system has come a long way
since 2007. Much has been done in raising awareness
about security sector reform, building the expertise and
knowledge of United Nations staff both at
Headquarters and in the field, advancing United
Nations conceptual work on SSR, promoting integrated
approaches, strengthening civilian capacities and, most
importantly, providing more systematic and better-
targeted assistance to national authorities in the whole
array of activities related to security sector reform.

Nevertheless, I would like to highlight the
challenges that Member States face in preparing their
personnel, whether police serving in United Nations
missions, military contingents or civilian personnel
who have a role to play, directly or indirectly, in
supporting the reform, restructuring or transformation
of justice and security institutions. There is both a
guidance gap on how to transform SSR principles into
practice and a capacity gap in preparing personnel for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding deployments. This is a
challenge that police- and troop- contributing countries
need to tackle.

National ownership remains the key principle of
the United Nations approach to security sector reform.
It is not only a moral imperative but also a pragmatic
consideration, because if the design and
implementation of security sector reform policies and
programmes are not led by national actors, they are
unlikely to be successful. That is acknowledged across
the board, including by concerned donors.

Right next to national ownership is the essential
role of regional and subregional actors, who, with their
legitimacy, expertise and capacities, can significantly
contribute to achieving sustainable progress in security
sector-related work on the ground. Many positive
results have been achieved recently in the work that the
United Nations system has done in conjunction with its
regional and subregional partners in areas such as
developing concepts, joint training, joint assessment
missions and other areas. The United Nations has
worked particularly closely in this regard with the
African Union and the European Union.

We strongly believe in the importance of regional
and subregional approaches in the related capacity-
building and coordination mechanisms. We equally
believe in the need to promote bottom-up and demand-
driven approaches. It is in this very context that
Slovakia, together with its close partner countries in
the regions and with the assistance of DCAF - the
Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed
Forces - organized three regional workshops with the
aim of galvanizing discussions and tangible efforts on
security sector reform in the most relevant regions,
facilitating partnerships and enhancing coordination
mechanisms.

The first such regional workshop, which we
organized together with South Africa in Cape Town in
2007, contributed a great deal to the process of
defining the African Union's approaches to security
sector reform, as well as to enhancing the African
Union-United Nations cooperation in the area of SSR.
The two subsequent workshops were equally useful,
one for the Latin American and the Caribbean region in
Buenos Aires in 2009, and one for South East Asia in
Jakarta in 2010. In fact, we have recently approached
another regional partner and are considering the
possibility of organizing the fourth regional workshop
in another important region.

Slovakia is keen to continue contributing as an
honest broker to building trust, further strengthening
United Nations capacities for security sector reform,
enhancing coherence and coordination within the
United Nations system as well as with regional and
subregional actors, and promoting positive synergies,
while at the same time trying to avoid duplicities.

That is exactly the context that led us to initiate
the creation of the United Nations Group of Friends of
SSR back in 2008. That Group has since served mainly
as an interface between the Member States and the
United Nations system, especially the co-chairs of the
inter-agency Task Force, and as such has proven to be
useful. As Chair of the Group of Friends, we would
like to take this opportunity to invite all interested
Member States, especially the recipients of assistance
in the area of security sector reform, to use this tool as
a platform for sharing their lessons learned,
articulating their needs and identifying the best ways to
address them in a timely and efficient manner. We are
ready to continue enabling such interactions and
promoting enhanced cooperation.

Last but not least, I would like to highlight the
fact that we have recently been witnessing increased
demand for assistance in the area of security sector
reform, both from countries emerging from conflict
and from countries undergoing democratic transitions.
This presents us with new challenges and requires
additional capacities. We believe it is our joint
obligation to address the challenges in a
comprehensive, coherent and coordinated way. I would
like to invite all Member States to approach the tasks at
hand in that spirit.

In the same spirit, and in the context of the
community of democracies, Slovakia, together with the
Netherlands, is now exploring how we can best assist
Tunisia to address the challenges that country has
identified in the area of security sector reform.

At the same time, as the current Chair of the
governing board of the Geneva-based International
Security Sector Advisory Team, we are committed to
enabling timely and efficient reinforcement of the
capacities for security sector reform of the United
Nations system, both in training and in advisory work
conducted in the field, especially in Africa.

In conclusion, I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, of our full cooperation with you and
with other Council members in the area of security
sector reform. It is a crucial component of the work of
the United Nations in promoting peace, stability,
development, the rule of law and justice in the
aftermath of conflict or in periods of transition.

