Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Allow me,
Mr. Minister, to welcome you to the Security Council,
and I warmly congratulate you on Argentina's
assumption of the presidency of the Council. Finally, I
thank you for convening this important debate on the
situation in Haiti. I would also like to welcome the
presence at this important debate of the Ministers who
wished to participate and thank Mr. Valdes for his
comprehensive presentation and the excellent work he
is doing in Haiti.

The particularly serious crisis that has afflicted
Haiti for over a year does not seem close to being
resolved as so considerable challenges remain. State
institutions have been permanently destabilized, and
the country's economy was affected, exacerbating the
economic and social marginalization of many segments
of society and contributing to growing insecurity in the
form of armed violence and greater impunity.

The Security Council's deployment of an interim
force and, later, of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has indeed had a very
positive effect on the overall situation. Algeria cannot
but pay tribute to those leading the Mission and to the
troops participating in it for the progress achieved.
Through joint operations with the National Police of
Haiti, MINUSTAH has improved security conditions,
to which the principal challenge has been the
persistence of armed groups that continue to pose a
serious threat to the transition process under way.

For that reason, we feel that it is urgent to disarm
all armed groups and bands. We believe that a
complete disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme is necessary. We note
with satisfaction the decision of the Transitional
Government to create a national disarmament
commission. It seems equally important to us that the
Government examine comprehensively the situation of
former members of the armed forces and the question
of their compensation in order to reintegrate them into
society.

We call upon the Transitional Government to take
the necessary measures to ensure the holding of local
legislative and presidential elections. We note with
satisfaction the announcement made by the Chairman
of the Provisional Electoral Council concerning the
finalization of the electoral law and timetable.

However, for the transitional process and the
upcoming elections to succeed, we believe it is crucial
that all actors of society participate, so that peace and
security can be permanently restored in Haiti, and that
all those that have been excluded from the transitional
process be included in the democratic and electoral
process, because it is vital that a national dialogue
comprehending all political movements be established
in order to promote national reconciliation, which is
inseparable from an impartial struggle against
impunity. A functional system of justice free of
influence must also be established.

More than half the population of Haiti lives
below the poverty line, and living conditions are
constantly deteriorating, against the backdrop of a
national economy dependent on foreign aid.

My delegation believes that it is crucial that the
international community further commit to helping the
Haitian population in the long term. As the Secretary-
General has said, the activities of the international
community and the United Nations must be take place
on a long-term basis. Mr. Annan added that he hoped
that this time the international community would not
be satisfied with putting a band aid on the situation or
merely stabilizing the situation but would help the
Haitians over the long haul to pick up the pieces and
build a stable country.

International assistance must focus on long-term
programmes aimed at the political and social
reconstruction of the country. It is urgent to strengthen
governance, give the population access to basic social
services, ensure respect for human rights and enhance
institutional capacity to ensure the rule of law. The
international community has the duty to help the
Government of Haiti to lay the foundations for
economic growth, reduce poverty and strengthen State
structures in order to facilitate the formulation and
implementation of policies leading to lasting
development. It must now honour its commitments by
accelerating the disbursal of its pledged assistance at
the World Bank donors conference.

Normalization of the political situation in Haiti
and the improvement of economic conditions must be
accompanied by the country's reintegration in its
natural regional environment and in a framework of
cooperation and solidarity provided by the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community. The presence in the Council and the
statements of Ministers of the region and the Acting
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States give us hope for Haiti's normalization of
relations with its neighbours, which would
undoubtedly be a further contribution to peace and
stability in the region as a whole.

