Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): C6te
d'Ivoire welcomes the convening of this briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
whose briefing oriented us on the multiple and complex
challenges to peace and stability in a region deeply
affected by the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.

Among the hotbeds of tension in the Middle East,
the Israeli-Palestinian issue is undoubtedly the most
complex crisis the international community has ever
faced, having been unable to provide a definitive and
universally acceptable response in 70 years. Cote
d'Ivoire, which has always advocated dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, regrets the lack of a
consensual and viable framework for consultation
since the deadlock in the Oslo Accords, which had
raised hopes for a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. My country therefore reiterates its call
on the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to move beyond
the current situation and to resume dialogue in order
to consolidate past gains and create the conditions
conducive to the achievement of a just and lasting peace.

My country, which attaches as much importance to
the security of the State of Israel as to the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
reaffirms its strong support for the solution of two
States peacefully coexisting within the 1967 borders.
Cote d'Ivoire therefore encourages all parties to work
for peace in order to put an end to the vicious cycle of
violence. To that end, it calls for the extension of the
current ceasefire and welcomes Israel's reopening of
the Erez crossing.

In the current context, the resumption of dialogue
between Israelis and Palestinians is not merely a
necessity; it is above all a matter of urgency the
resolution of which could help to contain the seeds of
potential violence. That is why my country supports
France's 15 January 2017 initiative, which led to the
adoption by 70 States and international organizations
of a joint declaration reaffirming the international
community's commitment to the two-State solution.
The declaration also calls for a settlement of the crisis
based on the relevant Council resolutions.

On the humanitarian front, C6te d'Ivoire encourages
donors to continue and increase initiatives to assist
Palestinians in distress. In that regard, it welcomes
Jordan's announcement to organize, on 27 September
in New York, a conference to mobilize the financial
support needed to maintain the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which provides assistance to
3 million Palestinians in need.

C6te d'Ivoire is convinced that peace is possible
when it is supported by the courage and commitment of
those who transcend the deepest divisions and hatred.
We therefore hope that one day very soon, Israelis and
Palestinians will be able to overcome their deep, but
certainly surmountable divisions in order to engage in
a fruitful dialogue with a view to achieving a lasting
settlement based on the two-State solution to a conflict
that has gone on for too long.

