I wish to begin by congratulating France on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June. I welcome the convening of this high- level video-teleconference on children and armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the topic before us (S/2020/525). We also extend our thanks to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, and the civil society representative for their briefings. Children are among the most vulnerable population groups in conflicts and crises. Because of the profound effects of conflicts and crises on their physical and mental well-being, they may easily become victims. During conflicts, they may be killed, maimed, sexually abused, abducted or even recruited as child soldiers. Furthermore, they may be denied their rights to education and health and access to humanitarian support. The report of the Secretary-General highlights that in 2019 there were over 25,000 cases of grave violations against children. It underlines the serious concerns about the violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. During such crises as the coronavirus disease pandemic, children are disproportionately affected. They bear unfathomable losses due to disruptions in education systems and other socioeconomic impacts. Such impacts have long-lasting effects not only on the lives of this generation but also on future generations. Nepal stresses the need for adequate resources and international cooperation for protecting children and ensuring them better lives, education and well-being. Children should be protected during both conflicts and crises alike. They are an important pillar of all peaceful and prosperous societies. Nepal has always supported international efforts aimed at ending the involvement of children in armed conflict. It is party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and to the Paris Principles and Commitments on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups. Nepal also welcomes the "Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict", launched by the Secretary-General on 12 February 2020. Nepal's Children's Act (2018) has ensured all rights for children, requires the State to make necessary arrangements for their basic needs and includes the maintenance, protection, health and education of children in need of special protection. The Act also guarantees that no child shall be deployed in the army, the police or in any armed group, or be used for armed conflict or political purpose directly or indirectly. It prohibits an attack on or hindrance to the operation and management of any school, including the place, services or facilities of schools, which are always to be used for the best interests of children, without excuse during times of armed conflict or in any adverse situation whatsoever. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the importance of providing children with education, skills and livelihood opportunities in order to help them build a dignified life. This is also crucial for the success of peacebuilding and prevention efforts as well as for ensuring a peaceful today and tomorrow.
