Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East and the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). We welcome the presence
of Mr. Al-Malki, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine, and Mr. Ayman Safadi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan.

China has listened attentively to the statements
made by both Palestine and Israel. The recent period
has witnessed an increase in the negative momentum
prevailing in the Middle East, where inflammatory
statements have intensified tensions in the region.
The construction of settlements continues unabated,
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is further
deteriorating and the Middle East peace process
has stagnated. Chinese is highly concerned over all
these developments.

I wish to highlight the following.

First, resolution 2334 (2016) should be effectively
implemented. The resolution bears great significance,
as it reflects the common aspirations and expectations
of the international community and responds to the
legitimate calls of Palestinian and the Arab countries
at large.

Continued advancement of the construction of
settlements by the relevant parties would undermine
mutual trust and seriously dampen the prospects of
a two-State solution. All settlement activities in the
occupied territories should cease immediately. The
demolition of Palestinian homes should be stopped,
and the destruction of Palestinian properties should be
stopped and measures taken to prevent violence against
civilians. All illegal acts and unilateral initiatives
aimed at legalizing settlements should be stopped
immediately, concurrently with practical measures to
eliminate their effects.

Secondly, it is imperative to promote a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
question of Palestine on the basis of the existing
international consensus. The international community
should commit to the two-State solution as its
ultimate goal, abide by the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the land-for-peace principle and the Arab
Peace Initiative as the fundamental guidelines, and
take positive actions to promote the early resumption
of peace talks between the Palestinians and Israelis,
culminating in the establishment of a Palestinian
State with full sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Any new initiatives
should, without exception, meet the aforementioned
international guidelines.

Thirdly, dialogue, negotiations and political
consultations are the fundamental way to resolve the
Palestinian issue. Neither violence for violence nor
inflammatory statements can help solve problems. China
is concerned about some recent incendiary remarks
concerning the annexation of the occupied Palestine
territories, including the Jordan Valley, and opposes
any unilateral act that may lead to the intensification
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In our view, Israel
should act with caution and avoid aggravating regional
tension and turbulence and earnestly safeguard the
foundation of the Middle East peace process.

Fourthly, we should follow closely and improve
Palestinian and economic and humanitarian conditions.
Oflate, the medical system in the Gaza Strip has suffered
serious material shortages, and the humanitarian
situation remains dire. The parties concerned should
comprehensively lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip
as soon as possible and fully implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions.

The international community should continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and continue to
contribute to improving the humanitarian conditions of
the Palestinian refugees.

China has always been committed to promoting
the Middle East peace process and to playing a
positive and constructive role in achieving peace in the
Middle East. In September this year, China appointed
Ambassador Zhai Jun as the special envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Middle East. In future
he will establish close cooperative relations with the
relevant parties, actively promote peace talks and play
a positive and constructive role in advancing a proper
settlement of regional hot-button issues and achieving
regional peace and stability.

