Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian): With all due respect to you, Madam President,
I cannot fail to note that Security Council meetings
should start on time. Unfortunately, the American
presidency this month has introduced an element of
nervousness into the work of the Council and has not
always acted on the basis of consensus.

The coup d'etat that extremists carried out with
the support of outside organizers during a wave of
legal popular protest has led Ukraine into a serious
economic and social crisis that has persisted for some
time. Helping to find a way out of that situation is the
challenge of the international community, including the
Security Council.

We are grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, to the Chief Monitor of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, Ertugrul
Apakanu, and to the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, John Ging, for their briefings.

With regard to the statement of Mr. Simonovie, I
would note that the Mission he heads in Ukraine does
not have a Security Council mandate and the subject of
his statement goes beyond the remit of resolution 2202
(2015). The report of his Mission is being discussed
in the Human Rights Council in Geneva. Returning
to that subject now is nothing more than an attempt to
divert attention from the most important task today,
which is to implement the package of measures for
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is
only through the full implementation of the provisions
of that document that the conflict in Donbas and the
problems related to it can be resolved.

The Security Council has met repeatedly on the
subject of Ukraine. However, most of the meetings
were of a polemical nature. An exception to that was
provided by the unanimous adoption, on 17 February, of
resolution 2202 (2015), which approved the package of
measures of 12 February and urged all parties to fully
implement it. That clear document, which presented a
road map for settlement, inspired hope that the crisis
could be resolved.

Ten months later, we consider it logical, expedient
and necessary to discuss how it is being implemented,
and if it is not, why. We believe that the military
provisions of the package have achieved some results.
Basically, heavy weapons have been withdrawn, and
even additional agreements have been concluded on
weapons with a calibre of less than 100 millimetres:
tanks, mortars and artillery shells. Not everything
went smoothly, but the intensity of the fighting and the
shelling on civilians in Donbas has been significantly
reduced. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
played an important role in that regard. However, we
are concerned - and this has been confirmed by the
OSCE observers - that in the past month tensions
have increased again. Seventy per cent of the ceasefire
violations have occurred in the Donetsk region. In the
area under the control of the Ukrainian armed forces,
there was regular shelling in Horlivka, Zhabichevo,
Zheleznaya Balka, Krasny Partizan, Spartak and
Staromykhailivka. The provocative nature of those
attacks can be seen from the fact that they took place at
the same time as the Normandy format meetings.

According to the statistics of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, the Ukrainian side bears the main
responsibility for the shelling, for placing military
equipment in the security zone and for using radio-
jamming equipment against the unmanned aerial
vehicles operated by the Special Monitoring Mission.
The Ukrainian armed forces continue to deploy their
forces in the region and do not hide fact that they
have heavy weapons, which can be seen in the regions
of Avdiivka, Volnovakha, Horlivka, Dzerzhynsk,
Orlovka and Pisky. In Horlivka alone, according to
Donetsk intelligence, there are 85 tanks, 12 armoured
personnel carriers and 30 rocket launchers. In addition,
on 4 December, the Ukrainian side arbitrarily and
in violation to the existing agreements seized seven
villages that were, at the time of the signing of the
package, in the buffer zone and still not under the
control of either party. We regard those actions as
provocative. The Ukrainian troops must be withdrawn
from those areas.

Those questions are of course being raised in
the Trilateral Contact Group and the Joint Centre for
Control and Coordination. However, the Ukrainians
are trying to argue that black is white, saying that
the rebels are shelling themselves. They criticize the
OSCE Mission and say that the problem is that it is not
accountable to the Contact Group. Even the politically
correct leadership of the Contact Group has had to
urge them to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. We
hope that Mr. Apakan will continue to call upon the
representatives of Kyiv to work constructively and
avoid provocative language.

It is clear that the military situation in Ukraine
cannot be considered outside the context of the
implementation of the political aspects of the package
of measures. The problems with regard to the political
area have unfortunately often led to an escalation
of the situation. Currently, we do not see anything
positive coming out of the implementation of such key
provisions of the Minsk II package as organizing local
elections, granting amnesty, providing Donbas with
permanent legislation on its special status or carrying
out real constitutional reform. Kyiv still refuses direct
dialogue with the representatives of Donbas, contrary
to what was stipulated in the Minsk agreement. The
Normandy format summit that took place on 2 October
in Paris should have provided some impetus towards
improvements on that score. Following that meeting,
the Luhansk and Donetsk authorities agreed to make
concessions and postpone elections until the winter or
spring of the following year, if Kyiv took specific steps
as agreed upon within the Normandy quartet. However,
soon after the Paris meeting of the Contact Group, the
representatives of Kyiv tried to present the situation as
if nothing needed to be done on their part. Therefore,
by ignoring the agreements reached by the leaders of
the Normandy format quartet, they returned to their
previous position.

For example, despite the agreement on the need
to adopt a law on elections in Donbas, the Ukrainians
asserted that the elections needed to be held under
the existing law under which they had been held
previously in the rest of Ukraine on 25 October and
on 15 November. In the first place, the law is far from
perfect, which became apparent during the voting.
It does not provide sufficient time to monitor the
elections, and the campaign preceding the elections is
rendered more complicated, as is the work of the mass
media. Consequently, those regions did not elect the
candidates who enjoyed the support of the majority. But
most important, that law was not agreed to by Donetsk
and Luhansk, as stipulated by the Minsk agreements,
and is in contradiction with the position that President
Poroshenko made clear at the Normandy format
summit in October. It is clear that Kyiv is not looking
for a compromise leading to a way out of the current
situation. Instead, it quickly endorsed the so-called
framework on the use of the law on local elections in
the Verkhovna Rada.

As is well known, the package of measures also
includes a number of socioeconomic steps aimed at
improving the difficult humanitarian situation in
Donbas. Logically, achieving progress in de-escalating
the military situation should have led to resolving some
ofthose glaring problems and building a climate oftrust.
However, Kyiv continues the economic blockade of
Donbas, while ignoring the relevant recommendations
of international organizations. The population of
Donbas cannot count on having quality medical care.
They have limited access to safe drinking water and
basic services. Depriving the residents of Donbas of
their pensions and social benefits and hindering the
delivery of food and other essential goods demonstrate
Kyiv's true desire to harm the people of the region.
There is an absence of services, such as the mobile
banking stations along the line of contact, through
which Ukraine is supposed to provide benefit payments
to the population of Donbas.

Moreover, the blockade is accompanied by a
number of absurd actions on the part of the Kyiv
authorities. The authorities continue to be brought to
trial in their own Ukrainian courts just to avoid paying
benefits to the residents of Donbas. On 16 October,
the highest administrative court of Ukraine ruled that
it was illegal to suspend the disbursement of social
benefits to citizens of the Donbas and Luhansk regions
and ordered their resumption. And that was not the
first time a Ukrainian court had handed down such a
decision. I am sorry to say this, but in this pre-winter
season, with increasing cold weather, the Ukrainian
leadership has quietly been encouraging those who are
working to make the situation for the people in that area
unbearable. The power supply to Donbas is unstable and
there has been no effort to improve the damaged water
supply, which is the result of shelling a 300-kilometer-
long section of a water supply system that used to
supply 400,000 people. In such an extremely difficult
humanitarian situation in the south-east of Ukraine,
Russia continues to offer humanitarian aid to the
people of the Donbas region, which has been isolated
by Kyiv, including medicine, warm clothing and food
for hospitals, schools and community centres, among
other forms of assistance. By 9 December, 46 convoys
had delivered approximately 56 thousand tons of goods.

As one can see, the implementation ofthe package of
measures, is, to say the least, being hampered. It would
seem that no one is interested in freezing the conflict
in the south-east of Ukraine, but in order to ensure a
viable outcome and its final settlement, there needs to
be political will on the part of the direct participants,
which is clearly lacking, especially on the Ukrainian
side. We have already discussed how Kyiv behaved
after the Normandy format summit in Paris, where the
agreements reached were simply disregarded. A mere
appearance of dialogue with the people of Donbas
and Luhansk emerged in the subgroups of the Contact
Group, but the bellicose rhetoric on the part of Kyiv
abounds and the military preparations continue. What
are we to say when we see diplomatic efforts under way
yet, at the same time, a seventh mobilization campaign
is being planned and enormous amounts of scanty State
funds are being generously spent on weapons?

The deplorable situation in Ukraine is well known.
Along with a very difficult economic situation, there is
an ongoing struggle for power - reminiscent of gang
violence - endemic corruption and an inability to
establish Government administration even in regions
that strongly supported the Maidan protests. There are
many problems in Ukraine with the administration of
the legal system. There is much evidence of human
rights violations by the Ukrainian security forces
and mercenary battalions, including torture, general
mistreatment, abductions, arbitrary detention and
extrajudicial punishment. The crimes committed in the
Maidan have not been investigated, and the snipers and
provocateurs are still walking free. No one has been
brought to justice for the terrible murders of the victims
in Odessa. International observers note the absence of
efficiency and objectivity in investigations, which are
being intentionally drawn out, and the efforts by the
authorities to conceal the results of the investigations.
There is growing pressure on the courts. The Ukrainian
authorities are still prosecuting civilian activists from
the opposition. Human rights activists continue to
condemn Kyiv's actions with regard to its restrictions
on the media and its exerting pressure on journalists.
Kyiv is also surreptitiously selling weapons and
military equipment to the Middle East through very
dubious channels. Those could possibly wind up in the
hands of terrorists.

We are not ruling out the fact that, in order to
conceal the problems in its domestic policy, the Kiev
authorities continue not only to undermine the peace
process in Donbas, but are also promoting military
provocations. It is clear that one of the factors behind
the political situation and the actions of the Kyiv
authorities is the spread of the ideology of extremism
in parts of Ukrainian society, including neo-Nazism
and aggressive nationalism. That is the sort of ideology
led to the coup d'etat in Kyiv in 2014 and the later so-
called counter-terrorist operation in the south-east
of the country. We are convinced that, as long as the
expression of such ideology is justified as part of the
right to freedom of expression and as a potential factor
in consolidating the country and society, we cannot
legitimize the authorities in Kyiv.

We were shocked to hear that a new Ukrainian
military transport aircraft has been christened the
Bandera, after the Nazi collaborator. Will they paint
a swastika on it? A glaring example of the outrages
committed by the armed nationalist radicals was
the destruction of the transmission lines supplying
electricity to Crimea, which has resulted in a crisis for
schools, hospitals and other facilities on the peninsula.
That threatened the lives of patients on life-support
and constitutes a gross violation of the right to life.
The Kyiv authorities have demonstrated their complete
inability to react to or condemn such actions.

The position of a number of States that claim to
want the best for Ukraine is unhelpful in that regard.
Recently, the Vice-President of the United States went
to Kyiv. Addressing the Verkhovna Rada, he spoke
about Minsk agreements. He said that Russia was
presenting an obstacle to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. But everyone knows that Russia
cannot modify the Ukrainian Constitution, adopt laws
regulating elections in Ukraine or grant amnesty. It is
puzzling that, in a similar vein, he did not take that
opportunity to call on Ukrainian lawmakers and the
President of Ukraine who hold such power.

In conclusion, we confirm that there is no alternative
to the implementation of the Minsk agreements of
12 February and of resolution 2202 (2015). We are
pleased that, although the work of the Trilateral Contact
Group is difficult, its participants are working in an
orderly manner.

