Mr. Egeland: I am very grateful for the
continued support that members of the Security
Council and other member States have expressed
throughout today's debate on the protection of
civilians. This debate has underlined the importance of
mainstreaming protection, providing a clear focus for
future action and addressing some of the critical gaps
in implementation.

Time does not permit my going into all the
important proposals made by speakers today. Let me
address only a few points.

The issue of engagement with non-State armed
groups is, as many Council members have said, a
sensitive and complex one. In situations of armed
conflict, Governments clearly bear the primary
responsibility to provide humanitarian access, to
protect civilians and to cooperate with humanitarian
agencies. But it is equally clear that there are situations
in which Governments alone do not have the capacity
to fulfil this responsibility, and consequently the lives
and welfare of their civilians are at risk. Where non-
State armed groups control or influence access to
populations in need of humanitarian assistance and
when non-State armed groups actively target civilians,
the humanitarian imperative may demand our
engagement with them, as when we facilitated the
humanitarian ceasefire in Darfur between Government
and rebels - an agreement that was mediated by the
Government of Chad.
Clearly, any engagement with non-State armed
groups must be aimed solely at providing protection
and humanitarian assistance to civilians living in areas
under their control and must be conducted
transparently, neutrally and impartially in a manner that
does not in any way legitimize the armed groups
concerned. Just as the impartiality and neutrality of
humanitarian organizations must be respected by
parties to conflict, humanitarian organizations
themselves must act in a manner that is above reproach
in this regard.

(spoke in Spanish)

As was just noted by the representative of
Colombia, I was recently in his country and had very
constructive meetings with the Government on the
matter of humanitarian assistance and access there.

(spoke in English)

The representatives of several delegations
addressed the situation of civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territory. I can only reiterate that the
violence against civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the profound constraints on their lives
imposed by the construction of the barrier in the West
Bank are issues of grave humanitarian concern, as I
said in my opening statement this morning. The attacks
in the Rafah refugee camp last month shocked us all.
International humanitarian law obviously applies to the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. In this
context, I thank the representative of Pakistan for
recalling the Secretary-General's emphasis in his report
on the fact that

"Compliance by all parties to conflict with
international humanitarian, human rights, refugee
and criminal law is critical in all of these
situations, whether they are situations of armed
conflict, occupation or transition". (S/2004/43], para. 3)

I particularly welcome the unanimous concern
expressed in the debate over the issue of sexual and
gender-based violence against women and children and
the recognition of the need for measures to deal more
effectively with this problem. I welcome the support
expressed for police- and troop-contributing countries
to take measures that will ensure the investigation and
prosecution of alleged offenders of sexual exploitation
and abuse, in line with the Secretary-General's bulletin
and the current practice of international staff.

I wish to thank Council members for their
valuable proposals for moving the protection of
civilians agenda forward. I wish to acknowledge the
proposal of the representative of Germany that, in
addition to the six-monthly briefings on the protection
of civilians, the Security Council receive ad hoc
briefings from me, as Emergency Relief Coordinator,
when grave threats to the protection of civilians in
particular situations require it.

(spoke in French)

I welcome the proposal made by the
representative of France that the system of cooperation
established in response to the Darfur crisis between the
Security Council, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs should serve as a model for other complex
emergency situations.

(spoke in English)

The representative of the United Kingdom
confirmed the need for clearer mechanisms to support
systematic and precise monitoring and reporting from
the field on protection of civilians issues. As requested,
we will provide an outline for such a mechanism in my
next briefing to the Council in December. Several
Council members stressed the need to make better use
of the aide-memoire. This we see as central to
delivering on the protection of civilians in the future.

(spoke in Spanish)

I welcome the support expressed by several
members of the Security Council and other member
States for a new resolution on protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I welcome in particular the message
that the next resolution will impose a greater obligation
on member States. As the representatives of the United
Kingdom, Chile, Germany, France and others have
noted, such a resolution should include a strategy
enabling us better and more effectively to protect
civilians. We must be as strongly committed,
innovative and flexible as possible and use a variety of
protection mechanisms, some of which already exist
while others will be new.

(spoke in English)

In addition to its work with the Security Council,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs will continue to promote this framework with
other appropriate organs of the United Nations, as well
as work closely with regional bodies and specific
member States. The renewed commitment of the
Security Council to acting collectively and decisively
to protect civilians trapped in situations of armed
conflict is needed now more than ever, and we look
forward to working closely in this endeavour and to
seeing a new resolution from the Council on this.

