Mr. Mituy Edjang (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I convey to everyone
warm greetings and a happy new year on behalf of
His Excellency President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo of Equatorial Guinea. The Government of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its gratitude to the United
Nations and to the Government of Kazakhstan for
having jointly organized this high-level meeting on
Afghanistan and Central Asia. We also thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his briefing, as well as
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
for his statement later in this meeting.

This meeting reflects the strategic importance
and specific role of Afghanistan and Central Asia as a
whole and the importance the international community
attaches to them. We firmly believe that this region
has great potential for development and the resources
required to achieve it, but that will also require the
contributions, collaboration and cooperation of all.
The international community must therefore continue
supporting the efforts of the Afghan Government
to achieve stability, security and sustainable and
lasting development.

The endemic security problems and their
ramifications are the main obstacle to achieving
that goal. As today's agenda indicates, security and
development are closely linked. The commitment of
all the States of Central Asia to the development of
Afghanistan requires their cooperation on security.

A regional approach is required in order to address
the problem jointly. Equatorial Guinea condemns the
existence of safe havens for terrorists in the region,
which are used for training and preparing attacks - not
only in Afghanistan but all around the world. The
support of the international community for such an
approach is crucial, including on the part of the most
developed countries and of the United Nations.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the approach of
Afghanistan's Central Asian regional neighbours,
which view the country as a partner but also believe
that Afghans themselves must lead an internal peace
process to bring about prosperity and stability for the
country, and must enjoy the support of the countries of
the region because, as has been shown, there can be no
regional stability without a stable Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's security and stability are important
for the entire region, as we continue to see worrying and
increasing terrorist activities carried out by associated
persons, groups, business and entities in Afghanistan
that pose serious threats not only to Afghanistan but to
all countries in Central Asia.

The United Nations as a whole has an important
role to play in those efforts. We are happy to see that,
as a result of the support and activities of the United
Nations Regional Center for Preventive Diplomacy in
Central Asia, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and regional organizations, the region
has strengthened capacities to overcome challenges
to peace, stability and sustainable development,
including in such areas as the fight against terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the fight against drug
trafficking, trafficking in persons, illegal immigration
and the use of the Internet for terrorism.

A key consideration for lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan is the need to accelerate social and
economic development in order to improve the
living standards of the population. The international
community must redouble its efforts to support the
Afghan Government in implementing the Afghanistan
Compact and the national development strategy so
as to make progress in economic development and in
improving infrastructure, education, health, human
rights, the rule of law and other areas. It must be ensured
that the dividends of development are beneficial to, and
shared by, the entire Afghan people.

The adoption of an integrated approach is crucial
to combat opium cultivation and drug trafficking.
The issue of drugs impacts negatively not only on
Afghanistan's economy, livelihoods, security and
stability, but also on the capacity of the Government,
as well as on the customs and beliefs of its people.
We hope that the Afghan Government will tackle the
problem thoroughly in coordination and cooperation
with its neighbours and the international community,
and that it will intensify its efforts in the fight against
drugs with comprehensive measures.

The role of Afghanistan's neighbours in the
region is crucial and, together with the international
community, they should continue their efforts to
fulfil their commitments and support the Afghan
Government and people. Equatorial Guinea calls for
continued assistance to the country while respecting
the interests, desires and specific characteristics of the
Afghan people. Afghanistan's development is tied to the
development of the whole of Central Asia. We would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude to
Kazakhstan for its initiative in organizing this public
debate, as well as for the remarkable trip to Kabul by
all 15 members of the Security Council during which a
consensus was reached on supporting Afghanistan in
its efforts to achieve development and to normalize its
situation. I would also like to commend the hospitality
and warm welcome that all of us, including Equatorial
Guinea, received from the Afghan Government.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea accepts and
supports the presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2)
adopted at this meeting and believes that its publication
will help to promote development, stability and peace
in Afghanistan and the Central Asian region.

