Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the Russian Federation's second
victory in the World Cup football championship
this morning.

We would like to welcome and thank Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda for her briefing on the twenty-seventh
report on the situation in Darfur in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). We appreciate the work of
the Prosecutor, as well as the report that she has just
presented to us.

As we have already reiterated on many occasions
before the Chamber, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is a State that supports respect for international law
and international humanitarian law. That is why we
commend the great efforts of the Security Council to
fight impunity for serious crimes and to promote the
principles of justice and responsibility, as well as to
demand accountability of all those responsible for war
crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and other
related crimes, as well as its unremitting effort to
establish institutions or methods to deal with such evils.

However, with regard to the International Criminal
Court, we would like to point out that we adhere to all
the declarations and resolutions issued by the African
Union on the way in which the Court deals with some
African issues, in particular concerning the proceedings
against the President ofthe Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that the
International Criminal Court has no jurisdiction to
charge a President of the Republic, in full discharge
of his duties, given the fact that, as the symbol of
national sovereignty, he enjoys immunity. International
law on the immunity of senior State officials must be
respected. The required cooperation by the Office of
the President and the Court is being diminished by
the lack of credibility of that judicial institution as
a result of its inability to meet its responsibilities in
an efficient, honest and transparent way. It is not by
chance that several countries, including countries that
are party to the Rome Statute, have not cooperated in
the arrest and detention of President Omar Al-Bashir
on account of their not sharing the interpretation of the
Court with regard to immunity.

The fact that so many years have passed without the
Court being able to make progress in that case clearly
demonstrates the absence of grounds. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea therefore shares the position of the
African Union with regard to the International Criminal
Court's action concerning Darfur. Accordingly, we
join the repeated request of the African Union for the
suspension of proceedings against the President of the
Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, and the withdrawal of the
referral of the case.

Meanwhile, Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
positive political developments in Darfur, thereby
improving the security and stability of the country.
Under the leadership of President Al-Bashir, the Sudan
plays a very active and positive role in combating
sectarian violence and terrorism, which is already
having encouraging results on the ground.

In accordance with the principles of responsibility
and justice, like the African Union, which is calling
for the restoration of peace and justice in Darfur, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is fully convinced that
dialogue and national reconciliation, in line with the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, are basic elements
for achieving a proper solution to the problems in the
Sudan and a broad and lasting peace. The actions of
the international community should support that
momentum and not hinder it.

I will conclude by encouraging the Government of
the Sudan to continue to make every effort to uphold
calm and respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights for all parts of the population under
its sovereignty, as well as to maintain the positive
momentum and to strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations country team in the
country in order to achieve peace and prosperity for the
entire Sudanese population.

