Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): As Turkey has aligned itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union, I will
underline just a few points which we deem to be of
critical importance at this juncture in the Middle East.

The events in the region once again depict a grim
reality for the international community. The complex
webs of issues in the region are certainly more
interconnected and entangled than ever. The Middle
East peace process continues to be stalled. The recent
internal strife in Palestine and Lebanon has further
complicated the situation and caused it to deteriorate.

With respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
there is an absolute need for the realization of the
vision of two States Without further delay. We welcome
the recent agreement to form a Palestinian national
unity government. This is a must. We hope that the new
Palestinian government will be established on a
political platform that embraces the Quartet principles
and meets the expectations of not only the Palestinians,
but the international community as well.
In the Middle East peace process, we believe that
a constructive approach with a view to initiating the
final status negotiations can be within our reach.
However, as the two parties consider the steps
necessary to build mutual confidence, they should also
refrain from actions that might lead to new tensions
and crises. In this respect, we reaffirm our stance
against terrorism and condemn all acts of terrorism and
violence targeting innocent people. At the same time,
we urge all parties to consider and implement
constructive, rather than divisive, policies. In the case
of the most recent incident, it was right that Israel
finally halted its construction work around Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. Yet we understand that the excavation is
unfortunately still continuing. We urge Israel to act
with the utmost caution and consideration, and to
assume policies which reflect high regard for the
religious sensitivities of the Muslims.

The Quartet statement of 2 February, announcing
a re-energized approach and a commitment to engage
with the parties, has been a step in the right direction.
In line with this approach, we believe that regional
efforts which support and complement the work of the
Quartet would be of great value and importance as
well. Turkey is also of the opinion that the Syrian and
Lebanese tracks should not be overlooked. In this
regard, any comprehensive settlement must take into
consideration the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the principle of land for peace, as well as the Arab
peace plan.

Unfortunately, the Israel-Lebanon war of last
summer has set back the efforts of Lebanon to heal and
rebuild itself. On the other hand, we think that Lebanon
could make a strong leap forward and achieve stability
if resolution 1701 (2006) were to be fully
implemented. Certainly, in this framework, the
normalization of relations between Lebanon and its
neighbours would also be vitally important.

We condemn very strongly the two explosions
near Beirut today, which led to the loss of lives. We are
of the view that the collective energy of the Lebanese
should be channelled for the rebuilding of their
country. We wish to see the reconciliation of
differences through a political dialogue in which
common interests in Lebanon become the top priority
for each and every Lebanese. Given today's regional
and global trends, Turkey believes that the preservation
of the unique and exemplary socio-political structure of
Lebanon is of paramount importance. Let me underline

once again that Turkey supports the sovereignty,
political unity and stability of Lebanon; that support is
amply displayed by its contributions to the enhanced
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as
well as to the Maritime Task Force of that Mission.
Furthermore, Turkey has opened its seaports and
airfields for the use of friendly and ally countries to
ease access to Lebanon through UNIFIL. We have also
responded to international calls for the recovery and
reconstruction of Lebanon, and have pledged a total of
$50 million in the form of donations.

Given its historical and cultural bonds with the
brotherly countries of the Middle East, Turkey is
determined to continue to contribute to and facilitate
the regional and international efforts for the realization
of the long-desired peace, security, stability and
prosperity in the region.

