Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his presentation of the report
on the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (MONUC). And I would like to
reaffirm our support for him and for all the members of
his Mission and of the peacekeeping force present on
the ground in difficult conditions. We are convinced
that without him and without the presence of MONUC,
the situation could have deteriorated further and would
be even worse than it is today.

I would also like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium and to recognize his
ongoing commitment and that of his country to this
difficult situation. We know that Belgium is the driving
force on this issue within the European Union.
I would also like to welcome our colleagues, the
Permanent Representatives of the Democratic Republic
of Congo and Rwanda.

It seems to us that the mandate of MONUC must
be clarified and priorities set. As indicated in the report
of the Secretary-General, after a 10-year presence in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, it is vital to carry
out a detailed review of MONUC's missions, which
have become diversified over the years. MONUC is the
United Nations biggest peacekeeping force, but the
Democratic Republic of Congo is an enormous country
and the challenges to be faced are gigantic. We know
that the solution will not be a military but a political
one. It hinges on the resumption of the Goma and
Nairobi processes and on the reaffirmation by all
parties of their will to disarm, disengage and cooperate.
To that end, we fully support the efforts of President
Obasanjo, whom we had the opportunity to meet
yesterday, to strengthen cooperation, in particular
among all States of the region. And we believe that
they too must respond to the expectations of the
international community and further involve
themselves in the peace process now under way.

There is a need to reaffirm the high priority
nature of the civilian protection in MONUC's mandate
by indicating that MONUC's other missions cannot be
carried out if they would have a detrimental impact on
civilian protection. The testimony of non-governmental
organizations yesterday was overwhelming. Crimes
have been committed. Atrocities have been perpetrated.
We all know this and we are also all aware that these
crimes have been committed by all parties. Sexual
violence, child recruitment, plundering and murder
have risen by dramatic proportions. Everything must be
done to put an end to this and that must be the highest
priority of MONUC, which must, in our view, tighten
its ranks near the camps, and in some cases even within
the camps, to carry out such deterrence or security
operations, in close cooperation, of course, with the
international humanitarian organizations involved.

Questions must also be asked regarding the
establishment of the personal responsibility of those
who have committed and who are continuing to
commit such crimes against the civilian population.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has
said that there is a need to follow the situation very
closely; of course, we encourage him to do so.
9

The second priority for MONUC should be that
of demobilization and disarmament of armed groups,
as well as control of the resources that those groups are
deriving from the illegal exploitation of the Congo's
natural resources. As was underscored yesterday by the
Special Representative, the link between the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
MONUC must be clarified in terms of actions against
armed groups. It seems to us that MONUC should be
able, on its own, to carry out defensive operations
against those armed groups that might take initiatives
that run counter to the Goma and Nairobi processes.
That being the case, MONUC has neither the means
nor the mission to take the place of the Congolese
army.

As was emphasized by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources is one of the underlying causes of the
conflict and above all of the fact that it has lasted so
long. Until now, the action of the international
community has not been decisive. From now on, we
must tackle this problem clear-mindedly, if necessary
by adopting any appropriate sanctions and, in any case,
by demanding that MONUC, in so far as possible,
make use of its deployment to prevent or discourage
the flow of illicit traffic that benefits armed groups.

Finally, security sector reform is an important
priority. The weakness of the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, as stated by its own
Minister of Defence, hampers MONUC's proper
accomplishment of its mandate. MONUC must work
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the international community to draw up a
plan of genuine reconstruction for the Congolese army.
The genuine establishment of the rule of law in the
Democratic Republic of Congo requires the formation
of an army, a justice system and a police force that are
effective and democratic. As for MONUC's other
missions, those we have already discussed must be
maintained in the East of the country but we should
also take into consideration the progress that has been
achieved in the West of the Democratic Republic of
Congo: the gradual transfer of certain tasks, the
promotion of good governance and the establishment
of a judicial system. The transfer to the Country Team
of the United Nations and to bilateral partners could
enable MONUC to further focus its action in the East.
Other more specific recommendations of the Secretary-
General on the modality of such a transfer could also
be useful.

My delegation will prepare a draft resolution that
will reproduce the major guidelines that I have just
indicated and will, of course, take into account the
observations made today by the members of the
Security Council, by Mr. Alan Doss and by the States
involved. We are aware that all members of the
Security Council share the same concern, namely, to
facilitate the task of MONUC with greater
effectiveness. We will do everything in our power so
that the negotiations may move forward swiftly and
constructively.

