Mr. Nejad-Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
May I associate myself with preceding speakers and
congratulate you, Sir, the distinguished Prime Minister of
Gambia, on assuming the leadership of the Council in
March. We look forward to a successful and concrete
result to emanate from this debate in the Council - a
hope that we think is quite realistic and achievable for
two good reasons: the debate is being carried out under
your able and skilful leadership, and the case at hand has

 

reached a stage where chances are great for a peaceful and
amicable solution.

May I also take this opportunity to express
appreciation to the Ambassador of Gabon for the exemplary
manner in which he guided the work of the Council in
February.

I would like to express sympathy to the bereaved
families of the innocent people who lost their lives in Pan
Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772.

The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
welcomes the Judgments issued by the International Court
of Justice on 27 February 1998 on the "Case Concerning
Questions of Interpretation and Application of the 1971
Montreal Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at
Lockerbie" between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
United Kingdom and between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the United States of America, by which the Court
found that it has jurisdiction over the case and that the
application filed by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was
admissible.

The Islamic Republic of Iran hopes that the Judgments
of the International Court will lead to the achievement of a
peaceful solution to the crisis agreeable to all parties
concerned and to the lifting of the sanctions imposed on the
people of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by Security Council
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993). In our view, in
addition to clarifying the crux of the legal issue in the
Lockerbie incident, which would ultimately serve the
interest of justice in this case, the Judgments of the Court
were indeed an important step in upholding the authority of
that international legal body, on the one hand, and
strengthening the rule of law at the international level, on
the other.

The views expressed at the highest political levels of
the Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab
States, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Conference - together comprising an
overwhelming majority of the United Nations
membership - are quite clear on the dispute between the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the United States and the
United Kingdom. And these views have been confirmed,
once again, in this debate. In this regard, all these
organizations have consistently adopted resolutions calling
upon the Western States concerned to respond positively to
the initiatives of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in order to
reach a settlement on the basis of international law and
through dialogue and understanding. One such example is
resolution 14/8 adopted by the Islamic summit held in
Tehran in December 1997, in which the heads of States
and Governments of the members of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference supported

"the efforts exerted by the League of Arab States
and the Organization of African Unity to persuade
the Security Council to accept one of the three
options which they proposed jointly to the Council".
The Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers held in
Doha, Qatar, earlier this week attached the same
importance to this issue.

The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the time
has come to resolve this issue in a manner consistent with
the rule of international law, in which the interests of
justice would be served and the sovereignty of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya respected.

