Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity,
following the comprehensive briefing just made by
6

Ms. Valerie Amos, whose recommendations I fully
support, to inform the Security Council about the latest
efforts by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) to better protect civilians in the eight missions
we have been mandated to carry out, as well as, more
generally, on the progress we have made in carrying
out those crucial and difficult missions.

Recent tragic incidents, notably in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which the lives
and safety of civilians have been so grossly
disregarded by armed militias are a tragic reminder of
both the importance of protecting civilians where we
are mandated to do so and of the immense complexities
that this entails. We must acknowledge and
communicate that peacekeeping operations cannot
protect all civilians at all times, especially when they
are deployed over very vast areas and in the midst of
ongoing conflict. Both the international community
and those whom we endeavour to protect must
understand that peacekeeping operations cannot be
regarded as a substitute for State authority. The
protection of civilians will ultimately depend upon
stable and legitimate State institutions. Peacekeeping
operations can augment their capacities and help to
build them, but cannot, and should not, replace them.

That being said, over the course of 2010 the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support undertook a very detailed
examination of how we can improve our performance
in protecting civilians. With the operational concept
developed earlier this year, we have focused on five
principal tracks to improve our planning and
implementation of our civilian protection mandates.
Those include the development of a strategic
framework to provide guidance for missions in
elaborating comprehensive strategies for the protection
of civilians; predeployment and in-mission training
modules that include a range of scenario-based
exercises for all mission components; an evaluation of
the resource and capability requirements necessary for
the implementation of protection mandates; a thorough
examination of protection planning processes, both
predeployment and within the mission; and, lastly,
capability development efforts, including addressing
capability standards for military units, to better
articulate the performance requirements to meet this
task as well as the other modern mandated
peacekeeping tasks.
10-64592
(spoke in English)

Our efforts in those areas have already had an
impact on the ground. In addition to the three missions
that previously developed protection of civilians
strategies, four missions are in the process of doing so
based on the draft general guidance that is being
developed here at Headquarters. That guidance assists
missions in undertaking a systematic analysis of the
relevant threats facing civilians in their areas of
operation, so as to better orient their efforts towards
addressing them. That includes identifying the
capacities that are required to ensure the effective
implementation of protection of civilians mandates.

One of the most prominent examples of the
implementation of such strategies is certainly the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which has already developed and is continuing to
implement a number of innovative and practical
approaches. Recent efforts have focused on further
enhancing the situational awareness of MONUSCO
troops and, as the Council is aware, on improving
communication between them and the population. Such
measures must of course be accompanied by the ability
to respond when and as necessary. It is in those
situations that capacity shortages, especially in terms
of aviation, are felt most acutely.

In the Sudan, in the crucial period leading up to
the referendum, the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan has finalized, in consultation with the country
team, a strategy for the protection of civilians, which
strengthens the coordination between the Mission's
civilian and military components and envisages joint
mapping processes of protection needs, actors and
potential emergencies.

In Darfur and Cote d'Ivoire, missions are
finalizing comprehensive strategies that include
analyses of current and potential protection threats and
vulnerabilities that civilians face, as well as risk
mitigation measures.

For the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the primary threats to the protection of
civilians are civil disorder and violent crime, including
sexual violence. UNMIL and the Liberian National
Police are working to develop clear and practical
procedures to enable community members to alert the
Mission or Liberian authorities in the event of an
emergency or major incident.
10-64592

As we look at the planning and implementation of
the protection of civilians in greater detail, it remains
clear that the efforts that we have undertaken thus far
constitute only the beginning of what will necessarily
be a continuous process. Peacekeepers in the military,
police and civilian components continue to request
more detailed operational guidance on the
contributions they can make to the protection of
civilians.

While we have made progress in bringing clarity
to how peacekeeping operations implement protection
of civilians mandates, we still require a more detailed
articulation of how key functions within missions can
more effectively protect civilians on a daily basis. This
operational guidance will be a critical part of the
protection toolkit that we are developing.

In conclusion, it must be reiterated that our
efforts to improve the implementation of protection of
civilians mandates within United Nations peacekeeping
operations is not a job for DPKO or the Department of
Field Support alone. It is critical that our key partners,
in particular troop and police contributors that
ultimately deploy personnel to protect civilians in the
mission area, are fully engaged. Ensuring that they are
aware of the expectations to protect civilians that have
been placed upon them and that they are prepared to
meet them is a shared task that will require a strong
and focused partnership moving forward. Likewise, the
support and engagement of the Council will be critical,
in particular in ensuring that missions with protection
of civilians mandates are fully resourced for the task,
as we endeavour to bring greater operational clarity to
some of the mandate language typically used in
mandate missions to protect civilians and bring
political leverage to bear on the parties to conflict.

