Allow me to congratulate the Estonian delegation on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of May. We are certain that, despite the circumstances arising from the coronavirus disease health crisis, it will do an excellent job. Accordingly, we welcome its present initiative to join with the delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, to convene today's meeting. At present, the work of both the permanent and the non-permanent members in the Security Council is still governed by the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, which were adopted in 1946. That is why we consider the working methods to be one of the most important issues for the Security Council to address, since the knowledge and mastery of the non-permanent members puts them on an equal footing with the permanent members in assuming their responsibilities before the Security Council and in carrying out their work in it. Furthermore, their presence also allows the general membership of the Organization to have a better and more complete understanding of workings of the Council. They create the framework that allows each and every member of the Council to participate fully, to contribute to informed discussions and to play a full and meaningful role in the work of the Council. It is a matter of all members having ownership of the issues on the agenda and fulfilling their respective responsibilities to their own people and to the membership at large. The working methods also seek to ensure that conflicts on the Council's agenda, as well as emerging threats, are addressed in a timely manner and that meeting formats and approaches are adapted to provide the best chance of achieving meaningful outcomes in the Council's deliberations. It is precisely the development of initiatives to improve the working methods of the Security Council that is decisive for the Council's ability to fulfil its responsibility to maintain international peace and security in a transparent and balanced manner and, above all, in accordance with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. We therefore believe that the improvements and updates that have been made are fundamental, especially since they result from a particular effort of the non-permanent members. For that reason, we cannot speak of progress in improving the Council's working methods without referring to the outstanding efforts of previous Chairs of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. For example, in August 2017 Japan played a decisive role in the adoption of revised note S/2017/507, which has become a useful reference for all, particularly newly elected members, and Kuwait contributed to recent updates through the adoption of numerous notes by the President. While the revised text of note 507 is comprehensive and balanced, we stress the need for the Council to regularly review progress and to ensure the note's full and effective implementation. Despite those updates and improvements, in our view the participation of Member States in the Council's decision-making process remains low owing precisely to its working methods and the lack of transparency under the pretence of effective, efficient and rapid decision-making. While we highlight the fact that informal briefings have become a regular practice in recent years, we consider it important to involve all Member States, in particular those especially affected by a given issue, and to consult them on the basis of an agreed framework before any decision is taken, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter of the United Nations. We stress the need for the Council's working methods to provide for timely interaction with the Secretariat on emerging risks and threats to international peace and security. We believe that that is of the utmost importance in preventing the development, escalation and resurgence of conflict. We also highlight the improved election procedures for the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and encourage more elected members to be appointed penholders on various issues and to work towards the effective implementation of what has already been agreed. However, it would be important that at least one informal meeting of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions be held during the selection process. While all the improvements are important to ensure the transparency of the Council, they remain insufficient. There is still room for improvement in order to enhance the Council's conduct of the tasks and responsibilities entrusted to it in the United Nations Charter. Therefore, the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions should continue to assess all the gaps in the application of note 507 with a view to ensuring the full implementation of the best practices it contains. It should also consider the proposals of Member States on ensuring transparency, inclusiveness and interactive exchanges in the Council's work. We should be very clear that, while the latest version of note 507 can be considered an achievement in itself because of the spirit of cooperation and compromise required to bring positions closer together, both within the Council and among Member States at large, we should not, however, merely acknowledge the improvement. The working methods are a continuous process that goes beyond the revision of notes and other positions. It is essential that, based on the work of the Informal Working Group, progress be made on reforms that will result in a Council that, like its rules of procedure, sets aside ideological positions and is in step with the twenty-first century challenges facing the international community. Finally, we agree that, for all those reasons, we must maintain the momentum of cooperation that has enabled us to get this far and continue our collective efforts to ensure that the codification of best practices shifts from a mere exercise to actual implementation within the Security Council, both in its day-to-day work and in the taking of major decisions.
