Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I wish to welcome Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the Great Lakes Region, and to thank him for his
briefing to the Council. I also thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for his statement. I also recognize the presence of
my colleague, the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In April this year, Rwanda, together with the
whole world, commemorated the twentieth anniversary
of the genocide against the Tutsi (see S/PV.7155),
which claimed the lives of more than 1 million of my
compatriots in just 100 days. I recall, in that regard,
that my country introduced a draft resolution that
became resolution 2150 (2014), which was sponsored
and adopted by all 15 Council members. The resolution
reminds us that leaders and members of the so-called
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR) were among the perpetrators of the genocide.
The resolution furthermore recalls that the FDLR
"is a group under United Nations sanctions,
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and which has continued to promote and commit
ethnically based and other killings in Rwanda and in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo" (resolution 2150 (2104), fourteenth preambular paragraph).

This is the FDLR we are talking about it today. This
is the FDLR we have been talking about for the past two
decades. We are not here to talk about simple negative
forces such as the dozen armed groups operating in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as recalled
by all recent products of the Council. The FDLR is not
the oldest negative force in the area, which has triggered
the creation of a number of other armed groups, but
it is also a genocidal movement that committed the
unspeakable 20 years ago.

Today the FDLR remains the main military and
security threat to Rwanda and the Great Lakes region
due to its genocidal ideology, the mass atrocities
that it regularly commits against civilians in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to its
substantive structural with international networks and
the active support it unfortunately enjoys from State
and non-State actors. Such actors have demonstrated on
multiple occasions their hidden agenda to sanitize and
preserve the F DLR in order to eventually destabilize
Rwanda.

To deal with the security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which includes
the FDLR issue, on 30 November 1999 - almost
15 years ago - the Security Council established the
United Nations Observation Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), whose mandate
was expanded by resolution 1291 (2000) to include
the protection civilians "under imminent threat of
physical violence". In 2010, that Mission was renamed
by resolution 1925 (2010) as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), with a mandate
including to

"support strategies towards a sustainable solution
of the FDLR issue, including repatriation,
reinsertion or resettlement in other areas, orjudicial
prosecution as appropriate" (resolution 1925 (2010),

para. 12 (fl).

However, despite the clear mandate given by
the Council, MONUC and then MONUSCO were
unable - or perhaps I should say, unwilling - to
fully implement it. It is in that context that the Council
adopted resolution 2098 (2013) in March 2013,
establishing Force Intervention Brigade (FIB) operating
under MONUSCO. The Force was given not only a
robust and offensive mandate, including, in the terms of
sub-paragraph 12 (b), the task to "prevent the expansion
of all armed groups, neutralize these groups and disarm
them". In addition, huge support was provided in terms
of equipment, technology and so forth. That essentially
represented a third mandate for a third force in 14 years.

Regrettably, upon deployment, the FIB chose
to restrict its actions to against the recently created
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and once again failed to
address the question of the FDLR. In November 2013,
the M-23 was totally defeated and Rwanda hoped at
that time that MONUSCO and its FIB would finally
decide to implement resolution 2098 (2013), which we
had sponsored here, and thereby move to subsequently
neutralize the FDLR.

Unfortunately, despite the tough rhetoric by my
good friend the Head of MONUSCO against FDLR,
no concrete action against that genocidal movement
has been taken or even planned by the United Nations
force. In the meantime, the Peace, Security and
Corporation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region - under the good offices
of the Secretary-General, whom I vigorously commend
for having initiated it - was signed in Addis Ababa in
February 2014. Through the Framework, the leaders of
the region once again called for the neutralization of all
armed groups, including, of course, the FDLR.

Furthermore, since the beginning of this year,
various summits of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), alone and jointly
with the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), emphasized the need for disarmament and
demobilization of the FDLR as well as the necessity
of military actions against those unwilling to disarm
accordance with resolution 2098 (2013).

To justify FIB inaction against the FDLR,
MONUSCO's senior leadership attempted to explain
that military action against the FDLR was complicated
because combatants were living among civilians. That
is not true. As a matter of fact, we, Rwanda, provided
extensive evidence to MONUSCO on the location
of the FDLR military camps separated from civilian
areas. In any case, the MONUSCO mandate includes
the protection of civilians by ensuring that women, men
and children are not used as human shields or deprived
of security, health care, education and development.
Military action to separate civilians from combatants
is therefore imperative. Given that impasse, the FDLR
could of course not miss that golden opportunity
to achieve its objective. That genocidal movement
continued to form alliances with subversive opposition
groups against Rwanda in order to engage in activities
aimed at gaining sympathy and support from the region.

In May, the FDLR decided to adjust its stratgey
by committing to voluntary disarm. However, from a
force of 3,500 combatants, the disarmament exercise
that allegedly took place in North and South Kivu on
30 May and 6 June, respectively, comprised 188 low-
ranking combatants and their dependants. Since then,
the disarmed combatants have refused to relocate from
Walungu and Kanyabayonga to a designated camp in
Kisangani, where no disarmament has taken place since
2 July. On the contrary, acccording to our information,
the FDLR continued to reinforce its troops, and around
200 additional elements have been recruited since May
to replace those 188 troops.

The Council may recall that the FDLR's delaying
tactics, seen by some as commitments, compelled the
ICGLR and SADC, at the request of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries of the region, to decide in July to give the
FDLR a six-month period, expiring on 2 January 2015,
to disarm. However, as all stakeholders have now
noticed, the FDLR never had any intention of disarming.
On the contrary, even recently at the summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community in
Luanda, Angola - I would like to commend Angola
for its leadership - the FDLR, through its allies in
the region, attempted to ensure that military action
against it is removed from the region's agenda, thereby
contradicting the Security Council resolutions that I
have mentioned above and its recent press statement
SC/11586.

Given the background that I have just provided, I
have several questions that occur to me. I would wish to
ask all of us why 20 years after our collective resolve of
the abused phrase "never again" the Security Council is
still struggling to find a lasting solution to the genocidal
negative force whose leaders and members are among
the perpetrators of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi.
Instead of addressing the main root cause ofinsecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, why has the Security Council, which comprises
at least five countries that have the required background
on that situation - I am talking about the permanent
members - prefer to manage that insecurity and focus
on the consequences of the FDLR presence in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo?

Why cannot the Security Council follow up on the
implementation of the multiple resolutions that it has
adopted and hold accountable the United Nations force
that it has established and to which it has provided a
clear mandate. The consequential budget is more than
$2 billion a year. I remember The Right Honourable
Matata Ponyo Mapon telling us that if he could get a
tenth of the MONUSCO budget, he could truly achieve
a strong police force and restore security to the entire
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
soon as possible. That is $2 billion per year, and we
have been sitting in this Chamber for 20 years. That is
insane and a humiliation. What do Council members
want to tell their taxpayers today? To keep spending
and feeding an Organization that is not doing anything?
After 20 years, we are still talking about a genocidal
force. We are all committed to that great phrase "never
again".

I believe that such questions are legitimate not
only from the Rwandan or regional perspective but also
from the broader perspective of the maintenance of
international peace and security and ofthe responsibility
to protect. In that regard, it would be unfortunate if the
Security Council were to spend the next 20 years dealing
with the FDLR and its consequences for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. Indeed, beyond
the absolute need to restore peace and security in our
region, I think that such collective inaction also further
undermines the credibility of such a lofty organ as the
Security Council.

Despite that picture, let me conclude on an
optimistic note. As the deadline given to the FDLR is
fast approaching, I am nonetheless convinced that the
overall momentum for peace, security and cooperation
in the Great Lakes region is so strong that it will
eventually enable MONUSCO's FIB and the supervision
of the Council to live up to our collective expectation
of a secure and stable Great Lakes region free of armed
groups, including the last genocidal movement on our
continent - indeed, in the world.

