Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
First of all, I would like to welcome Prime Minister
Aznar to New York and also to thank him for his very
insightful and important remarks and for the
significance that his presence brings to the work of the
Security Council in the struggle against international
terrorism. We would like also to thank the Secretary-
General for his presence among us today.

Terrorism constitutes a clear and present danger
to the ability of all the world's people to live in peace
and security. Each member of the Security Council
recognizes that this is true, and each has said so
repeatedly. As long as terrorists are permitted to thrive,
no land is safe and no border is secure. In recent
months, terrorist strikes in Indonesia, Russia, Kenya
and Colombia have attacked innocent victims from a
multitude of nationalities. Last year alone, the United
States Department of State counted 199 significant
terrorist incidents across the globe.

In New York City, we at the United Nations live
and work each day in the shadow of 11 September
2001. We are charged with a heavy responsibility, and
the Security Council has been responding. Its scorecard
in confronting terrorism is an example of how the
Council can fulfil its duty to strengthen peace and
security.

Resolution 1373 (2001), adopted in the
immediate aftermath of 11 September 2001, is
generating a worldwide juridical transformation.
Spurred by resolution 1373 (2001), Member States
have accelerated their accession to the 12 United
Nations Conventions and Protocols on Counter-
terrorism, propagating the legal norms necessary to
deter and prosecute terrorist acts across the globe.

The numbers are impressive. In September 2001
only two States were party to all 12 conventions. Today
the number stands at 31, including six members of the
Council, and another 36 States are closing in on the
target. In the judicial universe, where, quite properly,
change is slow, this is a radical shift. Clearly, with
resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council got
something right.

We should like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), which is charged with monitoring
the implementation by States of resolution 1373
(2001), and of its current Chairman, Ambassador Arias.
The CTC maintains a continual dialogue with Member
States that helps to identify gaps in counter-terrorism
capacity. Where outside assistance is needed, the CTC
is helping States to find it.

Through the CTC, the Security Council is
fostering a global counter-terrorism network. It
includes scores of international institutions and
regional and subregional organizations that are moving
to reinforce the Council's message that there is no
tolerance for terrorism in the twenty-first century. The
Council has taken the fight to Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1390 (2002), 1452
(2002) and 1455 (2003) provide strong direction to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Afghanistan - the
1267 Committee - which, under the leadership of
Ambassador Valdes of Chile, is quietly and effectively
working to block terrorist finances. Its consolidated list
of terrorist entities and individuals linked to Al Qaeda
and to the Taliban has led to a worldwide freeze of
$134 million. Ninety-eight million dollars of those
funds were frozen outside United States borders. The
United Nations 1267 list currently comprises 355
individuals or entities. Forty-one countries have
submitted reports to the Monitoring Group that
reinforced the mandate of 1267 and constituted a key
step in realizing improved implementation by States of
the Al Qaeda-Taliban sanctions regime.

The list of names and the dollar figures tell only
part of the story, which is about making common cause
to deprive terrorists of the means to commit their
crimes. Success in the war on terrorism depends on
sustained international cooperation and political will.
The Security Council has played an important part in
fostering that cooperation and in encouraging countries
and organizations to join the fight. Under the
leadership of Spain, as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and Chile, as Chair of the 1267
Committee, it will, I am sure, continue to do so.

