Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me join others in
sincerely commending you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate on youth, peace and security. This
particular open debate comes on the heels ofthe equally
important one on women and peace and security, which
convened about a week ago (see S/PV.8234). Botswana
heartily welcomes your continued engagement on
this issue and looks forward to a debate that will
contribute to global development, international peace
and security, and global partnership, particularly as it
relates to the youth who constitute the majority of the
world's population.

We also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for presenting his comprehensive
report (see S/2018/86), on the progress study of youth's
contributions to peace processes and conflict resolution.

Botswana aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representatives of Mali, on behalf of the
Group of African States, and Indonesia, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The global environment continues to experience
many challenges, some totally unprecedented. This
has placed an enormous burden on Member States,
as well as on regional, subregional and international
organizations, to deliver on the very purpose and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
only through collective efforts that the goals we all
aspire to for the betterment of humankind and of the
future we want can stand a chance of being realized.

Practically all the speakers before us have alluded
to the fact that the fast-evolving challenges confronting
the world today continue to grow in both scope and
magnitude. Their sheer enormity threatens the security
of our planet and even the existence of the human
race. Botswana is not, however, convinced that these
challenges are beyond our collective capability, nor
are they insurmountable. Since its inception in 1945,
the United Nations has strived to provide a platform
for nations to work together in addressing the various
challenges we continue to face, and it is proper to say
that notable progress has been achieved, particularly in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

We are glad to know that since the adoption of
resolution 2250 (2015), there has been a series of
worldwide consultations on the engagement of children
and young people in peacebuilding activities. The
adoption of the resolution was the first step of the United
Nations in recognizing the important role young people
play in preventing conflicts and sustaining peace.
It is in itself a groundbreaking and historic moment
for the United Nations, which specifically addresses
the topic of youth from an international peace and
security perspective.

This is also an opportune time for Member States to
discuss not only the progress achieved in the two years
since the adoption of the resolution, but to also engage
on how we hope and plan to ensure that the goals and
principles espoused in the Secretary-General's report,
which was presented this morning, can be aligned
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Secretary-General's report identifies five priority
areas for action in pursuit of efforts to promote youth
as agents of peace and security, and invariably see their
lives improve.

Education plays the dual role of building
competencies for social cohesion and civic engagement,
while also developing skills for economic engagement.
It is an extremely important undertaking as it relates to
youth empowerment. I must emphasize the importance
of partnerships in that regard.
Partnerships in peacebuilding are essential.
Although they are often considered from the perspective
of preventing violent extremism, partnerships with
young people facilitate their aspirations, as they are
engaged meaningfully as partners in implementing
policies, rather than as onlookers.

Like other Member States that have taken the floor
before us, Botswana has also made significant strides
on the above key pillars and is thus contributing to the
advancement and empowerment of youth, although we
still face challenges and constraints. We take special
pride in having established a ministry responsible
for young people - the Ministry of Youth, Sports
and Culture, way back in 2007. A department solely
dedicated to youth affairs has also been established
alongside the Botswana National Youth Council, which
acts as an umbrella for all registered independent
youth organizations in Botswana and through which
financial support and grants are made available to those
youth organizations.

Obviously, more needs to be done in this area and,
like many other nations across the world, we are also
concerned about what previous speakers have referred
to as the youth bulge, which is educated, unemployed
and very vulnerable. The number of youth graduates
in our country has grown drastically over the past
couple of years, exceeding the Government's capacity
to provide employment for them. It is in that light that
the Government of Botswana has stepped up efforts to
attract foreign direct investment so as to facilitate job
creation for these young people.

My delegation holds firm in the belief that the
recommendations and findings of the study that the
Secretary-General shared with the Council this morning
will help inform the national policies of United Nations
Member States on how young people can contribute to
peace processes and conflict resolution. Africa needs
to seize upon the demographic dividend arising from
the youth bulge in its population in order to enable
young people to constructively contribute to Africa's
development, as well to peace and security. The youth
bulge is, thus, a resource to be harnessed.

The time has come for us to partner with young
people and to be innovative, creative and forward-
thinking in order to address some of the challenges that
we face.
The Secretary-General's report has drawn our
attention to the most critical concerns of our youth
and recommends that we engage youth as partners
in development and policymaking. Again, in terms
of resolution 2250 (2015), the role of young people in
building cohesive societies can no longer be overlooked.
Their creative and innovative ideas need to be put to
good use for the benefit of their countries.

In conclusion, let me underscore the point that
young people throughout the world need a conducive
environment in which to develop and thrive. They need
an environment that sees them as agents of change and
as contributors and partners in development. This body
can contribute to that process.

Let me in concluding make a request: perhaps,
Mr. President, you should require that Member
States present progress reports to this body on their
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) so that we can
be informed of the efforts they are making to promote
the involvement of young people in development and in
decision-making on issues that affect them.

