Mr. Theron (Namibia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to discuss the
final report of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
Sanctions. I wish to acknowledge the presence of
Angola's Minister of External Relations, Mr. Joao
Bernardo de Miranda.

I wish also to thank Ambassador Larrain and his
team for his comprehensive and informative report on
the sanctions regime against UNITA, and Ambassador
Richard Ryan for the impressive introduction. I further
wish to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Ryan's predecessor, Ambassador Paul Heinbecker, for
his extraordinary efforts and commitment to making
the sanctions against UNITA successful.

The report before us provides us with an excellent
insight into the status of the investigations and the
continuing activities ofthe Mechanism in this regard. It
also sketches a detailed picture for us to understand the
complex and comprehensive strategies that UNITA
employs to continue its brutal war against the Angolan
people.

The report contains some positive information
vis-a-vis the implementation of the sanctions against
UNITA. However, some major incidents of sanctions-
busting are also reported. Of deep concern is the fact
that some countries still provide large-scale assistance
to UNITA, its officials and their families. This is a
grave situation, and appropriate action should be
considered.

While we are mindful of the stated difficulties
that some countries experience in fully enforcing
sanctions against UNITA, such as constitutional
reasons or binding international conventions, my
delegation is nevertheless glad to see in the report that
UNITA's room for manoeuvring abroad has somewhat
diminished.

With regard to the sale of diamonds, my
delegation is gratified that the military upper hand of
the Angolan Government against UNITA has seriously
hampered its production of diamonds. The international
community should now ensure that UNITA is
prevented from selling its stockpiles. In addition, the
countries involved should, as stated by the Mechanism,
prevent UNITA's commercial representatives from
illegally operating from their territories to help disrupt
UNITA's external sales programme.

The report furthermore highlights the fact that the
tracing of UNITA assets has been limited, due partly to
the difficulty of tracing financial operations,
particularly when money is moved electronically.
However, we remain convinced that this is an error that
should not be neglected, and that all possible options
should be pursued to discover and impound UNITA's
financial resources. In this regard, we note that the
Basel Convention on Money Laundering could be of
assistance.

My delegation strongly supports all efforts aimed
at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the
implementation of the sanctions against UNITA. We
therefore support the recommendations and
conclusions drawn by the Monitoring Mechanism. My
Government is studying these recommendations with a
view to implementing those applicable as soon as
possible.

I wish to confirm the information in paragraph 69
of the report regarding the discussions between
Namibia, in its capacity as the current Chairman of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
and the Mechanism. SADC recognizes the important
role that it can play in strengthening the sanctions and
in particular with regard to the implementation of some
measures recommended to it under resolution 1295
(2000). These measures include the establishment of an
information exchange mechanism involving petroleum
companies and Governments, the introduction of
measures to strengthen air-traffic-control systems in
the region, and the establishment of monitoring
activities in the border areas adjacent to Angola.

In this regard, President Nujoma has written to
the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) indicating that he has proposed
to the other SADC leaders that these matters be
discussed at the forthcoming SADC extraordinary
summit, scheduled for 9 March 2001.

However, in all these endeavours, paragraph 243
of the report remains pertinent, where it is stated that
the international community should consider assisting
Member States, where necessary, in acquiring
equipment for the control of national and regional air
spaces.

In conclusion, the Mechanism correctly expressed
the fear that any vacuum or discontinuity in the
exercise of vigilance by the international community
will affect the aims of the Security Council sanctions
against UNITA. We therefore welcome the adoption of
resolution 1336 (2001) on 23 January, which extended
the mandate of the Monitoring Mechanism for a period
of three months. We look forward to receiving the
addendum to this report.

