Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Before I
begin, I wish to express our condolences to the families
of the victims of the plane crash in Indonesia, which
claimed the lives of 189 civilians.

(spoke in English)

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock for his valuable briefing, which confirms the
continuing dire humanitarian situation in Syria. We
support his five asks and call upon all Security Council
members to work vigorously to that end. I would like
to pay tribute to all medical and humanitarian workers
for their efforts in the field to alleviate the suffering
in Syria.

I will present this statement on behalf of the
co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian file, namely,
Sweden and Kuwait. I will focus on two points: the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure and
humanitarian access.

First, we reaffirm that all parties must respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law in
all circumstances, including by protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We also call on all parties
to respect international human rights law. The period
covered by the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/947)
witnessed killings, arbitrary arrests and detentions,
the deprivation of liberty, abduction, torture and
inhumane, cruel and degrading treatment. We condemn
in the strongest terms those practices against civilians

by any party.

Secondly, we welcome the Russian-Turkish

agreement on the ceasefire in Idlib - whose
population is around 3 million, including 1 million
children - which averted the immediate threat

of a humanitarian catastrophe there. We applaud
the pre-positioning measures taken by the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners of humanitarian
assistance and food to places in Idlib in preparation for
the worst possible situation. In that regard, we stress
the importance of the sustainability of the ceasefire
in Idlib, and throughout Syria, to enable access to
humanitarian assistance and the evacuation of injured
persons, in accordance with international law and as
stipulated in resolution 2401 (2018).

Thirdly, we are also concerned with developments
in other parts of Syria. In Deir ez-Zor there
are thousands of civilians affected by military
operations. In that context, we call upon all parties to
strengthen the protection of civilians during military
operations against the terrorist group Da'esh. We
express our concern about the continuing danger of
explosives - including mines and improvised explosive
devices - in Raqqa, especially for the 152,000 people
who have returned there.

Fourthly, unfortunately, the reporting period
witnessed a continuation of one of the most egregious
violations of international law, namely, the continued
targeting of hospitals and health facilities. We condemn
attacks against hospitals, as well as attacks targeting
critical civilian facilities, and remind all parties of
resolution 2286 (2016) and the specific obligations
under international humanitarian law to respect and
protect medical and humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, as well as their means of
transport and equipment, and hospitals and other
medical facilities.

The report also refers to a number of cases where
schools have been targeted, resulting in the suspension
of school activity. We remind the parties of their
obligations under international law, the need to comply
with resolution 2427 (2015), on children and armed
conflict, and not to target schools.

There are still significant challenges for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria, as stated
in the Secretary-General's report. Although 1.5 million
people remain in hard-to-reach areas, inter-agency
convoys have not been approved since 16 August.
We call upon the Syrian authorities to cooperate
with the United Nations to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches those most in need 4 especially
in the areas that have come back under Government
control - through the various humanitarian modalities.
Only about 30 per cent of the population with acute
needs in those hard-to-reach areas are today assisted
by needs-based, principled and sustained humanitarian
assistance. A major reason for that is non-approval by
Syrian authorities ofrequests for permission for access.
We emphasize the need for humanitarian assistance to
reach those in need in accordance with humanitarian
principles, including the principles of impartiality and
non-discrimination. In that context, we welcome the
reference in the recent joint statement agreed by Turkey,
Russia, France and Germany, which underscored the
need to ensure the rapid, safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian organizations throughout Syria
and immediate humanitarian assistance to reach all
people in need in order to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people.
In that connection, we must recall what the Secretary
General stated in his report - that cross-border
humanitarian assistance provides an indispensable
lifeline for hundreds of thousands of people across
Syria. Cross-border aid is a vital and important part of
the humanitarian response in Syria, as evidenced by its
reach of 620,000 people in September.

We would also like to express our deep concern
about the horrible situation in Rukban, where more
than 45,000 people are suffering acute shortages of
food and humanitarian and medical supplies. Let us
heed the calls from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations system.
We call on all parties to facilitate immediate delivery
to Rukban. Anything short of delivery is unacceptable.

As co-penholders of the Syria humanitarian file and
some of the largest donors to the Syrian humanitarian
response plan, Sweden and Kuwait will ensure
that the Council closely follows the humanitarian
developments in Syria. Thirteen million Syrians still
need humanitarian assistance; more than 5 million of
them are children. Regrettably, it pains us to know
that the humanitarian catastrophe will continue in the
near and medium term. The humanitarian situation and
suffering will be alleviated only by achieving progress
on the political track through a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

