Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United States
delegation for convening this open debate.

Today's debate is certainly of special importance
to all States throughout the world, in particular those of
North Africa and the Sahara and Sahel regions, since
border security is a major challenge for all of them.
Trafficking in all kinds of goods across the borders of
those countries is rooted far back in history. Many
people in those countries live off illegal trading carried
out by organized groups. However, it must be said that
trafficking has now become an alarming phenomenon

that genuinely threatens the security of those States,
Libya first and foremost among them. The activities of
illegal organized groups are no longer limited to
trafficking in drugs or persons; they are deployed as a
major weapon in the competition among traffickers.

A ministerial meeting of the States concerned
held in my country last March produced the Tripoli
plan of action on cooperation among the countries of
the region, which was subsequently submitted to the
Secretariat for publication as an official document of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. We
regret the fact that, to date, the plan has not still been
issued.

What we have seen take place in Mali in recent
days is truly alarming. The declaration of the Azawad
State in the north not only means the ethnic division of
that African country, but also constitutes a real threat to
the security of all States in North Africa and the Sahel
and Sahara regions. We are all aware that extremist and
terrorist armed groups have coalesced in the areas
controlled by those separatists, who were trained and
provided with weapons and funds by the Al-Qadhafi
regime. Al-Qadhafi recruited thousands of mercenaries
from the four corners of the world in order to help him
to suppress the Libyan people, who had risen up
against his regime. He spent money on them, armed
them to the teeth and even went as far as granting them
Libyan citizenship.

After the collapse of his regime, those same
mercenaries fled and took weapons and money with
them to neighbouring African States. They are
currently working with the last remaining supporters of
the Libyan regime, in particular with Al-Qadhafi's son
Saadi, who is living in Niger, so as to generate anarchy,
murder and instability in Libya and neighbouring
countries. In fact, they are cooperating with Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, as well as with extremist
groups in desert areas. They have also made public
their plans to destabilize the region. The interview
given to the Al-Arabiya network by Al-Qadhafi's son
on 10 February is clear proof of that. A journalist who
recently Visited Niger met with Saadi Al-Qadhafi and
some of his close military supporters also indicated the
same thing, stating that Al-Qadhafi had stated that he
was planning to establish an Islamic State in the
region.
Securing borders in that very sensitive region is a
basic national responsibility. It also requires that States

of the region and the international community make
efforts to prevent terrorism, trafficking and illegal
migration. It is our hope that the competent bodies of
the United Nations will accord due importance to these
problems. It is also our hope that the United Nations
will support the Tripoli plan of action, which was
adopted by the countries of the region, by providing
assistance in the consolidation of institutions and
capacity-building in the countries concerned, because
security in that region, the Sahel and Sahara and North
African countries, is a fundamental pillar of
international security.

Libya, whose people defeated Al-Qadhafi and his
regime, cannot on their own protect their lengthy
borders against illicit cross-border movements,
particularly clandestine migration and illicit trafficking
in weapons and drugs. To that end, we are striving to
promote closer cooperation with our neighbours and
are mobilizing all our potential to address that threat.

We therefore call on all States and international
organizations to cooperate with the Libyan authorities
in pursuing Al-Qadhafi's sons and his die-hard
supporters and mercenaries, because they are the main
factors of instability in the region. They must be
arrested and brought to justice. We hope that all States
that are hosting on their territory senior officials of the
Al-Qadhafi regime realize that they are hosting time
bombs that could blow up at any time on their own
territory, with very negative consequences for their
stability followed by serious repercussions on their
neighbouring countries.

Border control and the prevention of illegal
cross-border trafficking is the joint responsibility of
neighbouring States. It requires the promotion of
cooperation and coordination as well as the exchange
of information and experience so as to ensure common
security.

