Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this timely
debate. I am also grateful to Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson; Mr. Christophe Deloire, from
Reporters Without Borders; and Ms. Mariane Pearl,
from the Daniel Pearl Foundation, for their informative
presentations.

Brazil strongly condemns all deliberate attacks
against media professionals, regardless of their
motivation. As we know, international humanitarian
law enshrines the safeguard of both accredited war
correspondents, who are entitled to prisoner-of-war
status, and other journalists, who benefit from the
same comprehensive rights and protections granted to
civilians in situations of armed conflict.

By adopting resolution 1738 (2006), the Council
urged States and all other parties to an armed conflict
to prevent violations of international humanitarian
law against civilians, including journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel. In areas
controlled by non-State actors and terrorist groups, this
issue acquires a special dimension, as pointed out in
the concept note presented by Lithuania (S/2015/307, annex). We should redouble our efforts to ensure
accountability for perpetrators of crimes against
journalists and to bring to justice those who broadcast
incitement to genocide, crimes against humanity and
other serious violations.

While the safety of all media professionals is a
matter of concern, there is a fundamental distinction to
be made between, on the one hand, threats to journalists
who report from armed conflicts and, on the other, acts
of violence against journalists in circumstances that do
not constitute armed conflicts.

When media professionals are endangered by
a situation that constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, the Council has a clear role to
play; conversely, other bodies of the United Nations
are responsible for promoting a secure environment
for journalists in times of peace. Positive examples of
the latter domain include the General Assembly, which
has proclaimed 2 November as the International Day
to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists; the
Human Rights Council and its resolutions on the safety
of journalists; and UNESCO, which plays a key role
in implementing the United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
The Security Council should respect these different
initiatives and observe the necessary discipline in this
regard.

The safety and security of journalists can also
be jeopardized by indiscriminate surveillance of
their professional communication. Media personnel
need to protect the privacy, integrity and anonymity
of their sources, particularly in conditions of armed
conflict. Besides violating fundamental human
rights, undermining the foundations of democracy
and challenging the sovereignty of States, secret
surveillance programmes also endanger those whose
very survival may depend on the confidentiality of their
identity or sources, such as investigative journalists
reporting from war-torn regions or areas controlled by
terrorist groups.

Let me recall the latest report (A/69/397) of the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, Ben Emmerson. The document
underlines the fact that bulk access technology is
indiscriminately corrosive of online privacy and
therefore poses a direct and ongoing challenge to an
established norm of international law.

Brazil commends the Human Rights Council for
establishing the post of a Special Rapporteur on the
right to privacy, focusing on the challenges arising
from the digital age and new technologies. We were
honoured to facilitate and introduce Human Rights
Council resolution 28/16, which established the Special
Rapporteur on the right to privacy.

The first victim of war is truth, and it is always
important to distinguish journalism from propaganda. A
free, independent and pluralistic media is not only vital
to upholding democracy and promoting human rights;
it is also an indispensable instrument to disseminate
information and alert public opinion to the tragedy of
war and its humanitarian consequences. Accomplishing
this essential duty requires shielding journalists from
harassment and harm. Yet the assignments of media
professionals in armed conflicts are increasingly
perilous, as highlighted by the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the safety of journalism and
the issue of impunity (A/69/268), and far too many
journalists have been killed in the line of duty.

In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its commitment
to the vital endeavour of protecting all journalists
and media personnel in situations of armed conflict.
We all have a stake in the well-being of journalists,
who selflessly risk their lives in order to inform the
international community, including the Security
Council itself, about the complex realities of armed
conflict.

Brazil fully endorses the initiatives of the Security
Council, within its Charter responsibilities and
in coherence with the efforts of other multilateral
bodies, to that end. Allow me to quote the Secretary-
General's statement marking World Press Freedom
Day, celebrated on 3 May: "Let us honour the memory
of those who lost their lives, and intensify our efforts
to uphold the fundamental human right to freedom of
expression and press freedom".

