Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing,
which was, as always, very precise and informative.

Let me turn first to the situation on the ground,
which is extremely worrisome. In recent days, we
have once again learned about a potential escalation of
violence in Gaza. The firing ofrockets into Israel, which
fortunately did not harm anyone, must be condemned
in the strongest possible terms. We have also observed
other activities, such as the use of incendiary balloons
launched from Gaza. In this context, let me reiterate
that we recognize the legitimate right of Israel to self-
defence and to ensuring the security ofits citizens. Such
acts represent a dangerous escalation that could quickly
spiral out of control. Hamas and other actors in Gaza
must refrain from violent actions and provocations
against Israel, including the aforementioned incendiary
kites and balloons launched with the aim of damaging
Israeli property and assets.

We should uphold the existing international
consensus that the only way forward for the Palestinians
and Israel is the negotiation of a two-State solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza
living side by side in peace and security, with borders
negotiated on the basis of the 1967 lines and mutually
agreed land swaps. Today our main aim should be
to restore a political horizon for the resumption of a
meaningful peace process to that end. A resolution of
all final status issues, including Jerusalem, should be
found through the negotiated two-State solution.

We must be frank with ourselves - on the political
track, we have to acknowledge that the process is
currently almost entirely blocked. The intra-Palestinian
division only aggravates the situation of the people
of Gaza and weakens the national aspirations of the
Palestinians. There is an urgent need to relaunch the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process. Everyone must
be committed to the Egyptian efforts in this respect.

Poland has long supported and continues to
support parameters for a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict that are based on respect
for international principles enshrined in international
law. Regrettably, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate, and the idea of a two-State solution
continues to be dismantled piece by piece, in particular
by an expansion of Israeli settlements. We are very
close to the point where it could be difficult, if not
impossible, to establish a viable Palestinian State.

Poland's position on the Israeli settlement policy
in occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged; it is also the European Union's well-
known stance. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. It not only erodes the viability of the
two-State solution and the prospects for a lasting peace,
but also - we have to be honest with ourselves - it is an
obstacle to peace. The adoption ofresolution 2334 (2016)
provided a strong reaffirmation of the international
consensus on this matter. The resolution underlined
the illegality of the Israeli settlements, stressing that
the cessation of settlement activities is essential for
salvaging the two-State solution. We are also very
worried about planned demolitions of the Palestinian
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, and we continue to ask
Israel to abandon these plans entirely.

Allow me to conclude by praising the collective
efforts of the international community to allow the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to fulfil its mandate
to provide essential relief, development and protection
services to Palestinian refugees and those displaced
by the conflict. In our opinion, UNRWA remains a
key contributor, providing, as it does, humanitarian
assistance, stability and security in the region. In this
context, we look forward to the UNRWA conference to
be held at the end of this month in New York.

