The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the military coup d'etat in Sierra Leone,
especially when the United Nations is assisting the
process of reconciliation in that country. It strongly
deplores this attempt to overthrow the democratically
elected government and calls for an immediate
restoration of constitutional order. The Council takes
note of the communique of the Central Organ of the
Organization of African Unity Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution of
26 May 1997, and underlines the imperative
necessity of implementing the Abidjan Agreement,
which continues to serve as a Viable framework for
peace, stability and reconciliation in Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
Violence which has been inflicted on both local and
expatriate communities, in particular United Nations
and other international personnel serving in the
country. It recalls the obligations of all concerned to
ensure the protection of United Nations and other
international personnel in the country, and calls for
an end to the looting of premises and equipment
belonging to the United Nations and international aid
agencies."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l997/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

