Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes today's unanimous adoption of resolution
2387 (2017), renewing the mandate ofthe United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). In a
context where the security and humanitarian situation
has been deteriorating and taking a heavy toll on the
civilian population, Blue Helmets and humanitarian
workers alike, we welcome the fact that through it the
Security Council is demonstrating its full and steadfast
support both to MINUSCA and the Central African
Republic authorities.

Before the negotiations that concluded today,
France had asserted that the Security Council could not
afford to take the risk of allowing the Central African
Republic to relapse into a crisis as tragic as the one that
it endured from the end of2012 to the beginning of2014.
On the contrary, we believed that the Council had to put
its full weight behind halting the spiral of violence and
recreate positive momentum in the country. That is the
thrust of the important resolution that France proposed
and we have just adopted. I would like to stress three
points concerning it.

First, the resolution delivers support for MINUSCA
that we hope will be decisive, with an increase in the
troop ceiling of 900 military personnel that everyone
has been waiting for and that will provide MINUSCA
with more resources and greater flexibility, enabling it
to improve its ability to deliver on its mandate to protect
civilians. MINUSCA has already shown that when
necessary it can act proactively and robustly to protect
civilian populations, especially women and children,
who are particularly vulnerable, against the threat of
armed groups. We hope that MINUSCA will be able to
continue those efforts within the framework of the new
resolution and therefore with a strengthened capacity.

With regard to the protection of civilians, we
would also like to revisit the importance of effectively
combating cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and
to reiterate our full support for the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy and for the voluntary compact
arrived at between the United Nations and Member
States. In that regard, today's resolution encourages both
the United Nations and troop- and police-contributing
countries to build on and consolidate the work already
undertaken to prevent such abuses, and to ensure that
the perpetrators are not left unpunished.

Secondly, at the request of the Secretary-General,
the resolution also enables MINUSCA to prioritize its
mandate better by focusing on the critical challenges
of peacekeeping, which are the protection of civilians,
which I just talked about; support for the peace and
reconciliation process under the leadership of the
Central African Republic authorities and jointly with
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation; and
the delivery of humanitarian aid. The prioritization

of the mandate will be accompanied by improved
sequencing of various other of MINUSCA's tasks so as
to enable the Mission to fulfil its mandate as efficiently
as possible.

Thirdly, the resolution is a first step in the
support that MINUSCA can give to the gradual
and controlled redeployment of the Central African
armed forces, trained by the European Union Training
Mission-Central African Republic, with a view to their
long-term re-establishment. The Secretary-General's
recommendations, which we expect to see by May,
will be very useful for that. This is a critical issue,
because it is through that support to the redeployment
of the Central African internal security forces that the
Security Council can affirm its support to the Central
African Government in implementing its strategy for
restoring the State's authority throughout its territory.

France, as the penholder for the Central African
Republic dossier, would like to once again thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
the Central African Republic, Mr. Parfait Onanga,
for their commitment to peace and reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. I also thank all the
delegations of the Security Council for their work.

Of course, as we all know, the crisis in the Central
African Republic cannot be solved by a security
response alone and without resolute commitment on
the part of all the stakeholders concerned. That is why
the resolution reaffirms the Security Council's full
support to President Touadera and encourages him to
continue the efforts he has made so far to facilitate
national reconciliation. It is also why it supports the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, with a
view to reaching a comprehensive, inclusive political
agreement that does not ignore any issues, including
the fight against impunity.

Despite the difficulties that we are all aware of,
together we can succeed in the Central African Republic
if we remain focused on working to achieve lasting
peace there. That is the thrust of today's resolution,
which must now be implemented in full.

