Mr. Doucoure (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all,
Sir, I would like to extend the sincere congratulations
of my delegation upon the accession of your country,
Australia, to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I also welcome the United
States initiative taken to convene this meeting, whose
aim is to pool our efforts, our minds and our experiences
with a view to containing and eradicating this serious
disease, which from every point of view has a negative
impact on the economies of directly affected countries,
including Mali today.

I also wish to congratulate Mr. David Nabarro,
Mr. Anthony Banbury and Mr. Thomas Mauget
for their leadership and for the quality of their
respective briefings. In the same vein, my delegation
wishes to thank the United Nations, through
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for the great
mobilization and the demonstration of solidarity so
promptly manifested towards countries affected by
the Ebola virus. Among others steps in that direction
was the creation of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response and the recent visit of
Mr. Banbury, Head of that Mission, to Guinea and Mali.
My delegation also wishes to express the gratitude of
the people and the Government of Mali to our bilateral
and multilateral partners, including subregional and
regional African bodies, in their determination to
continue their efforts in the fight against the disease.

Unfortunately, my country recorded its first
confirmed case ofthe Ebola virus disease on 23 October,
in the Kayes region, in the west of the country. The
patient, a two-year-old girl, reached Bamako from a
friendly neighbouring country on 20 October after the
funeral of her father. The little girl and her grandmother,
who was travelling with her, made a four-hour stopover
with a family in Bamako before going on to Kayes. As
soon as the first symptoms of fever appeared in the
little girl on 22 October, her family had her admitted
to a clinic and then to the Kayes regional hospital as a
suspect case.

The teams sent from Bamako to bolster regional
services made the necessary tests and analyzed the
samples, which were positive. Even though she was cared
for immediately, the little girl unfortunately passed
away. Faced with that situation, urgent provisions were
taken to identify the following: first, the host family
in Bamako; secondly, the travelling companions of the
little girl and her grandmother; thirdly, the medical staff
who had first contact; and, fourthly, the neighbours of
the residence in Kayes.

All those people were cared for and placed under
strict monitoring. The transportation vehicle was
also found and disinfected. On 10 November, another
patient from a neighbouring country was admitted to a
private clinic in Bamako. The results of the blood test
performed on the two health workers who had contact
with the patient proved positive for the Ebola virus.
Unfortunately, the patient and both health workers all
died of the same disease.

In accordance with its commitments to transparency,
the Government of Mali provides daily reports at the
national and internationals through the Ministry of
Health and Public Hygiene on the eradication of the
Ebola virus in Mali. As of 20 November, the situation
is as follows.

The number of persons who had contact with the
disease counted by the health services and who are
being monitored is 310 in total. Of those contacts, two
new suspects were identified and are undergoing tests
at present. Those linked to the Kayes case are no longer
being monitored, as the emergence of illness occurs
within 21 days. Those contacts are no longer counted,
hence the drop in the number of contact persons in
relation to previous situations. As of today, therefore,
there have been four deaths linked to the patient
coming from the neighbouring country, and one death
in Kayes - the little girl oftwo - a total of five deaths.

In terms of preventive measures, the Ministry of
Health and Public Hygiene has has a contingency plan
in place for several months, which has been distributed
to technical and financial partners. That plan includes
the following elements: the appointment of a person
with proven expertise as coordinator of the emergency
operational centre against Ebola; the strengthening of
health controls at land borders and airports through
the setting up of quarantines; the opening of two hot
lines for questions from the public; the activation of
standing committees to manage diseases at all levels;
the creation of a coordinating committee for prevention
activities and the care of Ebola; and the establishment
of a rapid response team. In addition, we have stepped
up epidemiological surveillance throughout the entire
country, particularly in the border regions with Guinea,
Senegal, Cote d'Ivoire and Mauritania. We have also
established a rapid response team and put in place
provisions for awareness-raising and information that
urge people to avoid unnecessary travel to the epidemic
areas and to observe health and safety measures. Along
the same lines, an isolation centre has been set up in
Kouremale, on the border with Guinea, which will
be supported by the health services of the armed and
security forces.

As one can see, the Government of Mali, despite its
limited resources, is firmly committed to cooperation
with all segments of society to contain the disease and
expel it from our region, which, one must recognize,
is facing all kinds of innumerable challenges. We call
on the international community for more substantial
and coordinated mobilization in support of the efforts
of affected and neighbouring countries for preventive
reasons.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Government of
Mali, I would like to reiterate our commitment to fully
cooperate with the international community, including
the United Nations, the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the European
Union, other affected countries, as well as bilateral and
multilateral partners, in order to rid our planet of the
spectre of this dreadful disease, which is a true threat
to international peace and security.

