Mr. Madeira: I greet the Security Council on
behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, and wish to thank the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, for their continued commitment
to supporting the African Union and other international
efforts aimed at eliminating the threat of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). I also wish to express our
gratitude for the concrete United Nations support
being channeled through its missions, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); its offices - the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), the United Nations Office to the African
Union (UNOAU) and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic;
and humanitarian agencies in order to respond to the
threat of the LRA and its impact on the countries
affected, particularly the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of
South Sudan. That support has effectively enhanced
implementation of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army.

I wish to stress that although successive military
operations have largely disabled the LRA command,
the rebels' ability to commit atrocities against civilians
has remained undiminished. The 11 June report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of UNOCA and
on areas affected by the LRA (S/2012/421) accurately
depicts the current situation vis-a-vis the LRA.
However, I wish to underline the efforts made so far
by some key partners of the African Union in the fight
against the LRA.

The ongoing United States-backed military
operations, especially in the Central African Republic,
have sustained pressure on the LRA, keeping the rebels
constantly on the run. Those operations contributed to the
capture by Ugandan troops on 12 May of the self-styled
Major General Caesar Acellam Otto, a one-time number
four in the LRA command hierarchy; the capture by
Central African Republic troops on 22 May of two LRA
combatants; and the killing on 16 June of two other
LRA combatants by Ugandan troops, who also rescued
seven civilians who had been abducted. Furthermore,
MONUSCO, the United States Government and various
non-governmental organizations are supporting these
actions with psychological operations in the form of
come-home radio messages and air-dropped leaflets in
local languages, aimed at encouraging mass defections
by LRA elements. When it becomes fully operational,
the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
is expected to bolster those efforts, particularly through
military operations, so as to heighten pressure on the
LRA, leading to more captures, surrenders, defections
and the eventual elimination of the entire group.

At this juncture, allow me to acknowledge the
enormous support and commitment the European Union
has demonstrated towards the Regional Cooperation
Initiative on the LRA. The European Union has been
providing funds to support the African Union (AU)
efforts to eliminate the LRA since 2010.

This meeting gives me the opportunity to apprise
the Council of some key issues concerning the Regional
Cooperation Initiative on the LRA. The first ministerial
meeting of the joint coordination mechanism on the
LRA, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on 8 May, adopted
concrete measures and made important decisions on
the next steps to be taken in implementing the African
Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative. They
include the full operationalization of the regional task
force headquarters and the three sectors; coordination
between the task force and the United Nations missions
and offices on the ground; and the convening of a
support forum to mobilize resources for the Cooperation
Initiative. In addition, the 321st meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council, held in Addis Ababa on
22 May, extended authorization for the implementation
of the Initiative for 12 months.

The major objectives of the African Union-led
Initiative are strengthening the capacity of the affected
countries to effectively respond to and neutralize the
LRA threat; facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the affected communities and creating
an environment conducive to the stabilization and
rehabilitation of the affected areas. Those objectives,
particularly the latter two - relating to humanitarian
assistance, the protection of civilians, support to
former combatants for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration, and the
long-term recovery needs of those affected - resonate
with those of the United Nations system on the ground
and have thus been well articulated in the comprehensive
regional strategy on the LRA.

The key components and structures of the initiative
are the joint coordination mechanism - an ad hoc
political body composed of the Ministers of Defence of
the four LRA-affected countries, with a secretariat in
Bangui and chaired by the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security - whose task is dealing with
the general political aspects, providing strategic
direction and coordinating with all stakeholders in
the fight against the LRA; a 5,000-strong force with
its headquarters in Yambio, South Sudan; and three
operational sectors, in Nzara in South Sudan, Dungu in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Obo in the
Central African Republic.

Regarding the status of the implementation of the
Regional Cooperation Initiative, we can state that since
the authorization in November 2011 of the African
Union-led Initiative by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the following efforts have been
accomplished.

The command and control architecture of the
regional task force, which had not been upon decided
and thus remained a potential impediment to operations,
was adopted on 8 May at the first ministerial meeting
of the Joint Coordination Mechanism. The regional
task force headquarters has been fully staffed with 30
officers, including a civilian humanitarian adviser, a
civilian human rights adviser and a police officer to
provide advice on the rule of law and ensure that the
activities of our soldiers in the LRA-affected areas and
their interaction with the affected communities and
LRA elements are conducted in strict respect of human
rights and the rule of law. They have all undergone
induction.

A joint team comprising military officers from the
African Union regional task force headquarters, the
UNOAU, the European Union and the United States of
America are currently conducting a technical assessment
mission in the sectors to evaluate their capabilities,
challenges and needs for effective operations. The
process for the adoption of major technical support
documents, notably standard operating procedures,
rules of engagement, common measures on the
treatment of LRA combatants and victims, and policy
on civilian protection are on track.

On the political and diplomatic front, I have
undertaken jointly with my colleague the Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou Moussa, to
encourage the missions to engage the leadership of the
LRA-affected countries to maintain their commitment
or, where necessary, urge them to renew cooperation on
the LRA issue.

At the sidelines of those missions, we have often
engaged representatives of cooperating international
partners to galvanize international support for the
regional cooperation initiative against LRA. We also
undertook a joint mission to N'Djamena in April,
within our strategic objective of seeking the diplomatic
support ofthe neighbours of the LRA-affected countries
to block the possible escape of the LRA members into
new areas in those countries. Consultations are ongoing
with authorities of the Republic of the Sudan for a
similar mission to Khartoum.

The effective implementation of the African
Union-led initiative is, however, being undermined
by certain critical challenges, for which we appeal
for international support. Those challenges include
predictability of financial and material resources and
logistical support for the Joint Coordination Mechanism
secretariat and the Office of the Special Envoy for
the LRA Issue, the regional task force headquarters
operations and the operational units tracking the LRA
in the respective sectors.

The operational units require concrete support
in terms of appropriate training, harmonized
communication systems, food rations, medical support,
air and ground mobility, munitions, fuel and lubricants,
inter alia, to enable them to undertake robust military
operations against the LRA so as to induce defections
or the surrender and capture of LRA combatants as well
as the rescue of LRA abductees.

I wish to inform the Security Council that, on
22 November 2011, the African Union Peace and Security
Council declared the LRA a terrorist organization and
requested the Security Council to do likewise. I take this
opportunity to formally request the Security Council,
through you, Mr. President, to consider the request ofthe
African Union Peace and Security Council and declare
the LRA a terrorist organization. I also wish to echo
the African Union Peace and Security Council request
of 22 May 2012 to the Security Council to consider
modalities for enhancing its support to the African
Union-led international efforts, inter alia, by adjusting
the mandates of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the LRA-affected countries. In that regard,
I wish to reiterate the need to make available an air
mobility network within the three sectors.

I wish to appeal further to the Security Council for
support for resources to mitigate the aforementioned
challenges to the effective functioning of the Joint
Coordination Mechanism secretariat and Office of
the African Union Special Envoy for the LRA Issue
in Bangui, operations of the regional task force/joint
operations centre headquarters in Yambio as well as
the sector headquarters and their operational units in
Nzara, Dungu and Obo.

We applaud the continued political engagement
of the United States on the LRA issue, particularly
for having deployed the approximately 100 military
personnel to the region in October 2011 to provide
logistical assistance, planning and intelligence. We
thank the European Union for the substantial and
sustained support to the African Union-led regional
cooperation initiative against LRA. That support has
proven to be essential in the operationalization of the
different structures of the initiative. We also recognize
and appreciate the efforts of the Members of Parliament
of the United Kingdom who debated the LRA issue and
urged their Government to do everything in its power
to arrest Kony. We welcome those efforts and request
more from other States Members of the United Nations,
so as to further enhance the current global momentum
against Kony and the LRA. In that regard, I urge the
Security Council to help us deny the LRA any external
sources of support, including safe haven for their
sympathizers who continue to issue statements from the
diaspora in support of the terrorist group.

