I should like at the outset to welcome the holding of this open debate under the chairmanship of Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany, which once again reflects the particular interest that the Security Council accords to the issue of climate-related security risks. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General as well as our briefers for the day, Colonel Mahamadou Magagi, Director of the Centre National d'Etudes Strategiques et de Securite of the Niger, and Ms. Coral Pasisi, Director of the Sustainable Pacific Consultancy; and youth representatives for their important communications. There is no need to reiterate here the dramatic impacts of climate change on our lives. In addition to the oscillation between two extremes, drought on the one hand and floods on the other, we are seeing the occurrence of sporadic, intermittent natural disasters of a very high intensity. Those phenomena exacerbate the major challenges of the twenty-first century: poverty, hunger, food insecurity, migration, internal displacement, economic collapse, intercommunity conflicts and violent extremism, among others. In that regard, the presence of eight of the 10 largest multilateral peace operations in countries of the Sahel and the Middle East, regions highly exposed to the impacts of climate change, is hardly surprising. It is also no coincidence that the majority of the 27 countries most at risk of a food crisis due to the coronavirus disease, according to a report dated 17 July 2020 issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme, are hotbeds of tension that were already grappling with extreme weather conditions. I can add to that list, without being alarmist, the swarms of desert locusts that have formed in Kenya and Ethiopia since last January and that could move towards West Africa in the coming weeks, thus threatening to reach a part of the Sahel that is already in turmoil owing to multiple crises. It goes without saying, therefore, that climate change has a corrosive effect on international peace and security, the preservation of which will now depend to a large extent not only on our collective actions in favour of the climate, but also on our efforts to avoid competition for access to natural resources, which have become scarce in several parts of the world. That competition is the trigger for and even the catalyst of conflicts in which the opposing parties often use as arguments the sell-off of their resources, their monopolization by a foreign power or, quite simply, their mismanagement and unequal distribution. However, above and beyond conflicts resulting from the competition for resources, we must recognize that the impacts of climate change directly threaten our very presence on this Earth: hence the notion of planetary security. Five questions were put to Member States to enable them to provide the Security Council with information on the implications of climate change for international peace and security and to offer their contributions and reflections on this subject. They were also invited to share their national experiences regarding the issue. I would like to regroup those questions into one larger question: what role should the United Nations play in hotbeds of tension that are directly or indirectly caused by the impacts of climate change? Or, more specifically, what form of conflict- related preventive diplomacy incorporating climate change should the United Nations system adopt? To answer that question, three basic ideas come to mind. First, it seems important to me to work towards a better harmonization of positions on high-stakes issues, including climate and security, within the Security Council and at the level of the United Nations system. Secondly, we must avoid at all costs the possibility of climate and security initiatives supplanting the implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as well as that of all related conventions, which constitute the multilateral reference framework for the fight against climate change. Last but not least, climate financing must be fully operational, especially in terms of adaptation, because it is an effective way to support and maintain activities aimed at combating climate change and, by extension, preventing conflicts. I would also like to take this opportunity to recall that the mobilization of resources to replenish the Green Climate Fund after 2020 must be a priority in order to allow developing countries to adapt to climate change, with a view to promoting their resilience. To conclude, I would like to share with the Council some conclusions from the subregional meeting on multilateral cooperation to address climate-related security and developmentrisks, in particular in the Sahel, which my country co-organized with Norway in Dakar on 3 and 4 March 2020, as part of the African and Nordic countries' initiative to strengthen multilateral cooperation and a rules-based international order. On that occasion, the following factors, inter alia, were recognized. First, there is a need to integrate the climate dimension into the peace- security-development link, in particular in the context of efforts to promote peace and security in the Sahel, without overlooking the gender dimension. Women are not only the main victims of climate-related risks but also key players in sustainable development and vectors of peace. Secondly, cooperation must be strengthened between the United Nations, the African Union and the regional economic commissions on climate-related security risks. Thirdly, we must invest in resilient agricultural jobs to address conflict and climate change, with a special focus on young people. Fourthly, we must urgently adopt an inclusive strategy that duly considers the real concerns of the affected populations in order to work alongside them to bolster their resilience. I would be remiss if I did not mention one example of successful cooperation in the management of transboundary waters among four States: Mali, Mauritania, Guinea and my country, Senegal. Our countries make up the Organisation pour la mise en valeur du fleuve Senegal (OMVS), which assessed the risk of conflict that could arise from the demand for water resources whose availability is become increasingly threatened by climate change. We therefore issued the declaration of OMVS Heads of State on 11 March 2015, in Conakry, on climate change and the implementation of the specific provision to be applied in the framework of the second phase of the Senegal River Basin Integrated Water Resources Management Project and the Senegal River Basin Multi-purpose Water Resources Development Project for the period 2014-2021. Senegal has also taken transboundary biodiversity management initiatives, the most prominent of which are the Senegal Delta Transboundary Biosphere Reserve, which became a UNESCO-designated site in 2012 at the request of Senegal and Mauritania, and the Niokolo-Koba and Badiar National Parks between Senegal and Guinea.
