Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by firmly
condemning and offering the heartfelt condolences of
Spain for the terrible attack that took place two days
ago against the Sardar Daud Khan hospital in Kabul.
We reiterate our full solidarity with Afghanistan in its
fight against terrorism.

I also recall the universal obligation to respect the
principles and norms of international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians in situations of conflict,
in particular the mandate of resolution 2286 (2016)
on the obligation to safeguard, always and without
exception in situations of armed conflict, the integrity
of health personnel and humanitarian personnel
dedicated exclusively to medical missions, as well as
their means of transport and equipment, hospitals and
other health facilities.

I thank the Special Representative Yamamoto and
Ms. Sima Samar for their briefings, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.

I fully endorse the statement delivered by the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union.

We particularly welcome the presence here today
of Ms. Samar, in her capacity as Chairperson of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
We admire her personal journey as a committed and
active advocate for the rights of women and girls in
Afghanistan, and we highly value her very important
role and the work of the institution she chairs so
ably. The promotion and protection of human rights
are inseparable from the maintenance of peace and
the achievement of social progress in every society.
Afghanistan is no exception.

Support for Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been
one of Spain's priorities during our recently conclude
two years as a non-permanent member of the Council.
We are convinced that the Council must maintain its
traditional spirit of commitment and consensus on
this issue. Such consensual support for UNAMA and
the authorities and people of Afghanistan is essential
to help the Afghans, who are the true owners of their
future, to overcome the conflict and advance along the
path of progress and reconciliation. Spain encourages
them to continue along this line.

It is only necessary and fair to acknowledge the
remarkable progress made by Afghanistan, such as
in its anti-corruption actions and policies for the
promotion and protection of women's rights, whose
implementation and dissemination still require strong
and sustained efforts. We must nonetheless recognize,
as does the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/189),
that security situation remains grave and has even
suffered setbacks last year and early in this. Spain and
the international community as a whole support the
Government and the Afghan people in their efforts in
the face of these grave challenges.
The unity of all political actors around these
efforts is essential to the success of those efforts.In
that regard, the electoral process whose foundations are
currently being laid will be decisive. We therefore call
on all political and social actors to demonstrate their
commitment to democracy and progress and to rise to
the vision that all Afghans expect and deserve.

But together with the consolidation of a democratic
system of governance, Afghanistan needs peace and
reconciliation in an increasingly more urgent way.
All members of the international community have
important contributions to make in that regard, but
the input of the countries of the region is irreplaceable
and essential. That is why we appeal to all countries
neighbours and friends of Afghanistan to redouble their
commitment to the stability of the country and to work
for reconciliation with renewed energy and decision.

The statistics concerning the terrible effects of
conflict civilians, as contained in the Secretary-
General's report, must make us all lead to reflect,
encourage us to maintain our solidarity, renew our
determination to support Afghanistan's efforts and,
above all and apart from other considerations, resolve
us to spare no effort in favour of peace, reconciliation,
stability and progress for Afghanistan and the Afghans.

