Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): Let me begin
by joining previous speakers in congratulating you,
Madam President, Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, and
your delegation on your assumption of this important
role and wishing you success in steering the work of
the Council during your presidency. My delegation
also aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia on behalf of the African Union.

Madam President, South Africa commends you for
giving special attention to this important topic during
your presidency of the Council. The importance of
developing strategic relations between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations
cannot be overemphasized. It is evident that to
succeed in the implementation of its mandate, the
Security Council has to forge a strong partnership with
regional and subregional organizations, particularly in
promoting international peace and security.

Even more important is the realization that while
such organizations may not have sufficient financial
resources to resolve conflicts in their own regions,
they remain a reservoir of critical knowledge about
the nature of such conflicts, including their evolution
and dynamics, their understanding of the parties to the
conflict and other fundamentals that may be essential
for conflict resolution and prevention.

In the case ofAfrica, new conflict trends, occasioned
by intra-State conflicts, have warranted the increased
involvement of the African Union (AU), which has a
distinct comparative advantage in addressing conflicts
in the often complex environments on the continent.

In 2012, South Africa piloted the adoption of
resolution 2033 (2012), thus building on resolution
1809 (2008), which was also adopted during South
Africa's presidency of the Security Council, in April
2008. Those resolutions encourage an improvement in
the regular interaction, consultation and coordination
between the two bodies on matters of mutual interest.
Moreover, the strategic thrusts of the resolutions are
the promotion of political and legislative coherence
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council in dealing with African peace and
security challenges.

Over time we have seen the benefits of the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union and its subregional organizations. At
the operational level, the Secretariat has been active in
supporting the AU's Peace and Security Architecture
through the implementation of the 10-year capacity-
building programme. Both organizations also benefit
from the deployment of joint technical assessment
missions. A further example of such cooperation is
the hybrid model, as seen in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the African-led
International Support mission in Mali, the African
Union Mission in Somalia, and, recently, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) Force
Intervention Brigade.

The debate we are holding today becomes even
more pertinent, particularly in Africa, in View of the
lessons provided by the Force Intervention Brigade. The
Brigade, piloted by the Southern African Development
Community and eventually endorsed by the United
Nations, brings unprecedented innovations that could
eventually serve as a model of United Nations regional
collaboration.

Despite those positive developments, challenges in
this relationship remain, particularly at the legislative
or policy level ofthe Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. Since 2007, the annual meetings
between the two Councils have become the central
trait of the Council's relationship with the AU. Other
than the annual meeting, there is no active engagement
between the two Councils. The annual meeting has the
potential to move the relationship in a more strategic
direction.

I wish to point out here that the collaboration
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has also had its challenges. Perhaps the
main painful reminder has been the differences and
indecisiveness in resolving the Syrian conflict even as
Syria is burning.

Central to the sustainability of peace initiatives are
the principles of national ownership and the sovereignty
of States, which ought to be respected ifwe are to create
sustainable peace. Steps undertaken by those directly
affected by conflicts, however minimal, including by
regional and subregional organizations, should be taken
into consideration and, where possible, built upon.

South Africa believes that, given the scarcity of
financial and human capital, a clear division of labour
and productive burden-sharing between the United
Nations and regional organizations is critical for
sustainable conflict resolution and prevention efforts.
We furthermore believe regional organizations could
benefit from flexible and predictable financial support
from the United Nations and other international
institutions.

In conclusion, as the AU celebrates its fiftieth
anniversary, clearly the level of maturity of that
organization has grown and its capacity to deal with
conflict resolution, mediation and peacekeeping
has increased. As South Africa, we believe that the
cooperation between the United Nations and the region,
and its subregional capacity, can further be enhanced to
ensure complementarity and minimize the duplication
of efforts.

