Mr. Fall: I have the honour to address the Council
for the first time since I took office on 1 November
and to introduce the Secretary-General's report on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The report before the Council (S/2016/996) presents the
main threats to peace and security in Central Africa,
as well as an update on the activities undertaken by
UNOCA in the past six months, in consultation with
Member States, United Nations entities and subregional
organizations.

Over the past five weeks, I have met with a number
of Heads of State and Government on the margins
of the fourth African-Arab Summit, in Malabo, and
at the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), in Libreville. As part of my
introductory meetings with national authorities, I also
met with a broad range of political stakeholders in
Cameroon, Chad, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe.

Despite a peaceful and successful transition
in the Central African Republic earlier this year,
the recent outbreak of violence resulted in high
numbers of fatalities, thus demonstrating once more
the extreme fragility of the situation as well as the
continued threat that the presence of armed groups in
the country represents for the entire subregion. The
Violence is taking place even as the country embarks
upon recovery and peace consolidation efforts. While
enormous challenges remain, the Government of
the Central African Republic has made important
progress by engaging with the armed groups through
a formal framework. That resulted in the adoption, on
4 November, of a national strategy on disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation that is
supported by ll of the main 14 armed groups.

Sustained assistance by international partners,
including the subregion, will be required to help the
country achieve lasting peace and stability. In that
vein, I welcome the holding of the international donors'
conference in Brussels last month, where important
pledges were made towards recovery and stabilization
efforts. It is now imperative that those pledges be
quickly disbursed. The Extraordinary Summit of
ECCAS Heads of State held on 30 November further
reinforced the efforts undertaken by the Government of
the Central African Republic and President Touadera
to consolidate peace and place the country on a path
towards recovery and stability. The Summit also
supported the African Union initiative that, with the
support of ECCAS, the United Nations and bilateral
and multilateral partners, would seek to facilitate a
peace agreement with the armed groups. UNOCA will
continue to support efforts to reduce the presence and
threat posed by the armed groups.

On 15 November, a United Nations-mediated
agreement was signed in Marrakesh, Kingdom of
Morocco, between the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
and the Gabonese Republic to submit their long-
standing border dispute to the International Court of
Justice. What remains is for the two parties to ratify
the special agreement at the national level, following
which it will be submitted to the Court. It is our sincere
hope that the peaceful settlement of the border dispute
will be a source ofinspiration for other countries facing
similar Challenges, by demonstrating that a peaceful
and legal settlement is available and possible.

Since the previous briefing to the Council by my
predecessor (see S/PV.7718), presidential elections were
held in Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe. In some
countries of the subregion, persisting political tensions
arising from recent or upcoming electoral processes
serve to underline the importance of genuine and
inclusive political dialogue, including on meaningful
democratic reforms to foster long-term stability. I will
continue to use my good offices to engage with the
relevant political and civil society actors in order to
encourage the peaceful resolution of persisting political
and socioeconomic grievances through inclusive
dialogue and confidence-building measures, in
consultation with regional and international partners.
Similarly, I will continue to offer the good offices of
the United Nations to ensure the peaceful conduct of
upcoming legislative polls in the region.

The collective efforts of the Lake Chad basin
countries in fighting terrorism have resulted in
substantial military and security successes. The
Multinational Joint Task Force has continued cross-
border operations and has reclaimed much of the
territory controlled by Boko Haram. Nonetheless,
the group continues to carry out asymmetric attacks,
mainly targeting civilians. Its capacity to cause mayhem
should not be underestimated and, as such, Boko
Haram remains a serious threat to regional stability.
The activities of Boko Haram have greatly undermined
development and exacerbated the economic hardship in
the countries of the Lake Chad basin. The situation of
refugees and internally displaced persons, in particular
women and children, continues to remain a cause for
serious concern, as persistent attacks by Boko Haram
have hindered access by humanitarian actors to the
affected areas. In November, UNOCA, in its capacity
as secretariat of the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, organized a visit
of the Committee's Bureau to Cameroon and Chad to
assess the impact of the Boko Haram violence.

While the Lake Chad basin countries are bearing
financial responsibility for combating Boko Haram,
the available resources are insufficient to finance the
operations of the Multinational Joint Task Force and
to effectively support humanitarian and early recovery
activities. Timely support for the Task Force in terms
of finances, logistics and equipment remains critical
to strengthen the force's operational capacity and
maintain the progress made. The complete eradication
of the group will remain a long-term venture through
sustained determination and vigilance, coupled with
a holistic approach aimed at tackling the root causes
of violent extremism, including marginalization and
extreme poverty. In that regard, there is an urgent need
to ensure funding for early recovery and development
activities in liberated areas, including measures to
reintegrate defectors and their families into their
respective societies. It is our hope that the plannedjoint
summit of ECCAS and the Economic Community of
West African States on Boko Haram Will take place
without further delay, with the aim of developing a
regional strategy that addresses the political, security,
humanitarian and development challenges. The
United Nations stands ready to support the region in
that endeavour.

(spoke in French)

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) continues
to threaten regional security, in particular for the
populations of the eastern part of the Central African
Republic and the north-east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The large number of LRA attacks on
civilians continues to cause untold suffering and serious
humanitarian consequences. The group's activities are
also linked to the poaching and trafficking in wild
species in the subregion. We must remain united and
determined in our efforts to fight the LRA.

UNOCA has maintained its commitment on this
issue, including through the implementation of the
United Nations regional strategy to counter the LRA
and address the effects of the group's activities, as well
as through coordination efforts. In cooperation with
the African Union, next week UNOCA will organize in
Entebbe, Uganda, the biannual meeting of LRA focal
points. Last August, a team made up of representatives
from UNOCA, the African Union, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo travelled to Bria and Obo,
Central African Republic, to assess the LRA threat.
Similarly, in October, a joint UNOCA-African Union
mission visited Dungu, Democratic Republic of the
Congo. During those two visits, the team met with
civilian and military partners to discuss measures to
counter the LRA.

The United Nations remains concerned about the
announced withdrawal of Ugandan troops from the
African Union Regional Task Force on 31 December.
However, from the latest news I understand that the
troops are to remain in place until April next year.
This Withdrawal would lead to a security vacuum that
the LRA would use to circulate freely and attack the
populations of the areas concerned. The collective
efforts against the LRA could therefore be compromised
by the withdrawal of Ugandan troops.

Piracy incidents in the Gulf of Guinea have
increased this year, with 50 cases registered at present.
Unfortunately, the Interregional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
is not yet fully operational and has only one staff
member running day-to-day operations, the programme
of activities, the budget and the administration for the
period 2016-2017. The recruitment of permanent staff
for the Centre is ongoing and should be completed by
the end of the year.

I am pleased to report that on 15 October, an
extraordinary summit of the African Union was held
in Lome' and adopted the African Union Charter on
Maritime Security, Safety and Development. We
welcome the adoption of the Charter, which seeks to
prevent national and cross-border crime, including
terrorism, illegal trafficking in wild species and piracy.

The continued support of the Security Council
remains crucial for the promotion of peace and stability
in Central Africa. UNOCA will continue to work with
the Member States of the subregion to achieve that
objective.

