Lord Ashdown: Before I came to this job, I was
a member of the British Parliament, and when I was
first elected I was given one piece of advice by my
rather elderly and distinguished predecessor, who said
 

to me: "My boy, I give you one piece of advice
never stand long between an audience and its meal." I
am rather conscious that I am standing between
members and their meals, and that is a dangerous
position to be in.

I would like, if I may, to start off by thanking
very warmly all those who used such generous words
in their contributions. I am most grateful to them. It
has been a privilege indeed to serve this Council, the
international community at large and, indeed, the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am grateful also
for the general support which has been expressed
around the Council, and, ifI may say so, especially for
the commitment made by so many nations to continue
to keep their engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It will be needed.

As the representative of France rightly pointed
out, my colleague the Ambassador of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and I may be giving an optimistic report,
but it may also be true that the worst of this journey i
the journey from blood and conflict - is behind us.
Nevertheless, the representative of France is correct -
Bosnia and Herzegovina has a long, long way to go in
completing its journey to full, sovereign, democratic
statehood as a member of the European Union. It will
need the Council's engagement, commitment and
constant attention. I am confident that that journey will
be completed, but it is far too early for the international
community to say that the job is done and we can
leave.

However - and here, I think, is the important
point - increasingly, as has been reflected in
comments around the table, the new framework for the
second phase of that journey to transition will be the
framework of the European Union. That is not to say
that we abandon Dayton; we certainly do not. It is the
foundations of our peace and we cannot abandon it,
except, as you rightly said yourself, Sir, by consensus
agreement between the three peoples. That is the only
way to do it. It cannot be imposed, but the European
Union is now increasingly the scaffolding within which
Bosnia and Herzegovina will make the second phase of
its journey.

However - and again, I would like to agree with
a point made by you, Sir - it is very important that the
wider international, non-European Union coalition that
has been so significant in bringing Bosnia and
Herzegovina so far remain in place. The European
Union may provide the scaffolding, but it is very
important that the Peace Implementation Council
continue to play its crucial role as the wheelhouse that
steers the international engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because it is only through the Peace
Implementation Council that non-European Union
nations that have contributed so much can continue to
play their part.

An essential part of that - and again, this was
picked up in a number of contributions today - is the
progressive handover to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
politicians. Let me reassure the Council that we long
ago abandoned what was referred to as the
"commanding approach". As the representative of
Denmark quite rightly identified, there has been a
gradual and persistent transfer, certainly over the last
three years, to Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities.
Refugee return, arguably the biggest and most difficult
and sensitive issue we deal with, was long ago handed
over to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities. None
of the key commanding reforms that were referred to
by my colleague the Ambassador of Bosnia and

Herzegovina - defence reform, the Indirect Tax
Authority reform, value added tax reform, judicial
reform, police reform - were done by the

commanding approach. All of them were done by
agreement between the parliaments. None of them has
been imposed.

Indeed, in terms of the use of the Bonn Powers,
as the representative of Brazil rightly said, we have
been using those decreasingly over the last three and a
half years and will continue to do so. In my first year, I
used the Bonn Powers 70 times to impose laws - 36
fewer than my predecessor. In my second year, I used
them 30 times; last year, three times; this year, once;
next year, I hope, none. Members will see that there
has been a very significant decline in the use of the
Bonn Powers, and that must continue, as the
representative of Italy has just said. It is very important
that we continue to progress towards a progressive
handover of the authority and power of the High
Representative in a sensible, timely and considered
fashion to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities.

Let me remind Council members that the Office
of the High Representative has, in the last three years,
halved its size and halved its budget. That is an
example of how we are now progressively moving
what we do in the Office of the High Representative
over to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities. That
must continue.

I wish to make three final points, if I may. I agree
so much with the representative of Romania, who said
that the regional aspect here is critical. If I have a
criticism of the international community's approach to
the Western Balkans, it is that we have a series of
policies for individual countries there, but we do not
have a regional policy. Almost no issue that I or my
colleagues in Bosnia and Herzegovina deal with in that
country today is not more easily dealt with on a
regional basis than it is within the borders of the
individual countries of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia
and Montenegro, Albania, Kosovo, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and so on. The
regional element is crucial to our future success.

As to my next point, if I may, the representative
of Algeria mentioned the fact that economic
improvement is occurring, but has not yet touched
ordinary peoples' lives. That is correct. Bosnia and
Herzegovina now has the fastest growing economy in
the Western Balkans - from a very low base - but it
is not yet growing fast enough either to be sustainable
or to touch on people's lives. We have to continue to
push that forward - a key task for my successor.

Finally, if I may, the representative of the United
States mentioned the importance of constitutional
reform. Again, I entirely agree that increasing the
functional efficiency of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
State is now crucial. It seems to me that there are two
important points to be made. The first is that this is a
process, not an event. It will take time. I am glad to see
that, because of the engagement of the United States
and the European Union, that process has begun in the
past couple of weeks and will continue next week in
Washington, DC. The fact that progress has not been
large does not matter. The process is under way, and
that is extremely important. I anticipate that major
progress on that front will not occur until after the
October 2006 elections. But the fact that we have laid
the groundwork and started the process is entirely
beneficial. Secondly - and this point was made by
you, Mr. President - this can be done only by the
local domestic authorities. The international
community can have a role to facilitate, to assist and to
enable. But in the end, the only way to achieve the new
status, the new structures for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
is by consensus - by agreement between the peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am sure that they will do
it, but it is going to take patience.

