Mr. Heusgen (Germany): You have just reminded
me, Mr. President, that the representative of Kuwait
already spoke on behalf of the three co-penholders on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. I promise to keep
my remarks very brief, but I would like to add a couple
of points.

We are of course extremely worried about the
humanitarian situation. I also want to add - since
others have mentioned it - that Germany is the second-
largest donor of humanitarian aid to Syria.

The first of the two points that I want to mention
has to do with the worrisome reports we just read about
the war crimes that have been committed during the
Turkish offensive. Civilians have been targeted, and I
can only subscribe to what has been said before about
the culprits being brought to justice. Perhaps our
Turkish friend can say something about what Turkey is
planning in that respect.

I also want to pick up on Idlib. I heard the report from
Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari
with regard to the increased air strikes and barrel bombs
reported in Idlib. That is extremely worrisome. Members
will remember that last month the three co-penholders
tried to get the Security Council's agreement on a draft
resolution (S/2019/756) again linking and counter-
terrorism measures to international humanitarian law.
Members will remember that we were not successful
because Russia and China vetoed that draft resolution
(see S/PV.8623). In their statements today, to which I
listened very carefully, there was a lot about counter-
terrorism but nothing explicitly addressing respect for
international humanitarian law. Quite to the contrary,
we are receiving very well documented reports
about targeted strikes against hospitals and civilian
infrastructure. Germany participated in a Russian-
organized meeting over lunch on the humanitarian
situation with an expert from Russia. We asked about
matters including the report in The New York Times
on 13 October. He did not know anything about it, so
we brought a copy of that article and handed it over to
Ambassador Nebenzia to study.

We have all said that there is no alternative to a
political solution. We all agree on that. But what do we
need for a political solution? The Council just returned
from a trip to South Sudan. We all listened to what civil
society had to say: they said that, for reconciliation
to happen and peace to be achieved in South Sudan,
there needs to be accountability. There needs to be the
installation of a court in South Sudan, which has in
fact been agreed upon by the by the Council. Similar
measures are also needed in Syria.

In another side event a few weeks ago here, we
heard from a witness who succeeded in escaping
from an Al-Assad prison about the torture that he had
to endure - 200,000 people remain in such prisons.
There will be no reconciliation and no future for that
country if there is no accountability for the crimes
that have been committed. Therefore, again, I would
appeal for support in that regard. Since our Russian
friends are so interested in the reconstruction of the
country, I urge them to support the efforts in the Fifth
Committee to give the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 the means
that it needs to work on accountability and finally
restore peace to Syria.

