Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council on the situation in the Middle East.

Japan continues to be deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Syria over the past 16 months,
and profoundly deplores the death of many thousands
of people as a result of the continued violence. We
condemn the Syrian authorities' failure to keep their
own commitments, as well as their increased use of
heavy weapons and all other violations and abuses of
human rights in Syria. The continuing bloodshed is
totally unacceptable and must end now.

Japan has strongly supported the diplomatic efforts
of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi Annan. We
call upon all Syrian parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, to unconditionally and swiftly implement
Mr. Annan's six-point plan. The transition plan set
forth in the Action Group communique of June 30 must
also be implemented, with the aim of bringing about a
democratic and pluralistic political system.

Japan has been cooperating with its partners to
urge the Syrian authorities to cease their violence and to
implement concrete measures for a Syrian-led political
transition, including through the framework of the
Friends of Syria. Japan deems it extremely regrettable
that, last week, owing to the exercise of the veto, the
Security Council failed to unite and speak in one voice
(see S/PV.6810), in line with other international efforts.
Japan will continue to make the utmost effort at every
opportunity in cooperation with like-minded countries.

Japan highly appreciates the dedicated work of
the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS). At the same time, Japan regrets that the
Mission had to suspend its operational activities
owing to the escalation of violence. As stipulated in
resolution 2059 (2012), we call upon the Syrian parties
to guarantee the safety and freedom of movement and
access for UNSMIS personnel. We also wish to believe
that the security and political environment will improve
so that UNSMIS can effectively implement its mandate.

Japan is also concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people. For that
reason, the Government of Japan decided in May
to extend an additional aid grant of $5 million in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We underline the importance of
allowing humanitarian personnel full and unimpeded
access to the people in need of assistance.
With regard to the Middle East peace process, Japan
has supported the efforts of the Palestinians to establish
an independent State, and it remains committed to
providing continuous assistance in that regard. In that
connection, we call upon Israel to support the fiscal
stability of the Palestinian Authority, including by
enabling uninterrupted tax transfers to the Palestinian
Authority.

Japan firmly supports a two-State solution in
which Israel and a future independent Palestinian State
would live side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition. It is regrettable that direct negotiations
between the parties have been suspended for nearly two
years. We call upon Israel not to be satisfied with the
status quo on the ground and to be positively engaged
in the dialogue with the Palestinians. We would also
like to remind both sides that a two-State solution can
be achieved only through sincere direct negotiations
between the parties concerned. Japan hopes that contact
between negotiators in order to build confidence will
lead to the resumption of direct negotiations.

