Mr. Doss (spoke in French): Today, it is my
honour once again to present to the Council the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 160) on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the
prospects and challenges of our peacekeeping mission.

In late January, Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
informed the Council of significant events that took
place in the context of bilateral meetings between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda and of the statement on an end to the war
by 10 high commanders of the Congres national pour la
defense du peuple (CNDP). Since then, important
progress has been made in integrating combatants of
the CNDP and other armed groups and in joint
operations against the armed Rwandan groups, the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR).

The prospect of an end to the main conflict,
which has dominated the situation in the Kivus for
almost two years now, has created real hope that a
lasting solution to the problems that have plagued this
region of the Congo for more than a decade will finally
be achieved. The first concrete results are encouraging.
A large portion of the two territories that have been
most affected up to now, Rutshuru and Masisi, is now
more secure. The authority of the State is being
re-established there. The FDLR in North Kivu have
been pushed back from several zones they occupied
previously and we have seen a significant increase in
candidates for voluntary repatriation. Displaced
persons are beginning to return home and the
Government has launched an initiative to accelerate
rehabilitation programmes in order to build peace in
the Kivus.

That being said, the integration process and
ongoing operations against the FDLR are encountering
considerable difficulties. Furthermore, tensions exist at
the national level following debates on joint operations
with the Rwandan and Ugandan armies, and at the
local level, Where changing alliances have raised
concerns, in particular in terms of land disputes which
the return of more than 1 million displaced persons
could provoke.

(spoke in English)

There has been a sea change in the situation in
North Kivu since mid-January, when CNDP and the
Coalition des patriotes re'sistants congolais, followed
09-29835
by other Congolese armed groups, declared an end to
the conflict and their readiness to integrate
immediately into the Congolese army. This remarkable
turnaround was made possible by the rapprochement of
Kigali and Kinshasa, and we commend the two
Governments for their courageous decision to
overcome their previous distrust and to focus on
common interests of the future. This, along with the
reversal of the CNDP's position and the abrupt change
of its leadership, has opened up entirely new
perspectives for the peace process. But, as with all
dramatic changes, they have also brought new
challenges which must be carefully managed.

The first of the challenges is the integration of the
Congolese armed groups into the national army. The
so-called fast-track integration had initially been a
political gesture that is only now being followed up by
practical implementation. Most elements of the CNDP
and other armed groups have been registered, but
payments of salaries have been delayed and the
provision of food and ammunition for the units
engaged in the operations against the FDLR has been
lagging behind. As a result, some elements of the
newly integrated Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (FARDC) have reverted to
looting or illegal taxation.

The FARDC command has, however, started
addressing these issues with the assistance of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
other international partners. MONUC provides rations
to soldiers engaged in the joint operations and to those
who will be sent for training by MONUC, but the
Government now has to move quickly to cover the
immediate needs arising from fast-track integration and
to manage the transition towards long-term army
reform. Secure areas have to be demilitarized by
properly garrisoning contingents not involved in the
joint operations or in patrolling and by deploying the
police to maintain law and order.

MONUC has trained police forces and is
coordinating international assistance to facilitate the
restoration of State authority and the provisional
garrisoning of the FARDC, which should start in the
coming weeks. A significant success of the accelerated
integration is MONUC's separation of almost 1,100
children associated with armed groups since the
beginning of the process earlier this year. In all my
meetings with the Congolese authorities and
09-29835

representatives of armed groups, I have consistently
urged them to release immediately all remaining
children within their ranks.

As the integration is ongoing, the FARDC and
MONUC have launched the next phase of the
operations against the ex-Interahamwe/FDLR -
Operation Kimia II. In addition to providing rations,
MONUC assists in the planning, ensures medical
evacuation and provides logistic and fire support to the
FARDC. A company of MONUC forces is also
co-locating with most FARDC battalions assigned to
those operations in order to ensure monitoring and to
facilitate the delivery of supplies. The first objective of
the operations is to prevent the FDLR from
reoccupying areas where they have been pushed out by
the joint FARDC-Rwandan Defence Forces (RDF)
operations. Some of those areas, particularly along the
border between the Masisi and Walikale territories,
have seen a spate of reprisal attacks against civilians.
MONUC has reinforced its presence there and
continues to assist the FARDC in flushing out the
FDLR in North Kivu, before starting operations in
South Kivu.

The next phase of Operation Kimia II will be
particularly challenging. The FDLR is spread over
large areas, many difficult to access, and has moved
the bulk of its fighting force to South Kivu. We
estimate its strength there to be around 4,500.
Operations will have to start as soon as FARDC and
MONUC troops are deployed preventively to protect
the main population centres. Continued military
pressure against the FDLR by the FARDC and
MONUC is very much needed, in particular to forestall
or counter attacks against civilians and to deprive the
FDLR of access to its economic interests.

Such pressure has been instrumental in
accelerating the surrender and voluntary return of
combatants and dependants to Rwanda. Close to 7,000
Rwandans have now returned home since the onset of
the joint FARDC-RDF operations and the follow-up
with MONUC. Among them are more than 500 FDLR
combatants, which is equal, I might add, to the entire
total repatriated in 2008. The pace of surrenders has
gone down slightly, but FDLR combatants continue to
turn themselves in to MONUC across both Kivus.

Along with resolving the crisis in the Kivus, the
Council has instructed us to pursue the protection of
civilians as the first priority of the Mission. As the
3
conflict between the Government and the CNDP has
come to an end, protection demands are also changing.
The main challenges are now to prevent FDLR reprisal
attacks, to rein in undisciplined elements of the
security forces, and to deal with the emerging threat of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in the Haut Uele
district of Orientale province.

Those tasks are intimately linked to consolidating
the integration of the armed groups, as well as to the
enforcement of civilian and military justice. Police and
army reform has to introduce a vetting system to
progressively remove known human rights offenders
and to ensure that they face justice. The timing and
method of vetting must reinforce the peace process and
ensure that all human rights offenders in police or army
ranks are dealt with in a consistent manner. I have
already broached this issue with the Government and
urged the Ministers of Defence and Interior to put in
place effective vetting mechanisms with the support of
MONUC and other partners.

Let me add that MONUC itself is adapting its
policies and practices to enhance its work to protect
civilians. MONUC has been deploying joint civilian
protection teams, composed of staff from civil and
political affairs, human rights, child protection and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
sections. They operate in close coordination with
MONUC military in vulnerable areas. Their presence
and contacts with the local population have greatly
enhanced our situational awareness and response
capacity. During the joint FARDC-RDF operations, for
example, recommendations by joint protection teams
led to the short-term evacuation of civilians from areas
where they were at risk of getting caught in the
crossfire, thus considerably reducing civilian
casualties.

In areas of FDLR presence, the joint teams have
facilitated early warning and preventive deployment to
avert possible reprisal attacks. We have also developed
guidelines for the military units, so they are better
advised on how to tackle the challenge of protection.
An example of those guidelines is being distributed to
the Council this morning, and I would urge members to
look at that as an innovative approach to dealing with
the problem of prevention and the protection of
civilians through peacekeeping.

However, we should be aware that the continuing
joint operations against the armed groups may lead to
further attacks on civilians and new displacements. The
Council must bear in mind that it is impossible to end
the FDLR's control over large parts of both Kivus
without any humanitarian consequences. Protecting
civilians has been integrated into the planning of the
joint operations with the FARDC, and we will do our
utmost to minimize negative effects on civilians.
However, we cannot allow those groups, in particular
the FDLR and the LRA, to perpetuate their violent
activities, which are accompanied by extortion, illegal
taxation and an appalling level of violence against
women and children. Those groups also remain a cause
of concern for neighbouring States and a risk to
subregional stability.

In Orientale province, the LRA's gruesome
reprisal attacks in the wake of the joint operation
conducted by the FARDC, the Uganda People's
Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) cannot be condemned too
strongly. The LRA has dispersed into small groups that
have sown terror and taken revenge by looting, raping,
maiming, abducting and killing civilians in a vast area
stretching from northern Ituri to the border with the
Central African Republic and the eastern part of that
country. Most of those attacks occurred between
Christmas 2008 and mid-January 2009. Altogether,
about 1,100 civilians have been killed, hundreds have
been abducted and some 200,000 people have been
displaced. The number of attacks has gone down
significantly in recent weeks, but there are indications
that the LRA may be regrouping, and a new wave of
attacks in the future cannot be ruled out.

The protection of civilians in such a huge and
inaccessible area is a major challenge. The FARDC has
progressively reinforced its presence, and MONUC
provides logistical and material assistance to the
Congolese army in the context of operation Rudia II,
launched to contain and to progressively neutralize the
LRA. We are also establishing four operational bases in
some of the most vulnerable areas of Haut Ue'le'.
However, improving the protection of civilians will
mainly depend on the deployment of FARDC troops
with the necessary mobility and fire support.
Furthermore, it is essential not only that the FARDC
and MONUC cooperate closely, but also that there be
smooth and continuing cooperation with the SPLA and
the UPDF. In both operations, Kimia and Rudia, I
would like to add that MONUC has urged and
requested the FARDC to establish joint operational
centres so as to reinforce coordination and planning
with, as necessary, the presence of liaison officers from
Rwanda and Uganda.

The situation in Ituri was for several years a
major focus of MONUC. Our efforts to progressively
restore peace in that district have been largely
successful. There are residual pockets of insecurity, but
recent incidents are more a matter of banditry than a
military challenge to State authority. The
implementation of the United Nations security and
stabilization support strategy is now gaining
momentum in Ituri and, I would add, in North Kivu. It
will expand the presence of police and judiciary into
remote areas, facilitate socio-economic recovery and, I
hope, reduce unemployment, which feeds the militia's
ranks. Ituri shows us that a sustained, multipronged
effort by the FARDC, with the active support of
MONUC and other partners, can break the cycle of
violence and lead to peace and security. That has
allowed us to redeploy some forces from Ituri both to
the Kivus and to Haut Uele, and is a process that is
currently under way.

Another encouraging element in our efforts to
protect civilians is the adoption by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United Nations
agencies and other partners of a comprehensive
strategy to combat sexual violence, which has been of
great concern to this Council. The strategy contains
four main components to address that scourge: fighting
impunity, prevention and protection, integrating the
fight against sexual violence into security sector
reform, and improving access to assistance and legal
services for victims. A lead entity has been identified
for each of those four components, which will now be
introduced at field level and implemented through
provincial action plans and the United Nations security
and stabilization support strategy. Copies of that
strategy are available to the members of the Council
and will be distributed after this meeting.

The stabilization strategy aims to consolidate the
improving security situation in the Kivus and Ituri by
rapidly rehabilitating basic infrastructure, facilitating
the return of law enforcement authorities and,
generally, State authority. The extension of State
authority and basic services also must go hand in hand
with labour-intensive employment programmes to
absorb disaffected combatants who cannot or do not
want to join the army. The armed groups of North and
South Kivu have declared a total of 47,000 combatants.
There are doubts, perhaps, about the reliability of that
figure, but it indicates how many unemployed youths
are associated with armed groups for want of a better
occupation. They need to be put to work in order to
avert future risks of remobilization.

At the same time, it is important to relaunch
economic recovery to mitigate ethnic tensions, which
could be aggravated by the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. A prosperous
and dynamic North and South Kivu can absorb
returnees, provided that conflicting land claims are
managed carefully, but if the Kivus continue to
struggle with mass poverty, unemployment and derelict
infrastructures, new escalations of violence may
emanate from the underlying tensions between ethnic
communities. Prime Minister Muzito has launched an
initiative to prioritize interventions in the area of
security, State authority, humanitarian assistance and
rehabilitation. MONUC and other international
partners are working with the Prime Minister in order
to fund and support those priorities, and we in
MONUC have realigned our stabilization strategy in
support of the Prime Minister's initiative.

The peace accord signed on 23 March by the
Government and the CNDP, facilitated by Presidents
Obasanjo and Mkapa, has laid the foundations to settle
critical issues that have long bedevilled the Kivus.
These issues include community cohabitation and
absorbing the CNDP's parallel administrative
structures into the provincial authorities and the
national security services. Proper implementation of
this agreement, monitored by the facilitation, would
contribute greatly to improving relations among the
communities and enhance the protection of returning
IDPs and refugees.

Our immediate efforts are focused on measures
necessary to consolidate the peace process in the Kivus
and to contain the threat of the LRA. However, Council
members should bear in mind that only a profound
reform of the security sector will eventually enable the
Government of the Democratic Republic to deal by its
own means with security threats and challenges to the
authority of the State. The FARDC is only at the first
stage of army integration, namely, the absorption of the
remaining Congolese armed groups. It has not yet
embarked on reorganizing the command structure,
combating corruption, ensuring an effective and
transparent chain of payments, the progressive
downsizing of the army to an affordable and
manageable level, and rehabilitating military
infrastructure. Most importantly, the training of
soldiers at all levels is still in the early stages.

The Defence Minister has recently presented an
outline for army reform to international partners, and I
have urged him to convene a group of potential
security sector reform partners to discuss the plan as
soon as possible. MONUC itself is ready to start
training for newly integrated brigades, and we intend to
contribute to the planning and coordination of external
support to army reform, if requested to do so, but it is
clear that the Government itself has to assume the lead
role in this process. I would add that this is a long-term
process, for which several international partners will
need to be collectively engaged, as will the
Government itself.

Reforms of the police and the judiciary are also
under way with support from MONUC and other
partners, in particular the European Union and the
United States. All three areas must be addressed and
consistently pursued.

In resolution 1856 (2008), the Security Council
addressed the issue of illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which helps to fuel the conflict. Improving
the conduct and effectiveness of the security forces
will be essential to curbing this illegal exploitation. In
particular, the organized plunder of Congo's riches has
been going on for decades, creating complex regional
networks that involve armed groups, corrupt officials
and irresponsible local and foreign traders.
Dismantling these networks will take time. MONUC is
working with the Congolese Ministry of the Interior
and provincial authorities to improve control
mechanisms, including spot checks at main transit
points in the Kivus and elsewhere, to help curb illegal
exports. MONUC is also training military and civilian
peacekeepers, as well as Government officials, to
better identify illegal commercial activities and act
against the perpetrators. We are also working closely
with the United Nations Group of Experts mandated by
the Security Council to tackle the problem of illegal
exploitation and illegal arms trading.

The international economic crisis, which has led
to declining demand and plummeting prices for key
minerals and crude oil, has obliged the Government to
revise its 2009 budget downwards. Prime Minister
Muzito has told me that in the past year, the
Government has suffered a 70 per cent year-on-year
decline in its revenue due to the drop in the volume of
commodities exported and a decline in their price. As
Council members can imagine, that has had a dramatic
impact on the Government budget and, indeed, on the
prospects for early economic recovery.

This situation has been accompanied, not
unsurprisingly, by a critical shortage of foreign
reserves and a dramatic devaluation of the Congolese
currency, imposing additional hardships on an already
impoverished population. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo requires rapid international assistance, and,
to facilitate that assistance, the Government must
obviously take more decisive action to tackle problems
of economic governance, including corruption, and
improve the management of public resources in order
to sustain donor support and financial aid.

In addition, the Council will recall that the last
component of the electoral cycle - the local
elections- is still unfinished business from the
transition. After repeated delays in the legislative and
administrative preparations, the main elements, I am
happy to say, are now in place. MONUC is supporting
the Congolese Independent Electoral Commission in
launching the voter registration update in early June.
Announcement of a polling date is expected as the
update proceeds, and MONUC's assistance will be
required to facilitate the holding of those elections,
which will involve 6,000 constituencies and an
estimated 200,000 candidates.

As we are faced with these multiple challenges, I
would like to express my appreciation for the Council's
approval, under resolution 1843 (2008), of a temporary
surge capacity for MONUC. The current situation in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as I described it, underlines the importance of
these additional resources. I am informed that several
countries have confirmed their intention to provide
additional troops and police personnel. Regrettably,
however, other critically important capacities are not
yet in sight. Without the additional helicopter support
required for rapid deployment and reaction, for
example, MONUC's capacity to respond quickly to
emerging threats and to protect civilian populations
will be compromised. Our support to the FARDC will
also be seriously constrained.

We are doing our best to focus our efforts and
resources in accordance with the mandate, and
MONUC has already deployed more than 90 per cent
of its troops to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have also thinned out
considerably our civilian presence in many of the
western provinces. However, the handover of tasks
envisioned in resolution 1856 (2008) is hampered by
the fact that United Nations agencies themselves are
also largely concentrated in the East and are absent
from other parts of the country in significant numbers.
An effective hand-over, as recommended by the
technical assessment mission recently sent to the
Democratic Republic of Congo by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, requires the preliminary
rebalancing of the presence and resources of United
Nations agencies. We are working on a strategic
workplan with specific benchmarks, which will guide
the transfer of functions and the eventual drawdown of
MONUC's presence. The main elements of this
strategic workplan will be shared with Council
members in due course.

Finally, I would like to mention that we have
made significant progress in addressing the problem of
misconduct within the Mission. In 2008, allegations of
serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and
abuse, declined to 56 from 66 the year before. The
number of category 2 allegations of lesser gravity has
also been reduced. This positive trend requires
continuous training, the deployment of conduct and
discipline teams in the East, and a network of civil
defence unit focal points throughout the Mission,
which are now producing results.

(spoke in French)

I hope that the strengthened security situation in
the East will allow us in the near future to gradually
reduce the presence of MONUC throughout the
country and to prepare our departure. This year, our
Mission will celebrate its tenth anniversary. In the
course of the past decade, MONUC has supervised a
ceasefire and the withdrawal of foreign troops
following the Lusaka accords. We have created a
09-29835
security climate conducive to the Sun City
inter-Congolese dialogue. We have accompanied the
transition and ensured the holding of the first free
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
40 years, and we have helped the Government to
resolve the problem of foreign and Congolese armed
groups in Ituri, the Kivus and Orientale province. In
the past two years, and in accordance with the mandate
that the Council has entrusted to us, we have focused
on resolving the crisis in the Kivus and on protecting
the civilian population.

The expectations of MONUC were commensurate
with the country in which we are deployed -
enormous and complex - and we have had to face
unexpected challenges. Often, our troops, our police
and our civilian personnel have sought new approaches
to carrying out duties that go beyond conventional
peacekeeping responsibilities. Mobile operational
bases and joint protection teams are new concepts
developed within MONUC. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the commitment,
creativity and the perseverance of our colleagues, in
particular the soldiers, civilians and police personnel
who are involved in forward-based operations in very
difficult and sometimes dangerous conditions.

We are the only mission that has had the privilege
of receiving an annual visit from the Council, and I
hope soon to be able to welcome members to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo once again.

