Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First, Sir, I join preceding speakers in expressing our
deep condolences in connection with the double
aviation tragedy that occurred in your country
yesterday. Please convey our condolences to the
Russian Government and the families of the victims.

I express our thanks to Special Representative
Mr. Arnault for the comprehensive briefing he has just
given the Council in presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/634) and for his work at the
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

As the representative of the Netherlands will
make a statement on behalf of the European Union,
with which Spain fully associates itself, I shall confine
myself to making some brief observations.
Despite numerous obstacles, the peace process in
Afghanistan continues to advance. Proof of that is the
presidential election to be held on 9 October, which
will be followed by legislative elections in April 2005,
and the success being achieved in the process of voter
registration of both men and women. This demonstrates
the Afghan people's determination to decide its own
destiny.

The elections must constitute a fundamental
milestone in the consolidation of democracy, stability
and the future prosperity of Afghanistan. However, it
has to be acknowledged that the increase in terrorist,
criminal and factional violence in recent months, with
numerous attacks on humanitarian personnel and
attacks aimed at undermining the progress of the
electoral process, makes it even more urgent to boost
efforts to establish basic conditions of security, in
conformity with the commitments of the Bonn
Agreement, ratified at the Berlin Conference on
Afghanistan.

The terrorist violence of Al Qaeda and Taliban
elements, the Violence caused by warlords and armed
militias and their connections with the drug traffic
continue to be the principal threats to the progress
made in the pacification, stabilization and
reconstruction of the country. Thus, as the Secretary-
General notes in his report, international security
assistance is of vital importance to Afghanistan.

In that context, and in reply to the request made
by the Secretary-General and President Karzai and the
appeal to troop-contributing countries contained in
resolution 1536 (2004), the Government of Spain, with
the support of Parliament and in the framework of the
agreements reached in the recent NATO summit,
authorized last month an increase of up to 540 troops in
the Spanish contingent of the International Security
Assistance Force in order to provide a field hospital,
complemented by means of transport, four helicopters
and two transport airplanes and one support and
protection unit. In addition, as part of that operation,
the Spanish Government authorized the temporary
deployment of an infantry battalion with a maximum of

500 additional troops to support the electoral process in
Afghanistan. I have the honour to inform the Council
that the new deployment of Spanish forces began on
17 August and that those forces will be fully
operational in the course of September, in time to
contribute to the security and good conduct of the
presidential election of 9 October.

Despite the great importance of the electoral
process, it should not lead us to forget the urgent need
to make progress in areas where progress so far has
been too slow. Specifically, I am referring to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, the fight against drug trafficking, land
management, and the development of the rule of law in
all its aspects. In the area of fundamental rights,
including the improvement of the situation of women,
where much remains to be done, the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission is doing a
valuable job, which we should all acknowledge and
support.

In short, all those elements I have mentioned -
security, elections, disarmament, the return of refugees,
the rule of law, the fight against drugs and human
rights issues - all those elements are interrelated. For
that reason, it is urgent to make progress on all those
fronts in a simultaneous, harmonious and integrated
manner. Only that way will the reform and
reconstruction of the country reach a satisfactory
conclusion for the good of the Afghan people and the
entire region.

