Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Marzuki Darusman,
Chairperson of the independent international fact-
finding mission on Myanmar, for his very thorough and
informative briefing.

Barely 10 years ago, my country and other countries
in the West African subregion were emerging from
very painful internal conflict. Mr. Darusman's briefing
brings back those images of hordes of ragged and
desperate people fleeing attacks, trudging over rutted
roads under a blazing tropical sun. When Cote d'Ivoire
emerged from that internal conflict, thanks to the help
of the international community, the people of Cote
d'Ivoire said never again. And as our country decided
to align its ideas with its actions, we have enshrined
as a cornerstone of our Constitution the right to life
as a cardinal principle and value. What we want for
the Ivorian people is also what we want for the other
peoples of the world. That is why the humanitarian
situation of the displaced and refugee Rohingya
people and the human rights situation in Rakhine state
continue to challenge the conscience of humankind and
our humanity. That is why we joined others in calling
for this meeting.

Cote d'Ivoire does not claim to have a monopoly
of the heart, to paraphrase a great President of a great
friendly country, whom I esteem. However, it is clear
that, in spite of the efforts made, enormous challenges
remain, particularly in relation to the delivery
humanitarian aid and the return of Rohingya refugees.
That is why my statement will focus essentially on the
humanitarian aspect.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the commitment of the
Government of Myanmar to cooperating with the
United Nations - a commitment embodied by the
signing on 6 June of the tripartite memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Cote d'Ivoire urges the Myanmar authorities to redouble
their efforts to implement that agreement by facilitating
the access of United Nations agencies and specialized
bodies to populations in need in order to provide them
with access to humanitarian aid and assistance.

With regard to the issue of human rights, my
delegation takes note of the findings of the Human
Rights Council independent international fact-finding
mission on Myanmar. Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to respecting and protecting human rights.
We underscore the obligation of the international
community to bring the perpetrators of human rights
violations before the appropriate courts. In that regard,
we support the efforts of the Human Rights Council
to implement the findings of the fact-finding mission,
including through the establishment of an independent
mechanism to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse
the evidence of the most serious crimes and violations
of international law in Myanmar.

The solution to the current crisis in Myanmar must
be viewed as part of a comprehensive approach that
addresses, inter alia, the important issue of the safe and
dignified return of Rohingya refugees. Cote d'Ivoire
remains convinced that lasting peace in Myanmar must
be based on the search for consensual solutions that
take into account the concerns of all parties. To that
end, we wish to see the international community focus
its efforts on three main areas: the implementation of
the memorandum of understanding between Myanmar,
UNHCR and UNDP; the establishment of a process to
fight impunity, in support of the work of the ongoing
national commission of inquiry; and the implementation
of the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State.

My delegation reiterates its support for Ms. Christine
Schraner Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General on Myanmar, and encourages the Government
of that friendly country to continue to cooperate with
her. My country - which, in the early 19905, provided
asylum to and facilitated the integration of hundreds of
thousands of refugees fleeing conflict in neighbouring
countries - recognizes the immense efforts and
sacrifices entailed in the opening of national borders
to people in distress. That is why we wish to express
our sincere gratitude to the authorities and the friendly
people ofBangladesh for their hospitality and assistance
to the Rohingya refugees.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the international
community to continue and increase its assistance to
refugees by making an adequate financial contribution
to the United Nations joint response plan.

