Mr. Bannon: The President of the World Bank,
Mr. Paul Wolfowitz, is unable to be here today and I
first wish to transmit his warm greetings to the
Security Council. President Wolfowitz has also asked
me to convey his appreciation to Foreign Minister
Philippe Douste-Blazy of France for organizing this
special meeting and for inviting the World Bank, and to
Ambassador Jean-Marc de la Sabliere for presiding
over the meeting.

As many members know, over the past 10 years
the World Bank has considerably expanded its work on
armed conflict, increasing research on conflict and
development, and adopting more flexible instruments,
approaches and financing mechanisms to support
countries in the transition from armed Violence to
sustainable development. Research has explored the
reinforcing linkages between poverty and conflict and
the special needs of vulnerable groups. Among the
vulnerable groups affected by conflict, it is clear that
children are most at risk. Over 300 million young
people below the age of 25 live in countries affected by
armed conflict, representing nearly a fifth of the
world's total population of children and youth.
Children and youth living in conflict settings face an
array of complex and urgent needs. We see today's
meeting as an important occasion to discuss those
complex needs and explore ways in which we can work
together to offer those young people a stake in a more
peaceful and prosperous future.

Taking into account the concept paper prepared
for this meeting, I would like to focus my remarks first
on some illustrations of the Bank's approach and,
secondly, to offer some examples of Bank operations
that aim to support children in conflict and post-
conflict settings, including demobilized children.

As with most Bank activities, analytical work
underpins our policy and operational interventions. For
example, recent studies have sought to provide
guidance on the demobilization and reintegration of
child soldiers in Africa and on reaching education
goals for all objectives in countries affected by
conflict. We have also taken an interest in better
understanding the effects of youth bulges on conflict
and instability. We find that youth bulges make

countries more unstable and thus more susceptible to
armed conflict, but youth are not the problem - they
are not the enemy. The challenge is rather to expand
employment and livelihood opportunities for young
people and to give them a voice and influence on
decisions that affect their lives. Recent research is also
focusing on the way young men in Latin America and
Africa construct their sense of identity and why that
definition of masculinity is often based on the exertion
of power through Violence.

In addition, children and youth have recently
become a special focus for the World Bank. Three
years ago, we established a Children and Youth Unit in
the Human Development Network, which works across
the institution in a number of cross-cutting areas, such
as education, health, social protection and social
development, including the special needs of children
and youth affected by conflict. This year's World
Development Report focuses on children and youth. All
this work highlights the multidimensional needs of
children and youth, from protection from Violence, to
education and training, to psychosocial support.

We have also learned that children and youth face
different needs, although interventions should be in
place as early as possible. Protecting children and
youth from violence is clearly an urgent priority, but
we must also understand that young people in conflict
face a simultaneous and more complex transition from
conflict and childhood to peace and adulthood.

I would now like to touch on Bank operations
related to children in conflict and immediate post-
conflict situations. In addition to our normal projects,
we also have a number of grant facilities that support
conflict-affected countries, fragile States and the
special needs of young people. Our Post Conflict Fund,
for example, has supported a number of activities on
the demobilization and social reintegration of children
involved in armed conflict, very often in partnership
with UNICEF, and most recently working in Cote
d'Ivoire. A recently established trust fund supported by
Italy will address at-risk children and youth in West
Africa.

A more comprehensive programme is the Multi-
Donor Demobilization and Reintegration Programme in
the Great Lakes region of Africa. The World Bank
administers that multi-agency programme, collaborating
with United Nations agencies and other partners and
supported by a number of donors, including France. It

currently targets 450,000 ex-combatants in seven
countries. The Programme also supports special projects
that complement national programmes designed to more
effectively provide demobilization and reintegration
support in emergency circumstances or to target specific
groups, such as children associated with armed groups.

Since 2003, the Programme has been funding six
special projects in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with a budget of $20 million for the prevention
of recruitment and for the demobilization, tracing and
reintegration of children associated with armed groups.
As a result, out of the estimated 25,000 children with
various fighting groups, some 19,000 have been
released or demobilized. There are similar projects in
the other countries of the Great Lakes region.

I would like to end my remarks by emphasizing
the need to strengthen collaboration and partnerships if
we are to effectively address the needs of this
important group. Although in recent years we have
redoubled our efforts at the World Bank to support
conflict-affected countries and to better target the
special needs of young people affected by conflict, we
are fully aware of the fact that we need to work hand in
hand with our colleagues in the United Nations system
as well as with our partner Governments and civil
society actors if we are to make a sustainable
difference. Children and youth in countries affected by
conflict deserve our support, not only because they are
a vulnerable group with special needs, but also because
it is a good investment, an investment in a more secure
and peaceful future.

