Mr. Vale de Almeida: I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor. I am honoured to address the Council
today on behalf of the designate representative of
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity as
Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), to whom
I shall refer hereafter as the "Coordinator".

The date of 14 July marked the first anniversary of
the conclusion of the JCPOA and six months from its
implementation day. In this first year, important steps
have been taken by all parties, the E3/EU+3 and Iran,
towards the successful implementation of the deal. We
are also pleased to say that JCPOA implementation
is on track. So far, all parties have fulfilled their
commitments, as confirmed by the two reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Iran's
nuclear commitments and by the lifting of the agreed
nuclear-related economic and financial sanctions on
implementation day. However, JCPOA implementation
is still a work in progress and we expect the full and
effective implementation throughout the lifetime of the
agreement on the part of all sides. We remain committed
to that goal.

As Coordinator of the Joint Commission, the body
established by the JCPOA, the High Representative
and its representatives oversee the successful
implementation of the deal, as well as the effective
operation of its working groups. We have a strong interest
in and responsibility for the successful implementation
of the deal, which we believe is a clear demonstration
that with political will, perseverance and multilateral
diplomacy, workable solutions can be found to the most
difficult problems. In that respect, another meeting of
the Joint Commission with the E3/EU+3 and Iran will
take place in Vienna tomorrow.

I would also like at this point to extend my gratitude
to the facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), my good friend His Excellency Mr. Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi, for his excellent cooperation since
implementation day, and to thank our colleagues in the
Security Council Affairs Division for their unwavering
support regarding the establishment of the procurement
channel. I would also like to take note ofthe report ofthe
Secretary-General (S/2016/589) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), as outlined by the Under-
Secretary-General.

I will now focus on the work of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission. The
Coordinator of the Joint Commission and the
Procurement Working Group is responsible for the
smooth operation of that newly established mechanism,
which has been tasked to review the proposals of
States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that
are for nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end-uses. On
implementation day, the Joint Commission established
the Procurement Working Group, which is comprised
of E3/EU+3 and Iranian representatives. The Group has
been in full operation since then.

Transparency has been one ofour guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the J CPOA.
According to paragraph 6.10 of JCPOA annex IV,

"the Joint Commission will report to the United
Nations Security Council at least every 6 months
on the status of the Procurement Working Group's
decisions and on any implementation issues"
(resolution 223] (2015), annex A, p. 92).

In this context, on 8 July, the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group submitted to the facilitator,
on behalf of the Joint Commission, the report of the
Joint Commission to the Security Council on the status
of the Procurement Working Group's decisions and on
any implementation issues. This is the first report of its
kind; it is factual, and it aims at providing the facilitator
and Security Council members with an overview of
the work undertaken by the Procurement Working
Group in the period since JCPOA implementation day,
16 January 2016, up to 6 July.

During that period, the participants in the
Procurement Working Group - the E/EU3+3 and
Iran - worked intensively to establish the Group and
define its modalities for operation. Participants held
seven meetings, at one of which the IAEA participated
as an observer. The Group has made great efforts to
be as transparent as possible, without compromising
confidentiality, by reaching out to third States and
promoting a better understanding ofits aims, objectives
and review process. To be more precise, since JCPOA
implementation, the Group has collectively engaged
with third States and briefed representatives of the
Security Council, as well as of States Members of the
United Nations, during an open briefing organized
by the facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). Participants also held separate bilateral
discussions with a number of interested third States.

We have taken note of the points raised by States
during those meetings. In that respect, the Joint
Commission has endorsed several documents relating
to the work of the Procurement Working Group,
namely, the information on the procurement channel,
the optional application form, the optional end-use
certification and the relevant explanatory notes, as well
as the statement on confidentiality in the Procurement
Working Group and the Joint Commission for matters
relating to the procurement channel. All of those
documents have been published on the Security Council
website.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong interest
and sense of responsibility in the successful operation
of the Procurement Working Group and of the JCPOA
as a whole.

