The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Slovakia.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union. That is why
I shall limit my statement to the following comments.

My delegation is pleased to note that there is
growing awareness of the importance of resolution
1540 (2004) for global and regional security and for
the national security of United Nations Member States.
Since the adoption of that resolution, significant
progress has been achieved in the implementation of its
provisions in various regions. At the same time, we
recognize that there are still many challenges to be
addressed in achieving the full implementation of all
aspects of resolution 1540 (2004) worldwide.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that
through the support of individual Member States,
donors, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
international and regional organizations, the Security
Council has succeeded in creating a strong momentum
in the implementation process, which must now be
utilized for the strengthening of a global response,
through further practical measures, to the threat of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.

Thus, while the year 2006 was dominated by
efforts to increase awareness of the significance of
resolution 1540 (2004), we strongly believe that this
year the Security Council must concentrate on ensuring
that further progress is made in the implementation of
all aspects of resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution
1673 (2006) and in facilitating cooperation and the
exchange of information on national experiences and
best practices in addressing the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004), including with respect to
further actions needed from States and on technical
assistance needed and offered.

My delegation is convinced that outreach
activities must be sustained by a sound strategy on
assistance that has to be developed and implemented in
the long run. Technical assistance is one of the
dominant issues in the context of the interaction of the
Security Council Committee with States Members of
the United Nations.

Slovakia wishes to stress that broad-based
cooperation with States and international and regional
organizations in capacity-building and assistance is
critical to effectively addressing this issue. Here we
believe that the contribution of international, regional
and subregional organizations and arrangements
relevant to such efforts can make a real difference in
advancing the implementation process.

For those reasons, Slovakia is grateful to the
Governments of Germany and of Norway for having
organized, along with the Security Council, a donor
States' workshop on the assistance provided for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to be held in
April this year in New York.

My delegation fully appreciates the offers of
assistance provided directly by several international
organizations and arrangements and recognizes that
other such bodies provide assistance of significant
relevance to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Since this is the Security Council's first
opportunity to meet with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
World Customs Organization since it decided to extend
the mandate of the 1540 Committee in April 2006, we
wish to thank those bodies for the detailed updates on
their activities in connection with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

We would like to underline the fact that
legislative measures to counter proliferation remain
primarily the responsibility of the States Members of
the United Nations, and that, ultimately, the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a national
function and responsibility. Slovakia therefore
considers that the importance of national ownership of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) might be
best reflected in national action plans or road maps to
achieve such full implementation. We are of the view
that national plans of action would not only help to
better prioritize the steps leading to the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), but could
also help to identify, for donor countries and countries
providing technical assistance, those areas in which
assistance is needed or requested.

Before concluding, I wish to stress the
importance that my country attaches to the need for a
comprehensive and systematic approach to the
implementation of all aspects and requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004). We believe that such an
approach can provide for an adequate system of
protection and prevention of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction at the national and global levels.

Last but not least, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my thanks to all members of the
Security Council for their contributions and active
participation in the preparation of the text of the
presidential statement affirming our determination to
promote increased multilateral cooperation towards the
full implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of
Germany, to whom I give the floor.

