Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Daudi
Mwakawago, for his briefing. We commend him and
his team for the very positive results that the Council is
acknowledging today. Upon the completion of the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), Sierra Leone will enter a new
phase in the path towards stabilization and sustainable
peace. We concur with the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/777) that remarkable achievements
have been obtained by the people of Sierra Leone and
by UNAMSIL. Peacekeeping is no longer necessary,
while peacebuilding activities are increasing in
intensity and variety. The international partners must
be able to sustain their attention on the country,
according to national priorities, thus helping
sustainable peace to take root.

The decision to establish the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone was very appropriate,
and it sets a positive precedent of timely action by the
Council to sustain international attention through the
post-conflict recovery phase. We expect the
Peacebuilding Commission will soon be entrusted with
that aspect, as it makes recommendations and promotes
greater coordination among United Nations bodies, as
well as between the United Nations and international
financial institutions.

We welcome the appointment of Victor da Silva
Angelo as the Executive Representative and Head of
Mission for the Integrated Office. We are confident
that he will work closely with local authorities towards
the common objective of tackling unemployment, in
particular youth unemployment, poverty and the many
social and economic challenges still facing Sierra
Leone. As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
it is critical that the population begins to feel tangible
peace dividends. In that context, the remarkable growth
experienced in diamond exports is a promising source
of direct and indirect employment, having generated
$109 million by the end of September.

While security sector reform and the rule of law
both need sustained attention in Sierra Leone, Brazil is
pleased that the human rights situation has shown
improvement and that progress is being made on
preparations for the 2007 presidential and
parliamentary elections. We look forward to those
additional milestones in the consolidation of peace.

With respect to the subregion, Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire, as well as Guinea and Guinea-Bissau, may
present risks for Sierra Leone. We welcome the
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
entities in the subregion, as well as the consultations
with the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union, which have resulted in a more
focused approach to the difficulties facing various
countries.

Lastly, I wish to reiterate what I said in
yesterday's Council meeting (see PV.5332) as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone. It is my delegation's
understanding that, as UNAMSIL has fully
implemented its exit strategy in December, the Council
should start reviewing the sanctions regime.
Discussions that could raise concerns in Sierra Leone,
in particular with respect to the sensitive work of the
Special Court, have been avoided. But it will soon be
time to update the sanctions' legal basis, after hearing
the views of the national authorities.

Before I conclude, I wish once again to commend
the work undertaken by UNAMSIL military and
civilian personnel and commend the troop-contributing
countries for their dedicated service to the cause of
peace.

