Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor at this late
hour. However, my delegation would like to respond
to statements made by the representatives of the
regimes in power in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey.
Their statements included a collection of claims,
falsifications and propaganda, in which they seek to
present themselves as playing a certain role in fighting
terrorism.

However, those three regimes are deeply involved
in spreading savagely cruel terrorism and hateful
extremism, as well as barbaric Wahhabism. They are
also financing and arming terrorist groups and providing
them with platforms for propaganda. They have also
endorsed many of the terrorist attacks that have been
witnessed by Member States of the Organization. They
are bringing foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries
from all over the world to my country to serve their own
interests, thus increasing the suffering of the Syrians,
delaying the solution of the crisis and undermining
political efforts.

United Nations reports indicate the presence of
more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters in Syria and
Iraq. We in Syria would like to affirm that there are, in
fact, many more than 30,000. In addition to the 24,500
terrorists of Saudi nationality alone who have joined
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist groups, many thousands
more are present in other Member States of the
Organization. They are all the product of the extremist
religious teachings that they have received and are the
ones responsible for committing all sorts of abhorrent
terrorist acts around the world. Their actions have
nothing to do with Islam, nor do they have anything
to do with civilization. The role of those regimes in
supporting terrorism is no longer a secret to anyone.
Today, we have heard affirmations by States Members
of the United Nations regarding the Turkish role in
preparing and transferring foreign terrorist fighters to
my country. As the Council is well aware, through its
support for terrorist groups on Syrian territories Turkey
has also interfered militarily. The Erdogan regime is
directly and indirectly involved in terrorism through its
trading in oil and in stolen Syrian artifacts with Da'esh.

The practices of those three regimes represent acts
of aggression in flagrant violation of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the Security
Council resolutions on terrorism. We once again call
upon the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
by condemning the practices of those regimes and by
showing zero tolerance for their practices, with a view
to making them put an end to their support for terrorism
and criminal acts.

