Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
should like to take this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of March and to wish you every
success in your work. I wish also to thank Ambassador
Pleuger for the excellent work he did last month.

Switzerland has taken note of the report presented
by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to the public meeting of
the Security Council held on 7 March. It can be
concluded from this interim report that, despite
undeniable gaps with regard to the cooperation
between the Iraqi Government and the United Nations,
real progress has recently been recorded in the
identification and destruction of prohibited arms in
Iraq's possession.
The process of destroying the Al Samoud 2
missiles, which has just begun, under the supervision
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), is a concrete
result of the diplomatic and military pressure currently
being exerted on the Iraqi Government. Furthermore,
Switzerland notes that UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) do not
have, at this moment, conclusive information about
Iraq's continued possession or production of weapons
of mass destruction.

Concerning the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999), which continues to guide a
considerable part of the inspectors' work, Switzerland
welcomes the proposal of the UNMOVIC Executive
Director to submit to the Security Council, within a
very short time, a list of all outstanding questions
concerning disarmament, as well as a programme of
work aimed at achieving, within a reasonable time-
frame, the objectives of Security Council resolution
1441 (2002).

In current circumstances - that is to say, for as
long as, according to United Nations experts, the
inspections continue to yield results - Switzerland
considers that priority must be given to disarming Iraq
by peaceful means.

At this stage, Switzerland can only support
initiatives that aim to grant the UNMOVIC and IAEA
inspectors a reasonable amount of time to complete
their work of inspection, verification and destruction of
arms which have been proscribed by the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

If all attempts to disarm Iraq by peaceful means
fail, Switzerland invites the members of the Security
Council to see to it that any decision taken on the basis
of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
includes the unconditional demand on all parties to a
possible conflict to respect, and to ensure respect for,
international humanitarian law.

Moreover, Switzerland recalls the paramount
importance it accords to the humanitarian aspects of
the crisis which has affected the Iraqi people for the
past 12 years, and it reiterates its concern about the
potentially destructive effects of a possible military
conflict, in particular in the humanitarian and social
spheres. The dependence of some 60 per cent of the
Iraqi population on food and medical supplies through
the oil-for-food programme; the worrisome moral and
physical condition of millions of Iraqis, in particular of
women, children and the elderly; and the run-down
state of medical and sanitation infrastructure in Iraq
also argue in favour of the continuation and
strengthening of the inspections, with a view to
achieving the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means.

Finally, Switzerland once again strongly urges the
Iraqi authorities to cooperate fully, actively and
unconditionally with the United Nations inspectors. In
view of the fact that the inspections cannot be
continued indefinitely, a resolute and immediate
commitment by Iraq is absolutely indispensable in
order fully to shed light, in the near future, on the still-
unanswered questions concerning disarmament.

