The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.

I too join my colleagues in thanking Mr. Pascoe
for his update, and I am also very grateful to
Ambassador Shalev and Ambassador Mansour for their
respective contributions.

The only way to achieve durable peace is through
sincere negotiations in good faith between the parties
concerned. We support in particular the effort by the
United States to hold proximity talks and to restart
direct negotiations between the parties. We appreciate
the 19 March statement of the Quartet in that regard.
We encourage the parties to take the initiative to restart
direct negotiations. The negotiations should lead to a
two-State solution, which will end the 1967 occupation
of the territories, including East Jerusalem. Japan
supports and assists the Palestinian Authority's plan for
building a Palestinian State within 24 months by
extending assistance for institution- and capacity-
building. Palestinian unity is essential for realizing
peace in the Middle East.
Both parties must carry out their obligations and
commitments under the Road Map. We call on the
Israeli Government to freeze all settlement activities in
the West Bank and not to implement the decision to
build new housing units in East Jerusalem. Any act that
could prejudice the final status negotiations should not
be taken. We also call on Israel not to implement
measures that place an undue burden on the
Palestinians in the West Bank.

With respect to the Palestinian Authority, we call
upon it to continue in its efforts to improve the security
situation and to fulfil its commitment to cease violence
and act of terrorism.

More than one year after resolution 1860 (2009)
was adopted and the end of the Israel military
operations in Gaza, the Israeli blockade continues to
create a serious humanitarian situation in Gaza. Such a
situation is unacceptable. We strongly hope that the
recent modest but positive step taken by Israel will be
followed by freer movement of goods and materials for
reconstruction. We also call on all who are responsible
for the rocket fire into Israel to stop such actions
immediately.

I resume my function as President of the Security
Council. I now have the honour of giving the floor to
the representative of Egypt.

