Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
shocked by the attack on the United Nations compound
in Mogadishu, which has resulted in casualties to
Somalia's Government and its people. We express our
sympathies to the United Nations staff affected.

I thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing. We have also listened attentively to the
interventions of Mr. Annan, Managing Director Anstey
of the World Bank and Under-Secretary-General
Grynspan.

Natural resources form the material foundation for
human survival and development and play an important
role in promoting countries' economic growth and
development. However, in some conflict regions,
the illegal exploitation of and trafficking in natural
resources and their irrational use and distribution will
likely become major factors in triggering and fuelling
conflict.

Addressing the problem of conflict resulting
from the abuse of resources requires a multifaceted
industrial mix and a pattern of sustainable economic
growth, which are needed for the promotion of
sustainable development. On the other hand, the factors
leading to armed conflict are numerous and complex,
involving political, economic, social and other factors.
Nevertheless, natural resources are not a direct cause
of conflict.

Allow me to stress the following points on
the relationship between natural resources and the
prevention of conflict. First, the domestic sovereignty
of States over their natural resources must be respected.
All States possess inalienable sovereignty over the
resources within their territory. Given the rights and
duties of those countries, which include managing
and using their natural resources, the exploration,
development and use of those resources should be
determined by the people of the country itself. The
international community should respect that principle in
conducting resource-related cooperation. In particular,
it should respect the ownership by the country in
conflict in efforts to improve the management and use
of resources and to ensure that the people of the country
concerned will benefit from them.

Secondly, United Nations agencies and programmes
should enhance coordination in that area and together
assist conflict-affected countries to improve the
management of their natural resources. They should
also work within their respective remits and avoid
repetition. China supports the efforts of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, inter
alia, in continuing the discussion on the management
and use of natural resources. In formulating
integrated peacebuilding strategies, the Peacebuilding
Commission should bolster the important area of natural
resources management in post-conflict resolution and
reconstruction. The United Nations special missions
and various specialized United Nations development
agencies should integrate their resources and synergies
in order to support countries in conflict in their efforts
to strengthen capacity-building and the rational
development and use of their natural resources.

Thirdly, from its vantage point, the Council should
play its natural role in carrying out its responsibilities.
As the main United Nations organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council should place greater reliance on mediation and
good offices efforts. The Council must prioritize the
prevention and resolution of conflict when it seeks to
effectively fulfil its responsibilities in safeguarding
international peace and security. Therefore, sanctions
imposed by the Council should not serve as a means
in themselves, but should be specifically targeted to
avoid adverse impacts on the country's use of natural
resources while it is subjected to sanctions.

F ourthly, it is imperative to devote greater attention
to the role of regional organizations and relevant
mechanisms. In recent years, the African Union and
other regional and subregional organizations have
played an important role in encouraging African States
to bolster their resource management and development
efforts and improve the integrated management of
natural resources.

Intergovernmental mechanisms, such as the
Kimberley Process, have played an outstanding role in
curbing illegal trafficking in natural resources. Those
mechanisms should be encouraged to play a mutually
complementary role with the efforts of the affected
countries and the United Nations so as to ensure further
contributions in that area.

Transforming a country's natural resources into the
opportunity to create an enhanced future requires the
coordinated efforts of countries and the international
community. China supports the efforts of the relevant
United Nations agencies, based on their respective
mandates and the distribution of labour, in assisting
the countries affected to shake off the curse of natural
resources and promote their use and development.

