Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): I am pleased to begin my statement today by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. The work of the
Council has been conducted with efficiency and skill
under your presidency.

I am also pleased to extend to Ambassador Mahugu,
the Permanent Representative of Kenya, our appreciation
for his work last month.

Today, the Security Council is again addressing a
topic of great importance to the future of peace in the
Middle East: the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly in holy Jerusalem. This
city has a special status, the uniqueness of which is
represented by the spiritual heritage of the followers of all
three revealed religions and the deep religious feelings
associated with it, particularly in the Arab and Islamic
worlds.

We have spoken on this topic in the Council on a
number of occasions in recent years and we do so again
today in the wake of the adoption by the Israeli
Government, on 21 June 1998, of a programme
announced by the Prime Minister, which aims at
strengthening Israel's illegal hold on Jerusalem. The plan
would expand the boundaries of Jerusalem and would
extend the municipal authority so as to include some
Jewish settlements in the West Bank, establishing a so-
called "umbrella authority". This is a concrete step
towards the illegal annexation of more occupied
Palestinian land to the already illegally expanded
Jerusalem municipality.

With the convening of the Madrid Conference in
1991 and the establishment of the foundations and
principles of the peace process, we had hoped that a new
dawn had broken over the region in which just, lasting
and permanent peace would prevail. But Israel's
expansionist settler policy and confiscation of territories
dealt a blow to these hopes, which the new Israeli
Government has all but extinguished. It has openly
reneged on the commitments on which the peace process
is based, made settlement an integral part of its political
priorities, and adopted new and dangerous measures to
annex East Jerusalem. Thus, once again and for the fourth
time in two years, we return to the Security Council to
focus our attention on Israel's illegal measures and
practices in occupied East Jerusalem, aimed at
consolidating its attempts to alter the legal status and
demographic composition of that city.

 

Last year the Israeli Government began building a new
settlement that includes 6,500 housing units at Jebel Abu
Ghneim. Today it is trying to expand the area of settlement.
That is being done in the context of a series of similar
measures taken by Israel, including its declared intention to
build another settlement at Ras Al-Amud, within the
original borders of East Jerusalem, in the wake of its
demolition of buildings at Burj al-Laqlaq in order to
establish yet another settlement in their place. All of this is
the prelude to another campaign aimed at reducing the Arab
and Palestinian population of Jerusalem. We have always
warned that these policies and illegal measures to expand
Jerusalem are extremely dangerous.

The Israeli authorities are still holding to the new
tunnel that was built under Al-Haram Al-Sharif, despite
Security Council resolution 1073 (1996). The Security
Council has so far adopted 16 resolutions on Jerusalem, and
has repeatedly announced that all measures and
arrangements adopted by Israel, the occupying Power,
including those legislative and administrative arrangements
that aim to change the legal status and demographic
composition and character of the city, are null and void and
without any legal validity. Moreover, the Security Council
has repeatedly declared that the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 applies to all the territories occupied by Israel in
1967, including Jerusalem.

Given this context, we should like to affirm the
following principles. First, we express our full solidarity
with the Palestinian people, who refuse to submit to the
occupation, no matter how powerful that occupation may
be. Secondly, the settlement and expansionist measures,
justified by the Israelis on the pretext of security, which has
brought numerous Israeli Governments to power, have
proved to be a failure. Those measures have led to an
escalation of violence and an increase in tension between
the Arabs and the Israelis. What peace can be established
as long as occupation continues? A peace that is a fait
accompli imposed by force cannot survive, and is doomed
to ignominious failure.

Thirdly, the current problem is not an emergency; it is
the result of basic Israeli mentality and policy. To deal with
that problem we therefore need the international
community, as represented by this Council, to take a clear
position reaffirming to the Israeli Government its rejection
of the annexation of the occupied Arab territories, including
East Jerusalem, and its policy of settlement in other
occupied Arab territories.

 

East Jerusalem, like other towns and villages in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, are territories that were seized
by force by Israel in 1967. Occupation will not bestow
any legitimacy with the passage of time. The provisions
of international law state that those territories, which were
acquired by force, must be evacuated. The international
community should never recognize that occupation.

Those Arab territories, including East Jerusalem, are
subject to the provisions of the Hague Convention of
1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Therefore Israel, as the occupying Power, must not make
any changes in these territories. The Security Council has
adopted a long list of resolutions, all of which demand
that Israel respect its commitments and obligations as the
occupying Power. The most important of these is
resolution 478 (1980), which determines that all
legislative and administrative measures and actions taken
by Israel, the occupying Power, which have altered or
purport to alter the character and status of the Holy City
of Jerusalem, and in particular the recently "basic law" on
Jerusalem, are null and void and must be rescinded
forthwith.

We hope that the Security Council will oppose the
threats posed to Jerusalem by the Israeli Government's
actions and violations of international law and by the
blockade it has imposed on that Holy City, in addition to
the demolition of houses, the confiscation of identity
cards and the building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The Security Council, which is responsible for
international peace and security, must adopt specific,
concrete measures to stop the Israeli plan to expand the
borders of Jerusalem and any other Israeli violations of
international law and of Security Council resolutions.

In issuing this call we are working honestly and
sincerely for the future of peace in the region. Adopting
a relaxed attitude towards Israeli leaders has brought only
violence and destruction for Arabs and Israelis alike. Our
position is in conformity with the previous resolutions of
the Council and all resolutions of international legitimacy.
It is also in conformity with the high precepts of
international law, which remains the cornerstone of
today's civilized world.

We believe that it is the duty of the Council to work
for the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
and the resolutions that it has adopted in other regions of

 

the world as well as in the Middle East on the basis of one
and the same standard. We should not forget Security
Council resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969),
298 (1971) and 476 (1980), which all considered the
legislative and administrative measures as well as other
actions adopted by Israel in Jerusalem to be null and void.

We call for a resolution that will clearly express the
international community's rejection of and opposition to
Israel's policy and its measures to annex the occupied
territories or expand the settlements. We would like such a
resolution to include specific measures to commit Israel to
act in conformity with international legitimacy. Time is not
on the side of peace. There is a sense of foreboding, of an
evil that might spill over and that may not be confined to
the region.

Respect for previous Security Council resolutions on
Jerusalem must remain one of the main requisites for the
achievement of peace in the Middle East. If the Council
were to turn a blind eye to such Israeli actions, it would
call into question the credibility of the Council's criteria
and standards which the Council applies in dealing with
various questions. Real peace is at hand, provided that we
work for it on the bases that we all agreed together in
Madrid. The most important of these are land for peace and
the full implementation of international legitimacy. This
requires Israel to withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem and the Golan, to the lines
of 4 June 1967, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as resolution
425 (1978), which calls for strict respect by Israel for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders.

It also calls upon Israel to stop its military action
against the territorial integrity of Lebanon immediately and
to withdraw its troops from all Lebanese territory.

We call upon the cosponsors of the peace process and
the international community to continue to bring pressure
to bear on Israel to implement the pledges and
commitments it has entered into and to resume negotiations
on both the Lebanese and Syrian tracks from the point
where they stopped. The incomplete measures that have
been taken within the peace process should not free Israel
from the pressure of public opinion and of the international
community and should not allow it to continue its massive
settlement activities.

 

