Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Our thanks
to the Department for Disarmament Affairs for this
excellent report (S/2003/l2l7) on how the Council can
contribute to dealing with the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. The recommendations of the report
have Spain's firm support and the conclusions that can
be drawn from it are positive, on the whole, although it
indicates that important gaps remain.

As the Secretary-General has recalled and as has
been stated here, small arms and light weapons,
although they are not considered weapons of mass
destruction, have caused 90 per cent of the deaths in
conflicts since the Second World War. More than ever,
they represent a significant threat to peace and stability
in many countries. It is well known that they constitute
the main instrument of violence in internal conflicts,
their victims generally being civilians. Their
proliferation is also closely related to high levels of
crime and, of course, to the great scourge of our time,
terrorism. Fuelling that vicious circle is their illicit
trade in exchange for currency, gold, diamonds and
other natural resources and often illegally exploited
resources such as drugs.

The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms is a politically binding instrument.
Hence, despite its unquestionable value, an effective
action against illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects calls for complimentary
legislative work, both internationally - that is,
through conventions - and domestically, through
legislation. It is not in vain that the Programme of
Action's preamble gives States the main responsibility
for adopting measures aimed at combating the illicit
trade in these weapons.

Spain welcomes the adoption by the General
Assembly of a decision to set up a working group to
negotiate an instrument on the marking and tracing of
small arms and light weapons, the first legally binding
instrument that will come into being under the
Programme of Action. My country trusts that the
instrument to be agreed will contain all of the elements
needed to guarantee its effectiveness when it comes to
helping to prevent these kinds of weapons from ending
up in the wrong hands, especially among terrorist
groups.

Spain believes it is appropriate for the Security
Council to become increasingly involved in combating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and, in
conjunction with the Assembly, to promote the
adoption of national measures as well as international
and regional cooperation to strengthen controls over
exports, imports and transit of small arms,
effectiveness of end-user certificates and combating
problems of illicit brokerage, all of these being key
elements in combating illicit trade.

Increasing the effectiveness of end-user
certificates and combating unlawful brokerage are
questions that have already been addressed in the First
Committee. For the time being, those discussions have
not yet been translated into concrete action, except for
the decision of the General Assembly in resolution
58/241 to ask the Secretary-General to consult with
Member States and international and regional
organizations on ways and means to enhance
international cooperation against illegal brokerage.

We believe, however, that the Council should
explore specific modalities in connection with the
Assembly on those two concrete issues, especially to
promote the development of long-term strategies aimed
at preventing and eradicating the illicit trade in those
weapons. Strengthening international and regional
cooperation are key elements in combating that trade.
Therefore, I should like to refer to a number of
initiatives in which my country is participating. First,
the European Union Code of Conduct on Arms Exports
is applied by Spain and constitutes one of the most
advanced instruments with regard to laying down
common criteria for export of conventional weapons
with transparency. This is an example of regional
cooperation. The same can be said of the common
position on the control of brokerage, which requires
middlemen to be registered before they can conduct
their transactions. Spain will soon incorporate into its
legislation the recommendations of that joint position.

Finally, the permanent parliamentary forum on
small arms and light weapons in Central America,
constituted by the national parliaments of Spain,
Sweden and the countries of Central America has, as
its objective, the harmonization of national laws on
small arms and light weapons. It represents an
outstanding example of regional cooperation in that
field.

In conclusion, Spain considers that the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms constitutes an
important mechanism for global transparency. We
therefore welcome the recent decision to expand its
scope to cover so-called man-portable air defense
systems. If those systems were to fall into the hands of
terrorists, it would be an extremely grave threat to the
security of air traffic and thereby constitute a danger to
international peace and security. For that reason, my
country believes the Council should address this
question as soon as possible.

