Ms. Nakamitsu: On behalf of the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Ms. Helen Clark, I would like to sincerely thank you,
Madam President, for convening this very important
meeting and UNDP to brief members of the Council
on this crucial topic. I would also like to express our
gratitude to the Nigerian delegation and you for your
personal leadership on this very important issue.

Security sector reform (SSR) is a relatively
new area for us, but as co-Chairs of both the United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force and the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice
and Corrections, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and UNDP increasingly reap the
benefits of working closely together to sustain peace
in settings where Security Council mandates apply.
Resolution 2151 (2014) highlights aspects of security
that are particularly important to UNDP. It emphasizes
people's safety, human rights and democratic oversight
in the security sector. These are essential foundations
for the rule of law, peace and sustainable development.

The proposed goal 16, on peaceful, just and
inclusive societies of the 2030 agenda for sustainable
development further recognizes the important linkages
between peace and development and urges Member
States to promote the rule of law, safety and justice.
It also calls for effective, accountable and transparent
institutions at all levels. This also applies to the security
institutions responsible for providing a safe and secure
environment to people and communities. Please allow
me to highlight briefly three essential ingredients
for successful SSR implementation in post-conflict
environments from the UNDP perspectives.
First, security sector reform is a long-term process,
and we must understand and accept that SSR requires
both concerted efforts in the lifetime of United Nations
peace operations and long-term sustained efforts and
support beyond peace operations. It is therefore critical
to sequence and strategically prioritize various tasks.
Security Council mandates on SSR have become
more comprehensive, requiring United Nations peace
operations to implement an increasingly wide range
of SSR tasks. But we also know that addressing the
negative power bases in the security services of post-
conflict countries is one of the most challenging aspects
of post-conflict reconstruction and transformation. In
fact, it is one of the structural causes that had led those
countries to Violent conflicts in the first place. Military
and security cadres often have vested interests in the
political settlements that follow peace agreements.

Therefore, it is not easy to resolve these
challenges. This means that the implementation of
holistic approaches to SSR by the United Nations
requires a sustained focus on building political will
for meaningful reforms. Strong political support from
the Council will be key in that regard, and therefore
Mr. Titov's suggestion of a possible compact is indeed
an interesting one. At the same time, national capacity-
building efforts that will continue over time need to
be supported by predictable and reliable sources of
funding. In order to be effective, such efforts must be
carried out in a conflict-sensitive manner and be built
into longer-term development assistance programming.

Secondly, at the country level, as Mr. Titov pointed
out, we must have the right balance and combination
of technical expertise and guidance, on the one
hand, and political accompaniment, on the other, for
a successful SSR. In order for the United Nations to
make a difference in this area, we must find ways for
peace operations to work closely with country teams
in an integrated manner, and we must strive to use our
collective resources and capacities more efficiently and
in a more impactful way.

As underscored by the recent report of the High-
Level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446), such joint approaches
are a necessity for enhancing operational coherence.
We are pleased to see acknowledgement in the Panel's
report that Mission budgets should ensure that funds
for programming are available to support that work as
well as the recognition that United Nations agencies,
such as UNDP, are well placed to support peace
operations in that regard. The fact that the Council
invited UNDP to brief it today is further testimony
that our programming work, which brings together the
required technical expertise, is indeed an important
part of the implementation of the mandates given to the
United Nations.

By working together, the United Nations is more
capable of delivering those comprehensive mandates.
For example, linking police salary payments with
support to improved community policing on issues
related to gender-based Violence and with better
recruitment and training of cadets makes eminent
sense and is already delivering positive results on
the ground, as seen in Somalia. There, UNDP works
with the Global Focal Point partners, DPKO and UN-
Women, as well as the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, in delivering a joint rule-of-law
programme that includes training and mentoring for
the Puntland police force. Through the programme,
we are supporting 25 police officers, including six
women, who are studying criminal science thanks to
a police scholarship initiative developed in partnership
with Puntland State University. This might seem like
a small initiative, but we are investing in creating and
supporting the leadership of a police force that will put
people's security and safety at the core of their service.

In another case, UNDP, through a joint initiative
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
UN-Women and the Global Focal Point, redeployed
police and gendarmerie forces in the Central African
Republic by supplying general food allowances and
salary payments. Those efforts allowed justice sector
activities to resume and reduced cases of robbery,
including armed robbery, in the country.

Thirdly, for SSR to succeed, we must have a coherent

strategy among all actors who support it - from the
United Nations, regional organizations and other
Member States - and the full ownership, leadership
and political commitment of national stakeholders.
Successful SSR requires support and investment from
Member States, whether through development support,
Government-provided personnel or direct cooperation,
to reinforce and complement United Nations efforts.
We have many lessons learned over past decades in
that regard - for example, from Afghanistan. In other
places, such as the Central African Republic, Mali and
Somalia, where many actors are involved, we have
also learned that better coordination efforts between
regional entities and the United Nations should be
prioritized to enhance our collective impact.

Within the United Nations system, coordination
between United Nations missions and country teams
should commence as soon as Security Council mandates
on SSR are established and should be linked to joint
planning undertaken by the global focal point, which
encompasses important aspects of SSR, especially
on police reform. I very much agree with Mr. Titov's
statement that SSR is not only about the defence sector.

For reforms to be sustainable, joint programmes
need to be aligned with national development plans and
national budgets. I would also add that joint engagement
throughout the lifetime of a mission will also help
the United Nations to manage smooth transitions as
missions draw down.

In conclusion, let me stress that the United Nations
system needs to translate security sector reform in
post-conflict settings into tangible results that are
immediately felt by ordinary people on the street. As
I stated earlier, SSR is a long-term process. However,
for UNDP it is the number one priority in the lifespan
of United Nations peace operations. We must look at
security in the broader context of promoting safe and
secure environments for communities and people,
especially for women, and in terms of facilitating
people's participation in efforts to strengthen and
reform security institutions.

We must also pay more attention to advancing
gender equality and security for women, as Special
Representative Bangura pointed out. Although this
year marks the tenth year anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, we
continue to see high levels of Violence against women
and girls in conflict and, unfortunately, high levels of
impunity. Those situations require a comprehensive
and coordinated response on the part of the United
Nations system and the international community. Only
by promoting people's security and safety and human
rights and democratic oversight in the security sector,
can we lay the foundation for the rule of law, peace and
sustainable development.

