Allow me to congratulate the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, for her assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November. We wish her every success in fulfilling her mandate. I would like to take this opportunity to deeply thank all delegations for their condolences and sympathies following the recent passing away of our former Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Omer Arteh Ghalib. He left an indelible mark on our history, having led during its toughest moment, and we will certainly remember him for his brilliant leadership during Somalia's presidency of the Security Council, steering the work of the Security Council's first- ever meeting in Africa in January 1972 (see S/PV.1627). The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its unwavering commitment to continuing to work closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, alongside the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), in order to help accomplish its mandate. I therefore wish to extend our gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia for their briefings. I would also like to thank our Somali civil society representative, Ms. Zainab Hassan, for her briefing. On 12 November, President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo signed the electoral agreement for indirect elections, having been adopted by both Houses of Parliament on 26 September, marking the culmination of the inclusive political agreement reached in Mogadishu by the leadership of the federal member states and the Federal Government of Somalia. The electoral timetable and the procedures announced by the National Consultative Council on 1 October will guide the implementation of those elections. In line with the agreed timetable, the elections for the Upper House and for the House of the People are expected to take place by the end of the year. That will be followed by the election of the speakers of Parliament and the election of the President between | January and 8 February 2021. We reiterate that the Federal Government of Somalia is committed to holding fair, free and timely elections. Since the preparations for, and logistics of, the elections require significant funding for operational and security arrangements, we seek the renewed commitment of our partners to providing timely and adequate technical and financial support to the relevant institutions and bodies tasked with organizing and overseeing the 2020-2021 elections. The political agreement reached between the leadership of the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states was clear in advocating that the 30 per cent quota for women should be safeguarded and that it constitutes a mechanism for ensuring that women's participation is developed. The Federal Government of Somalia will continue to advocate for the full representation of women at all decision-making levels. Allow me to stress that the 30 per cent quota for women should be seen as a minimum requirement to be attained. The Somali Women's Charter, which was endorsed by the Federal Government of Somalia, clearly states that the aim should be 50 per cent women representation. While a one-person, one-vote election could not be achieved at this moment in time, it continues to remain the ambition and aspiration of all Somalis. For the realization of that goal, the Federal Government of Somalia formed a technical team consisting of members of the Ministry of the Interior and the National Independent Electoral Commission and representatives from the Office of the Prime Minister to draft a road map for universal suffrage elections of one person, one vote, to take place in 2025. Let me take this opportunity to inform the Council that the technical committee has already drafted the road map, which will be presented to the Cabinet for endorsement. In addition to that, my Government will take up consultations with the leaders of the federal member states and other stakeholders before the road map is presented to Federal Parliament for adoption. That is why the Federal Government of Somalia, in collaboration with the National Independent Electoral Commission, has also started preparations for one-person, one-vote elections to take place in 2024-2025. Our comprehensive security sector reform is undergoing continuing progress and continues to gain momentum. Having streamlined and standardized Somalia's national armed forces, the Government continues to generate and integrate forces, enabling us to continue to degrade the terrorist groups and liberate more areas. We are at the finishing stages of a longer-term Somali transition plan, designed to hand over the responsibility for protecting Somali citizens to the Somali national armed forces as the AMISOM peacekeeping troops continue to transit out of the country. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the troop- and police-contributing countries for their unwavering support and sacrifices in restoring peace and security in Somalia. The brave young men and women in our Somali national armed forces continue to effectively hold areas previously liberated from Al-Shabaab, paving the way for a successful AMISOM drawdown and its eventual exit from Somalia. However, there is an urgent need to empower and invest more in the advancement, training, mobility and equipment of the Somali National Army. We go on record again to say that the arms embargo is greatly hindering the capabilities of the Somali National Army to be able to effectively eradicate terrorist groups from our country. Somalia's economic and financial sector reform initiatives have been key priorities for the Federal Government of Somalia, with a view to alleviating the unsustainable national debt burden on the Somali people. Through great national efforts and in partnership with bilateral and multilateral partners, Somalia completed successive economic reform programmes guided by the International Monetary Fund to reach the decision point under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. That was a huge achievement, which is now being followed by a sequel programme - the Extended Credit Facility - which continues to focus on strengthening public financial management, raising domestic revenue towards fiscal sustainability, managing expenditure at a sustainable level, good governance, financial sector reform and, overall, putting in place laws and regulations to institutionalize good governance and sustainable economic management. We are determined to remain on the right reform trajectory in order to reach the completion point and hopefully attain complete debt forgiveness. That, coupled with the lessons we have learned and the systems and processes we have built through the economic reform journey, should lead Somalia on the road to sustainable development, opportunity and prosperity. With regard to justice reform, the Lower House of Parliament approved, on 16 November, the nominees for the Judicial Service Commission. That Commission is a vital, constitutionally mandated body that advises the Federal Government of Somalia on the administration of justice. We are also currently in the final stages of presenting before Parliament the list of nominees for the Anti-Corruption Commission. On the promotion and protection of human rights, in 2018 the Cabinet unanimously approved the draft sexual offences bill and submitted it to Parliament. That legislation is not new to Somalia. The regions of Somaliland and Puntland have already adopted similar legislation. Nonetheless, our Government remains committed to advancing human rights and the protection of women and girls in Somalia. To that end, we are aware of the controversy that has surrounded the sexual offences bill and will engage in dialogue with Parliament and religious scholars to discuss how we can move that vital legislation forward. The Federal Government of Somalia is cognizant of the important role played by the media in our State-building process. I recently met with a group of Somali journalists and representatives of Reporters Without Borders to reassure them of my commitment to protecting the space for the media to enable it to provide information to our citizens freely. We have enacted a media law that provides guidelines on media operations and activities while also protecting the rights of the media and journalists working in the country. We have reformed the communications units under the Office of the President, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Information in order to facilitate access for journalists who require information on Government plans and activities. Somalia has been grappling with cyclic climate emergencies as the country oscillates between floods and droughts from season to season. We are now faced with the worst medical crisis in a century. Somalia's weak health infrastructure and limited resources have curtailed our efforts to contain the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is threatening to derail our reform efforts. It also poses a serious security challenge in a context that is already marked by fragility. In Somalia, training delivered by partners has been suspended so as to stall the spread of the disease. There is a high risk that the security personnel screening road users may catch the contagion. Protective equipment is in short supply. The Government is distributing masks among front-line officers, but that is far from being sufficient. The Somali National Army forces are also involved in the public awareness campaigns against the disease. The global shutdown has seen a ban both on international and local flights, the imposition of a partial curfew and the waiving of taxes on essential food and non-food items, among other measures. And while food prices have soared, remittances have significantly decreased, and trading activities have declined considerably. All of those factors have caused a reduction in domestic revenue. Families will need to be supported and small and medium-sized business enterprises cushioned against the negative impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In conclusion, Somalia's challenges remain significant, including our vulnerability to extreme weather, the COVID-19 pandemic, the long-term demands of State-building and tackling an active and vicious terrorist group. All of those challenges require long-term plans to build and resource legitimate institutions in order to address the structural, political and legacy issues of corruption. We are certainly on the right path, which will enable us to achieve peace and security for all Somalis, while changing the perception from one of poverty to one of sustainable development, and from fragility to resilience.
