Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I must convey the condolences of the Kingdom
of Morocco to South Africa and the entire African
continent upon the loss of the giant of Africa, Nelson
Mandela.

I wish to thank the Presidents of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Theodor Meron, and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Vagn Joensen, and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their reports
and presentations on the activities of the Tribunals.

We noted with satisfaction the efforts deployed
by the two Tribunals during the reporting period to
implement the completion strategy for their work and
to achieve a smooth transition to the International
Residual Mechanism, while ensuring trials that respect
the fundamental principles of equity and due process.

The ICTR has taken an important step in the
process of transition to the Mechanism by concluding
trial division cases with regard to all of the individuals
before it and ensuring referrals to the Mechanism, while
the six remaining cases, in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010), come under Rwandanjurisdiction.

We welcome the spirit of cooperation and
coordination that has characterized the relations
between the Tribunals, which are closing, and the
Mechanism, which is being assisted in administrative
matters by the Tribunals and which will continue to
track fugitives, mount prosecutions and take on most of
the judicial functions.

The President of the Tribunal, as a permanent
judge of the Arusha Branch of the Mechanism, is now
focusing his attention on contempt allegations; he also
regularly meets with the Tribunal's archive groups and
chairs meetings of the Joint Coordination Council of
the Tribunal and the Mechanism.

For its part, the Office of the Prosecutor is working
to complete appeal cases, monitor cases transferred to
national jurisdictions and take transitional measures to
ensure a smooth transfer of functions to the Office of

the Prosecutor of the Arusha Branch of the Mechanism
and the effective final closure of the Tribunal at the end
of its mandate.
In addition, the transitional activities have already
addressed the monitoring of the enforcement of
sentences by the President of the Mechanism and the
designation, on 17 September, of two facilities for
the transfer of the temporary Tribunal archives to the
Mechanism, which has now begun.

Nevertheless, the transition process is not without
its difficulties, such as the preparation of archives to
be transferred to the Mechanism and issues of staff
compensation, which have given rise to delays.

With respect to the ICTY, I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate my congratulations to Togo on
the election of Koffi Kumelio Afande on 18 November
by the General Assembly as a judge of the ICTY.
We support the extension of the judges' mandates as
requested by President Meron.

Since its inception, the ICTY has made efforts
to complete its mandate. It was able to judge 136 out
of a total of 161 accused in the trial division and 21
appeals during the reporting period. There are no
outstanding fugitives, since Ratko Mladie and Goran
Hadzie were arrested in 2011. However, as indicated in
the report, there are still some remaining difficulties
to be overcome. The ICTY will not be able to deliver
judgements on the two accused whom I just mentioned
before 31 December 2014, as stipulated in resolution
1966 (2010), owing to the fact that their arrests were
so recent. Moreover, on the other cases, decisions
may not be handed down until June 2017, owing to the
appeals docket. The Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal
will therefore function in parallel with that of the
Mechanism after 31 December 2014.

Furthermore, practical solutions must be considered
for facilitating the resettlement and rehabilitation of
persons who have been acquitted or who have completed
their sentences.

We welcome the outreach programme, which
seeks to disseminate factual information regarding the
Tribunal to the communities of the former Yugoslavia,
targeting in particular young people in high schools
and universities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and Serbia. The documentaries transmitted by 12 local
television stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
judicial activities in the former Yugoslavia and post-
conflict reconstruction, as well as cultural events,
are extremely important when it comes to promoting
reconciliation.

While everyone recognizes the important role
played by witnesses in testifying to their experiences,
those people face great difficulties, especially those who
suffered atrocities. They therefore require multifaceted
support, including psychological support.

We are pleased to note the efforts made by the
Tribunal to implement the completion strategy and the
transition to the Mechanism. We welcome the transfer
of the archival and records management functions
from the Tribunal to the Mechanism on 1 July 2012;
local cooperation between the Tribunal and The
Hague Branch of the Mechanism, in accordance with
provisions of resolution 1966 (2010), during their
period of coexistence; and the support provided by the
Legal Affairs Section of the Tribunal in negotiations on
a headquarters agreement with the host country.

Lastly, it should be underscored that only through
continued dialogue between the Tribunals and the
other bodies of the United Nations will it be possible to
overcome the difficulties that they face.

I cannot conclude my statement without paying
tribute to the Ambassador of Guatemala and his team
for their praiseworthy efforts and professionalism in
leading the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.

