Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Security Council is
meeting today to consider the quarterly report of the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and its 90-day work programme, until the end of 2003,
which my delegation fully endorses as a real
contribution to the global fight against terrorism.

We praise the activity undertaken by Ambassador
Inocencio Arias, current Chairman of the Committee,
its members and the independent experts. We have
taken note of the Committee's work regarding the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by reviewing
the reports submitted by States, by ensuring that all
States become parties as soon as possible to the
relevant international conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism; and by taking, in the area of
assistance, a more proactive approach to its
collaboration with States facing difficulties in
complying fully with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001) and strengthening cooperation with and among
international, regional and subregional organizations
with anti-terrorist programmes.

The fact that, by 30 September 2003, 48 States
were late in submitting their reports to the CTC is a
reality that reminds us of the urgent need to extend and
strengthen CTC assistance to a large number of
developing countries in order to make the existence of
legislation and operational mechanisms to combat
terrorism global and effective. A large number of
developing countries have enacted anti-terrorist
legislation, but their scarce financial, technical and
human resources inhibit the implementation of such a
legislative framework.

Moreover, those countries lack the capacity to
deal effectively with border control and security, the
movement of criminals, the smuggling of illicit drugs
and illegal firearms and possible links with terrorists.
We recognize the need for those countries to approach
international standards in order to meet the great
challenges ahead. However, to meet that goal,
developing countries need long-term assistance focused
on national and regional capacity-building in areas
related to resolution 1373 (2001). Only through a
concerted effort and international assistance will they
be able to meet reporting requirements and strengthen
their capacity to wage an effective fight against
terrorism. We welcome the Committee's commitment
to provide assistance to countries in need and its
decision to adopt a more proactive approach to the
delivery of assistance.

The CTC recognizes that cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations is
the main thrust of its programme of work. The meeting
held on 7 March by the CTC with international,
regional and subregional organizations concluded that
the sharing of information and best practices relevant
to global cooperation was one of the main instances of
their coordinated approach for the suppression of
terrorism. Regional and subregional organizations are a
suitable forum for the exchange of information, setting
standards and disseminating best practices among
members.

The African Union set a pioneering example by
establishing the Organization of African Unity
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, generally called the Algiers Convention of
1999. Through the Convention, the African countries
pursue a common objective, with joint action at the
intergovernmental level for the exchange of
information on the activities and movements of
terrorist groups in Africa, and with actions designed to
step up the fight against terrorism. In that regard,
international cooperation is vital to build capacities in
the African countries, allowing them to take more
effective action at the national, subregional and
continental levels against the financing of terrorism, to
track terrorist networks and to apprehend terrorists and
bring them to justice.

In conclusion, the approach and strategies for
fighting terrorism have been agreed by consensus by
the international community. The establishment of
international standards and best practices; adherence by
all States to them, the provision of technical assistance
to States lagging behind in establishing the appropriate
legislative and operational mechanisms to combat
terrorism; and cooperation among international,
regional and subregional organizations - those are the
main elements of the global strategy established by
resolution 1373 (2001) that we are striving to
implement.

