Mr. Pal (India): It is not only a pleasure, but also
very reassuring, to see you, the representative of a
leading member of the Non-Aligned Movement,
presiding over the Security Council as it considers
what its role might be in an area of the work of the
United Nations where the clear view of the non-aligned
is that most of what post-conflict peace-building
involves lies outside the mandate of the Council, and
properly within the purview of the General Assembly.
May I also take this opportunity to congratulate
Singapore very warmly on the outstanding work it did
during its presidency; the credit for this goes to
Ambassador Mahbubani and his dedicated staff.

In a detailed statement when the Council
discussed this matter in 1998, we set out the reasons
why it would do more harm than good if the Security
Council trespassed on the mandate of others. Those
arguments remain valid, and I will not repeat them. We
would be glad to send copies of our statement to
Council members who want to refresh their memories.

As the cold war showed, conflicts might end and
peace-building begin without the Council's being
involved. The huge challenges that the countries in
transition in Central and Eastern Europe now face have
their roots in that conflict, and they are identical to the
priorities the United Nations lists for post-conflict
societies: putting in place representative systems of
governance, building an inclusive society, setting up a
liberal economy, and coping with the difficulties of
demobilization. The countries in transition need, and
have received, special attention from the entire United
Nations system; the one body not engaged in post-
conflict peace-building there is the Security Council,
which has, prudently and correctly, kept its distance.

Where the Council has helped settle conflicts, or
where the United Nations is asked to monitor peace
agreements negotiated by others, it has a role to play in
setting up the peacekeeping operations which are part
ofthe process of building peace. But it does not follow
that these must take on the work of economic and
social reconstruction, or that the Security Council
should ask them to do so. Much has been said of the
new peacekeeping and of how it is completely different
from the old, but this ignores facts. Consider the
operations now in place. Some points become clear: the
majority are still groups of observers or formed
contingents observing a truce, even if they are
deployed within a single country; the operations in
Georgia and Tajikistan are cases in point.

Major operations such as United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) might have
thousands of troops, but they are deployed in thin
bands across a border to monitor a withdrawal and a
ceasefire. They have no other mandate, and, being
where they are, obviously cannot possibly take on
economic, social or other tasks, or even advise on
them, such local knowledge as they gather being
limited to the borders they police.

Even new operations within a single country,
such as the one contemplated for the Congo, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), would be deployed
very selectively. MONUC would have little
information about what was happening in the rest of
that vast country, would find it very hard to discharge
even the military mandate it has been given, and would
be in no position to do anything else.

The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) are the three exceptions in recent
years to this rule.

Trying to draw general conclusions from these
very exceptional cases is dangerous and was one of the
more serious shortcomings of the Brahimi report. In
Kosovo and East Timor, the United Nations runs
transitional administrations, as it does not and should
not in other post-conflict situations. Speaking here on
November 29 last year on the lessons for post-conflict
peace-building to be learnt from the United Nations
experience in Guinea-Bissau, the Secretary-General
said that, in devising mandates for peace-building
missions or revising the mandates or exit strategies for
existing ones, the Council should bear in mind that
Governments in post-conflict situations might be weak
and not able to take action which should normally be
undertaken by a sovereign Government. This is what
the United Nations does in Kosovo and East Timor,
where it took over in a vacuum. Where a Government
is in place, no matter how weak, the United Nations
should do nothing to give the impression that the
Government is a cipher and that authority resides in the
peacekeeping operation. That will undermine, not
build, peace.

The Secretary-General also asked for more
flexible financial arrangements for post-conflict
situations, and he asked the Council to support the
Brahimi recommendation that a percentage of a
mission's initial budget be set aside to fund quick-
impact projects. We understand what the Secretary-
General has in mind. Indeed, wherever Indian troops
have been deployed, they help the local communities
with practical projects, digging wells and building
schools and roads, as the Council's mission to Sierra
Leone has seen. Our troops are trained to take on
projects in aid of civil authority and they respond to
local needs, expressed to them by community leaders.
It is another thing entirely for projects to be conceived
and funded from New York, which might seem
attractive, but be either unsuitable or unsustainable.

In fact, in the debate on East Timor in the Council
on 26 January, the representative of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) made this very point. Donors
were being generous because East Timor was a high-
profile undertaking, but he warned, as others have
before him, that when interest faded, what may be
beneficial today may be too costly tomorrow. And on
flexible funding, the Council will remember that what
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello called a "cruel budget", the
IMF representative described as realistic.

Clearly there are hard choices to be made, but the
Security Council is not the place to make them. It does
not have the mandate or the expertise to decide these
issues, and if major extra financial provisions were
built into the budgets of peacekeeping operations, these
would be funded through assessed contributions. There
are several regions where countries recovering from
conflict border others teetering on the brink. It would
be unjust and self-defeating for the post-conflict
country to have its development paid for through
assessed contributions because the Council had
mandated it, while, for very much the same needs, its
neighbours, in very much the same desperate
circumstances, had to scramble for a share of a
shrinking global official development assistance.
Blatantly unequal treatment, within countries as
between them, does not build peace 7 it breeds conflict.

The dark side of what the United Nations does in
Kosovo and East Timor is Iraq. There too, though there
is a Government in place, it is the United Nations that
determines local needs and how they shall be met. The
oil-for-food programme is post-conflict peace-building
of sorts, but no one - neither the Secretariat, nor the
Brahimi Panel, nor the vast literature on this subject -
ever refers to the United Nations experiment in Iraq as
a precedent to follow. But if Iraq is sui generis, so too
are Kosovo and East Timor.

It is not that the Council has no role at all.
Members of the Council can help in some ways
in post-conflict peace-building. In disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which peacekeeping
operations are expected to supervise, experience has
shown that armed gangs do not hand over the weapons
without which they might be lynched by those they
have terrorized or be unable to force others to
give them food and shelter. For disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to succeed, the
peacekeeping force must be so visibly strong on arrival
that all parties to the conflict realize that it has the
means of protecting them if they surrender their
weapons and can overwhelm anyone foolhardy enough
to try to take it on. Unfortunately, the Council almost
never authorizes this, and its frugality has been shown
to be a disastrous and false economy.

Secondly, most conflicts are still fought with
small arms and light weapons. Effective arms
embargoes are one way of reducing the risk of conflicts
being resumed, but members of the Council have a
larger role here. Some of them are the principal
manufacturers and exporters of these weapons; they
must ensure that arms are not exported from their
territories to States, non-state actors, terrorists or rebel
groups that use violence against legitimate
Governments.

Finally, the instrument the Council uses for post-
conflict peace-building is the peacekeeping operation,
but it is the Secretariat that chooses the troop
contributors. Because the peacekeepers play so
important a role, the Council needs to give some
thought to this. Some standard and minimum
requirements must be laid down, and these must be
both professional and political. The Serbian Special
Police are quite effective in what they do, but the
United Nations has not deployed them as civilian
police in East Timor, nor has it tried to legitimize the
former East Timorese militias by offering them jobs in
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor. This is natural; the United Nations can promote
democracy, respect for civilian authority, the peaceful
resolution of disputes and national reconciliation only
through peacekeeping forces who understand, from
national experience, what all this means. It would be a
travesty, for instance, and an insult to promote post-
conflict peace-building in Sierra Leone through
peacekeepers who overthrow democracies at home.

