The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing and the very helpful graphics that she circulated
today. We warmly welcome Helen La Lime and wish her
every success with her new mission. We look forward
to continued progress from the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), together
with its road map towards the planned drawdown of
operations by October 2019.

This past July represented a critical test for both the
Government of Haiti and MINUJUSTH, with both the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and the United Nations
formed police units confronting Violent protests and
riots. During a time of political instability, the Haitian
National Police, with the support MINUJUSTH, acted
to protect the civilian population and refrained from
actions that would have further inflamed the situation.
Those efforts prevented a prison break from the national
penitentiary, which would have made an extremely
volatile situation in downtown Port-au-Prince even
more complex. The continued professionalization
of the Haitian National Police demonstrates the
progress made towards achieving the Mission's exit
strategy benchmarks, and will make possible the
on-schedule transition of tasks and responsibilities
to the Government of Haiti, in coordination with the
United Nations country team. However, it is essential to
protect those hard-won gains, and MINUJUSTH has an
important role to play before drawing down.

First, more progress must be made in the fight
against corruption. No one should be above the law,
and we call on the Government of Haiti to work
with MINUJUSTH and international partners to
strengthen its justice-sector institutions, including its
anti-corruption bodies, and to promote judicial reforms
to combat impunity and strengthen the rule of law.
Secondly, it is imperative that corrupt officials or any
other individuals implicated in human rights violations
be held accountable for their actions. Thirdly, we must
also caution against the politicization of the police.
The Government of Haiti must prioritize the continued
development and professionalization of its National
Police and ensure that the institution remains apolitical.
Finally, the Government of Haiti and its civil society
and international partners must continue to address
human rights concerns, such as those involving sexual
exploitation and abuse, violence against women and
girls, high rates of prolonged pretrial detention and
trafficking in persons.

While there is much to accomplish, we acknowledge
the HNP's steps to improve its response to public
demonstrations and reinforce its inspectorate general to
investigate reported police abuses, as well as progress
made in advancing human rights activities through the
Haitian Government's Directorate of Civil Protection.
The United States looks forward to the scheduled
transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti by October 2019 and the assumption
of those responsibilities by the Government of Haiti.

I will now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
