Mr. Ahmad (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
extending a very warm welcome to the Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Zimbabwe, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Rwanda. Their participation in the discussion of the
issue before has helped us appreciate their positions
better. We are encouraged by their renewed
commitment to reaching an early resolution of the
problem and the conflict.

I should also like to pay special tribute to
Mr. Mahmoud Kassem, Chairman of the Panel of
Experts, and members of his team for a task
accomplished with a high degree of professionalism,
courage and determination.

As we focus our discussion on the Panel report, I
would also like to recall with gratitude the work done
by the Panel under the chairmanship of Mme Safiatou
Ba-N'Daw. With the submission of the addendum, the
Panel has completed the basic task of enquiry into the
problem and preliminary recommendations to break the
nexus between the illegal or abusive exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the continuation of the conflict. The Panel's findings
and recommendations assume critical importance as we
make determined efforts to advance the peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We shall address two issues in particular: first,
Council action with regard to the recommendations of
the Panel, and secondly, the question of the extension
of the mandate of the Panel.

The Kassem Panel has confirmed that the finding
regarding the illegal exploitation of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to be
true. It has also confirmed the conclusion that there is a
clear linkage between the illegal exploitation of those
resources and the continuation of the conflict. This
linkage has to be broken. The question is how.

The Panel recommends to us a set of three
measures: the review and revision of all concessions,
commercial agreements and contracts signed between
1997 and 2001; a moratorium on the import of high-
value commodities such as coltan, diamonds, gold,
cobalt, copper, timber and coffee from territories under
foreign occupation or rebel control; and sanctions,
depending on the evolution of the situation.

We would have supported the immediate
implementation of some of the recommendations, in
particular, a mandatory moratorium on the import of
high-value commodities from the territories under the
control of rebel movements or foreign forces.
However, maintaining the imperative of preserving
momentum in the peace process, we agree that the
Council should take a decision after a thorough study

S/l'VA437

 

of relevant factors, including the humanitarian
consequences of the measures.

The review and revision of all concessions,
commercial agreements and contracts would be an
effective measure to cut the linkage between
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the war. We are aware of
the argument that such a measure can be best
undertaken by the new political dispensation, following
the successful conclusion of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. However, should such a step be ultimately
necessary and if the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is in agreement, we shall
support setting up a body under the auspices of the
Council to assist the process.

As for sanctions, we would hope that the parties
would cooperate with the Council to avert recourse to
such a coercive measure.

Let me go back for a moment to the original
report submitted by Mme Ba-N'Daw in April. We
believe the Council should revisit some of the
recommendations in that report, in particular with
regard to the mineral trade, financial transactions, an
arms embargo, military cooperation and compensation.
The moratorium on high-value commodities, if and
when decided, should ideally also extend to these
areas. All concerned, including transit countries and
the countries of destination of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo's illegally exploited resources, have a
moral obligation to join the moratorium.

The moratorium should include the import,
export and transport of certain minerals and financial
transactions that have been questioned. Countries
involved may also consider declaring an immediate
moratorium on the supply of weapons and all military
supplies to the rebel groups operating in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Council's demand for such interim measures
should extend to all actors involved in the illegal
activities: Governments, armed forces, individuals and
public or private enterprises engaged directly or
indirectly in the extraction, transport, import and
export of the resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The second point we would like to address is the
need for extending the mandate of the Panel.
Bangladesh supports a six-month extension of the

mandate for three reasons. The first is to complete the
unfinished task. As the Panel reports in paragraph 7 of
the addendum, information was not forthcoming from
several regional countries. Besides, the short mandate
of three months severely limited the Panel's ability to
present a more complete addendum. The second reason
is that the Panel was also unable to investigate fully the
reactions and complaints of those named in the report.
The third is the need to examine the feasibility and
possible impact of proposed measures. The Panel itself
would be the best placed, given its experience, for the
monitoring and follow-up of the measures.

In conclusion, we would like to underline that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should have full
sovereignty over its national resources. The Council's
purpose in pursuing the matter is to facilitate the peace
process; it should take all appropriate measures to that
end. To end the conflict, we must effectively withhold
the means that sustain the war and take away the
motive, as these are important steps in that direction.

