Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Before starting my formal statement, let me first thank
Mr. Motoc of Romania, under whose able leadership
the Council successfully completed its work in July.

I also wish to congratulate the Ambassador
Denisov of the Russian Federation on his assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August. We look forward to working with him, and I
pledge that I personally and the entire Chinese
delegation will fully cooperate with him.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/6l3) and to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
supplementary briefing. I welcome the presence and
the statement of Mr. Loncar. I also wish to take this
opportunity to thank the former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, for his
unremitting efforts in promoting the peace process in
Kosovo. I also wish to congratulate his successor, Mr.
Jessen-Petersen. I wish him every success in his new
capacity.

We note that in the recent past Kosovo has
witnessed some progress in implementing the relevant
standards, in rebuilding the communities of ethnic
minorities and in promoting inter-ethnic reconciliation.
However, as stated in the Secretary-General's report,
despite that progress, the international community still
has a long way to go to fully reverse the negative
impact of the large-scale violence that took place last
March, and especially to heal the psychological
wounds and finally to achieve harmonious multi-ethnic
coexistence and common development in Kosovo.

In that regard, all the parties in Kosovo are duty-
bound to play a bigger role. We fully share the view of
the Secretary-General that at present the most pressing
task for all political leaders in Kosovo is to translate
commitments into actions, so as to ensure that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
administrative organs at all levels fully implement the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan and effectively
observe resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kosovo
Constitutional Framework. The interim Kosovo
Assembly should work strictly within its mandate and
should not interfere in the powers reserved for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
resolution 1244 (1999).

A proper solution to the issue of ethnic minorities
is an important element of a fundamental and
comprehensive solution to the Kosovo issue. It is also
the priority for UNMIK and all the parties in Kosovo.
In our view, it is important first of all to do a good job
of conflict follow-up, including improving living
conditions and ensuring the safety and freedom of
movement of ethnic minorities, ensuring proper
compensation to victims, rebuilding damaged facilities,
and, on this basis, accelerating the return of refugees
and making returns attractive. In addition, efforts to
investigate the incidents in March must be
strengthened and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice, so as to enhance inter-ethnic trust and
reconciliation.

It is also important to use legal and institutional
measures to ensure the legitimate rights and interests of
ethnic minorities. All the parties in Kosovo should
work to strengthen the rule of law and administrative
capacity-building in order to further enhance the
reform of local institutions. Pristina and Belgrade
should resume direct dialogue at an early date so as to
find proper solutions to all the problems relating to the
daily life of the people of Kosovo. We hope that
UNMIK and the international organizations working in
Kosovo will continue to support the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and to
create the necessary conditions for the legislative
elections in the autumn, so as to lay a solid foundation
for peace and stability in Kosovo and throughout the
Balkans.

