Mr. Okamura (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien for his briefing and for his
commitment to and engagement in saving the lives of the
people of Syria. Last December, the Council gathered
in this Chamber to unanimously adopt resolution 2254
(2015), and expressed hope about advances in the
political process (see S/PV.7588). Then, in February, we
adopted resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing the cessation
of hostilities agreement. And now, six months later, it
is hard to believe that only half a year ago, we were
discussing a cessation of hostilities for all of Syria.

Today, the picture is terribly different. For the
past month, our attention has centred on Aleppo, and
Castello Road in particular. We are far from being able
to discuss a nationwide cessation of hostilities, and
instead find ourselves focused on a very particular
area. It pains me to see how badly the situation in Syria
has deteriorated. Many of us have been reminded of the
scope of the tragedy through the heartbreaking image
of five-year-old Omran Daqneesh. I was horrified to
see the dust and blood covering Omran's young face,
but the brave hospital and aid workers on the ground
tell us that there are many, many more children just like
Omran in Syria today.

So what can we do? Humanitarian efforts are under
way, and we are urging all influential parties to do their
part. But we should all be deeply troubled to see such
a catastrophe continue unresolved. In his latest report
(S/2016/714), the Secretary-General urges the United
States and the Russian Federation, the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) co-chairs, to rapidly reach
an agreement for a ceasefire in Aleppo and beyond.
Japan appreciates the co-chairs' efforts to improve
the situation on the ground, and joins the Secretary-
General in urging an agreement as soon as possible.

At the same time, I also want to urge all parties to
redouble their efforts to prevent the tragedy in Syria
from getting any worse. United Nations humanitarian
aid must move firmly forward, and the Four Towns
agreement must be implemented. This is the time for
influential countries in the region to play a leading role.

I also want to take a moment to express my profound
gratitude to our United Nations and non-governmental
organization colleagues on the ground, who are risking
their lives to help the people of Syria even as the
fighting worsens. I also urge the Syrian Government
and all related parties to use caution to ensure the safety
of the people.

I understand that the Russian Federation has
expressed its readiness to support a 48-hour military
pause in Aleppo. That would be a hugely important step
in changing the situation in Aleppo. In order for that to
happen, and for United Nations and non-governmental
organizations to safely access the area, the cooperation
of opposition forces is also essential. We should appeal
to the Syrian Government, opposition forces and all
influential parties in that regard. The international
community is watching to see whether the Security
Council and the ISSG can improve the situation on the
ground. Our credibility is on the line.

The besieged areas and parts ofAleppo will demand
our attention for some time to come. However, once a
pause or ceasefire is attained, and in parallel with the
pursuit of a political solution, we also should consider
how we can support early recovery and strengthen the
resilience of Syrian society. Most importantly, we should
provide livelihoods, rehabilitate social infrastructure
and strengthen social cohesion, thereby providing hope
to individuals and communities in Syria facing very
difficult challenges. The international community must
invest in preparedness and resilience in Syrian society
in order to prevent recurrent crises.

