Mr. Merican (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
debate on such a critically important topic. The concept
note (S/2016/4l6, annex) that you shared in advance
also provided useful guidance. I also wish to thank the
briefers, whose respective briefings have brought keen
insights and added much value to the discussion today.

At this stage, my delegation aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Thailand and Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

For the past quarter century or so, the United
Nations and the Security Council have been at the
forefront of international efforts to counter the scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism. Besides the
necessary targeted military actions and intelligence
operations on the ground, we have established norms,
networks, structures, strategies and action plans to
counter the spreading influence of terrorists, fighting
them on a number of critical fronts, notably their
movement, financing and recruitment.

Those efforts have shown varying degrees of
success. However, we can do more. And we must do
more. That is why today's discussion has particular
resonance for us, as it seeks to address the narrative
or ideological aspect of terrorism, and one of the main
drivers of the phenomenon. Accordingly, we are pleased
to join the consensus on the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2016/6), which we fully support, and
we thank the Egyptian delegation for initiating it.

Terrorism and violent extremism are global threats
that transcend cultures, religions and geopolitical
boundaries. They have no religion. In the past few
decades, the international community has engaged in
long-standing struggles against various terrorist groups
worldwide, from the Irish Republican Army to the
Tamil Tigers and Aum Shinrikyo. We thus reject any
association of terrorism and violent extremism with
any one religion, nationality or ethnic group.

However, as Muslims, we should not be in denial.
We should be honest with ourselves and acknowledge
that, whether we like it or not, there is a critical need
for us to address the exploitation of Islam by terrorist
groups, which has led to the perceived link between
terrorism and Islam or Muslims. As all of us are aware,
among the most heinous and nefarious perpetrators of
terrorism and violent extremism today are Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and Da'esh. They all have one thing in
common - they rely on Islam, or more accurately,
their twisted interpretation of Islam, to legitimize
their causes, justify their criminal actions and attract
their followers. Therefore, for the purpose of today's
debate, I wish to focus my statement on that disturbing
phenomenon, notwithstanding our long-held position
that terrorism must be dissociated from any particular
religion.

It has been said that in order to understand a
religion, one must study its scriptures. In our Koran,
the holy scripture for Muslims, a message of peace,
justice and honourable conduct is featured prominently
and constitutes the very essence of Islam. Indeed, the
very definition of Islam itself is peace. To illustrate
that, the Koran states:

(spoke in Arabic)

"And make not Allah's name an excuse in
your oaths against doing good, or acting rightly, or
making peace between persons; for Allah is One
Who heareth and knoweth all things." (The Holy Koran, II: 224)

(spoke in English)

Meanwhile, on justice, Allah says, in verse 8 of
Surah Al-Maidah:

(spoke in Arabic)

"0 you who have believed, be persistently
standing firm for Allah, witnesses in justice, and
do not let the hatred of a people prevent you from
being just. Be just; that is nearer to righteousness.
And fear Allah; indeed, Allah is acquainted with
what you do."

In light of such clear commands in the Koran,
we strongly denounce the terrorists' claims that their
barbarity is sanctioned by Islam. The concept of "the
end justifies the means" has no place in Islam. So
even if you have good intentions or you are fighting
a just cause, you are still not allowed to achieve it via
wrongful means or to commit transgressions against
others.

Long before the Geneva Conventions existed,
Prophet Muhammad and subsequent scholars instituted
a just-war doctrine. Among other things, during the
conduct of war, Muslims are forbidden from harming
non-combatants, particularly women, children, the
elderly and the sick, as well as envoys, diplomats and
those praying in houses of worship. They are even
prohibited from harming civilian objects, including
water wells, trees, crops and livestock. That is the
true and right teaching of Islam. True Muslims do not
accept ideologies that espouse hatred, wanton violence
and destruction. We must make absolutely clear that the
extremists are the blasphemers. It is they who insult and
pervert the teaching of the Holy Koran and the Sunnah.

It is abundantly clear to my delegation that if we
are to successfully counter the terrorist narrative, we
cannot limit the response to merely denouncing violence
or stating why their approach is wrong; we must cut
through their rhetoric and seductive approaches. An
ideology does not exist in a vacuum. To those who are
marginalized, disenchanted or frustrated, an ideology
can be a powerful thing. It provides a sense of purpose,
a sense of direction and a sense ofbelonging, especially
when faced with deep underlying sociopolitical
grievances.

Based on investigations of the motivations of
foreign terrorist fighters in Malaysia, their main
motivation has been found to be political in nature, be
it prolonged and grievous injustice, gross violations
of human rights, foreign occupation, or systematic
discrimination against people whom they identify with
due to shared religion, values or ethnicity. Beyond
this motivation, they share little similarities in terms
of academic background, social status or geographical
origin. Thus, in countering the terrorists' narrative, it is
also crucial to remove these underlying root causes in
order to expose the fallacy of their arguments. This will
diminish the soft power of the terrorists in manipulating
sociopolitical grievances to gain sympathy among
impressionable youths and to recruit foreign terrorist
fighters worldwide.

Part of Malaysia's efforts in countering the
extremist narrative is also to engage with religious and
community leaders to spread accurate messages about
Islam. We believe that there is a need to encourage
more IT and media-savvy Muslim public figures and
scholars to reach out to youths via social media to
provide a counter-narrative, including to clarify the
concept ofjihad, which has been twisted to serve the
terrorists' agenda.

At times, the promise of heavenly reward and
spiritual salvation has led some to become misguided
and fall for the terrorists' narrative. Thus, in our response
we have incorporated a rehabilitation programme
as part of our counter-terrorism measures. This is
consistent with our belief in long-term rehabilitation
and not just punitive action in dealing with terrorists.
Under this programme, experts from various religious
departments, clerics and police counsellors actively
engage with detainees and provide guidance with the
aim of eventually restoring them as useful members of
society.

Malaysia remains steadfast in its belief that
terrorism and violent extremism are twin cancers that
require our collective and concerted effort to address.
We therefore reaffirm our commitment to continuing
our close cooperation with the United Nations and
relevant international organizations towards that end.

On a final note, I wish to stress that terrorist
attacks do not discriminate among women or children;
they do not discriminate between old or young; black
or white; Muslims, Jews or Christians; rich or poor.
All of us are potential victims of terrorism. In our
response to this threat, let us not allow the terrorists to
divide us. Hysterical responses to terrorism, including
by discriminating against a group of people for their
peaceful religious beliefs or branding an entire group of
people as terrorists, will merely perpetuate terror and
paranoia and further serve the terrorists' narrative.

