Mr. Motoc (Romania): First, I would like to say
that it is a distinct pleasure for me to be able to take
this opportunity, at this first public debate in the
Council for this month, to very warmly congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We trust that you will be successful in
carrying out your mandate, and we pledge our full
support to that end.

I welcome the participation in this meeting of a
high-level representative of Serbia and Montenegro,
Mr. Zoran Loncar, and thank Assistant Secretary-
General He'di Annabi for his very useful update of the
Secretary-General's comprehensive report
(8/2004/613).

I would also like at the outset to pay a tribute to
the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as to the men and women of KFOR, They are our
representatives in Kosovo; they implement the
Council's policies and follow its guidance, and they
deserve all our gratitude and support. Full appreciation
should go to the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, United
Nations partners within UNMIK, and to the other
organizations, agencies, contributors and donors that
are helping with the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).

We would also like to assure Mr. Saren Jessen-
Petersen of our full backing as he prepares to take up
his duties in his new position of authority as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo.

As regards Romania, Foreign Minister Mircea
Geoana visited Belgrade and Pristina in July.
Romania's Contact Office in Pristina was opened on
that occasion. The head of Romanian diplomacy had
extensive contact with representatives of UNMIK,
KFOR, the OSCE, the Contact Group, the provisional
authorities of Kosovo and leaders of the Serb
community.

There are many keys to addressing the situation
in Kosovo. They have to do, in particular, with the
course of action that will be chosen in the next one or
two years by Kosovo Albanians, Kosovo Serbs, the
Serbia and Montenegro Government and the
international community. But each one of those keys
involves dialogue, as well as enforcement of and
respect for standards based on fundamental values such
as human rights, the rule of law, democracy and
freedom.

Leaders in Kosovo bear a great deal of
responsibility for promoting dialogue, the
reconstruction of relations and, ultimately, a normal,
decent life for every Kosovo inhabitant, irrespective of
ethnicity or cultural background. Romania is
encouraged in this respect by some - albeit still
timidf relevant signs that the dialogue between
communities is being reinstated, that leaders at the
central and local levels are beginning to grasp their full
responsibilities and that Kosovo Serbs are increasingly
joining the process. We welcome the signing, on
14 July, of a joint declaration by President Rugova,
Prime Minister Rexhepi and Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb leaders, and we look forward to its
bearing fruit.

We also welcome the positive evolution of the
sustainable reform of local government as reported
today by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi along the
lines recommended in a presidential statement by the
Council (S/PRST/2004/l3).

Unfortunately, the report before the Council also
shows in a detailed manner that the profound physical
and psychological negative impact of the March
violence has still not been overcome. The report
contains ample references to insufficient progress in
almost all categories of standards implementation and,
most importantly, in those fields that should be
priorities for healing after the March events, namely
reconstruction of patrimony, sustainable returns, the
rights of communities and freedom of movement. The
provision of adequate security for minority
communities and the protection of their rights are a
telling test for every democratic institution and society,
and they should be a political goal and motivation in
Kosovo.

Romania understands the bitter feelings of
Kosovo's population at a time of difficult economic
conditions and the transition to democracy.
Nonetheless, we recall that violence is never a viable
option and that it only hampers aspirations for a stable
and prosperous future.

We have noticed the increased ownership of
responsibilities by Kosovo's institutions in addressing
more and more of Kosovo's problems. Romania
supports that trend - within the framework allowed by
the Council's decisions - as long as it is connected to
consolidating professional policy-making and
administrative capacity, bettering economic conditions,
enabling Serbs and other minorities to safely return and
live in Kosovo, establishing the rule of law and
fighting corruption and organized crime, all in close
partnership with UNMIK.

The situation ahead with regard to Kosovo is
complex and remains uncertain. Romania believes that
the Council needs to keep Kosovo under closest
consideration and to give the population of Kosovo and
the surrounding areas the clearest of all possible
messages.

We are not 100 per cent confident that the lessons
from the March violence have been adequately learned
in Kosovo, and many examples in the Secretary-
General's report confirm that impression. There might
still be extremists and profiteers of instability willing
to derail Kosovo from the right path and prevent it
from addressing its most stringent priorities.

Nonetheless, we maintain hope, encouraged by
recent developments in Kosovo and the successful
completion of the presidential election in Serbia. We
trust that dialogue and a sense of responsibility will
prevail, backed by a strong and coherent response from
the Security Council and the mandated organizations in
the field.

Romania awaits with great interest the prompt
presentation of comprehensive recommendations from
the Secretary-General on the way forward for Kosovo,
based on recently finalized assessments and, especially,
on Ambassador Kai Eide's review of the political
conditions in and surrounding Kosovo.

Also, while we appreciate the work of UNMIK
and the Secretariat in compiling a comprehensive
report on the status of standards implementation, we
consider that in future reports, an even more detailed
presentation is necessary. Such presentations should
follow the exact structure of the Standards
Implementation Plan, establish clear and realistic
priorities for each of the periodic reviews until mid-
2005 and take into account feedback from the "Contact
Group Plus". We also believe that the Provisional
Institutions should make a cooperative contribution to
the reports.

Finally, I would like to associate my delegation
with the statement that will be made shortly by
Ambassador van den Berg of the Netherlands on behalf
of the European Union. Romania applauds the Dutch
presidency's manifest interest in the issue of Kosovo,
especially since we believe that the best possible future
for the whole region lies within a united Europe.

