Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, let me
express my sincere congratulations to Lithuania on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Ms. Amos, Mr. Ladsous,
Ms. Pillay and Mr. Daccord for their respective
briefings.

Japan concurs and associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict. In my statement, I would
like to focus on the most urgent and humanitarian
aspects of the issues highlighted in the concept note
(S/2014/74, annex) prepared by Lithuania.

The lives of countless civilians are in deadly peril in
such places as Syria, Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and
Yemen. In contexts such as those, ensuring safe, timely
and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian goods and
equipment and access by humanitarian workers is of
the utmost necessity and is essential to the effectiveness
of the humanitarian assistance itself. However, in
those regions, the efforts of humanitarian workers to
reach people in need of assistance and protection are
extremely hampered.

The issue of humanitarian access is right in front
of us. According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/689), between May 2012 and August
2013, 134 humanitarian workers were killed, 172 were
wounded and 149 were abducted. The kidnapping of
humanitarian workers is reported to have quadrupled
over the past 10 years. Such attacks against humanitarian
workers is really deplorable and must be condemned in
the strongest possible terms.

It is indeed regrettable that Governments or
non-governmental military groups frequently obstruct,
delay or prevent United Nations humanitarian
operations in an arbitrary manner within the territories
they control. The serious impact of those cases on
civilians requires the continued and urgent attention of
the Security Council to act in a visible and concrete
way in order to protect humanitarian workers, ensure
humanitarian access and mitigate situations of civilians
in armed conflict.

Another issue that requires the Security Council's
immediate attention is the use of explosive weapons,
including improvised explosive devices, in populated
areas. According to the Secretary-General's report, in
2012, more than 34,700 people were killed or injured by
explosive weapons; some 60 per cent of those casualties
were caused by improvised explosive devices. Who
would not be dismayed by those numbers? The Security
Council must make every effort to find possible ways
to decrease that lamentable number by looking into the
serious consideration of voices from the field where
civilians are faced with the real threat of those weapons.

While welcoming and recognizing the need to
discuss normative and institutional mechanisms to solve
those issues, let me stress once again that ongoing crises
on the ground around the world require the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to
take immediate actions and measures to improve the
situation in any possible way. Although the international
community has developed various mechanisms and
tools in order to protect civilians in armed conflict, it
is difficult in reality to successfully implement them.
We must not only establish mechanisms and tools, but
also analyse underlying factors that hamper the smooth
functioning of those mechanism and tools so that we
can increase their effectiveness.

