Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Firstly,
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting in the form of an open debate. This will
enhance the transparency of the deliberations of the
Council and give us an opportunity to hear the opinions
of other Members of the Organization, which will

 

certainly be very helpful to us given the difficult situation
with which we are confronted. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presence with us during this
debate.

Argentina reiterates unambiguously its total
condemnation of the events unfolding in Sierra Leone.
What is occurring in that country is very serious. A rebel
movement characterized by its acts of atrocity is once again
flouting the authority of the United Nations and is now
arrogating to itself the power to disarm and deprive of their
liberty entire contingents of the United Nations force
deployed there.

Despite the fact that it had inflicted terrible suffering
on its people, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) was
included in the negotiations that led to the Lome
Agreement. Despite the outrages committed by that rebel
movement against the civilian population, the need to
pacify the country led to tolerance being extended to its
leaders, who escaped judgement and punishment by means
of an amnesty.

All of these concessions were in vain. The
Revolutionary United Front is now flouting the Lorne
Agreement and the standards governing the protection of
United Nations personnel. These violations and the taking
of hostages are unacceptable and must not be tolerated. The
leader of the RUF, Mr. Foday Sankoh, may have escaped
responsibility, through the Lome Agreement, for massive
human rights violations in the past, but this time he must be
held personally accountable for the acts committed by the
irregular troops that he leads.

The Security Council must give a prompt and adequate
response to this emergency. We cannot allow this situation
to continue and the tragic acts of January 1999 to be
repeated.

We wish to express our support to President Kabbah,
the democratic legitimacy of his Government and the values
of liberty and tolerance. The Government of Sierra Leone
demonstrated these values when it asked the rebel forces to
join in the dialogue and when it signed the Lome
Agreement. We must not forget that the ultimate solution
to the problems that are afflicting the country must be
political, not military.

Unfortunately, the good faith of President Kabbah's
Government has not been reciprocated. From the start, we
have been aware of the fact that United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) forces might have to confront a
hostile environment, and, unfortunately, this has been
confirmed by recent events. The current situation makes
it even more necessary to strengthen UNAMSIL. We
must speed up the transportation of the battalions that
have been pledged in order to provide the required
number of troops and the equipment needed to deal with
the current situation. In this connection, I believe that we
must wait until Under-Secretary-General Miyet, who has
just returned from Sierra Leone, has conveyed to the
Secretary-General his impressions of the situation on the
ground, and the Secretary-General has communicated his
conclusions to us.

However, we already support the Secretary-General's
request to increase the number of troops to 11,100, as is
provided for, if necessary, in the relevant resolution. But
we stress that we must act as quickly as possible. This is
a particularly difficult moment for Africa, and the
evolution of events in Sierra Leone may have an impact
on other conflicts in the region that are currently being
considered by the Security Council, and we must not let
that happen.

We do not wish to conclude without expressing
Argentina's acknowledgement of the work of Under-
Secretary-General Miyet, the staff of the United Nations
Secretariat, especially the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Adeniji, and the States members of the
Economic Community of West African States, for their
work. We should also like to express our appreciation to
the States that have contributed to UNAMSIL and to
those that have continued to pledge their support as these
tragic events have unfolded.

We should like in particular to offer our sincere
condolences to the families of the members of UNAMSIL
who have lost their lives or been deprived of their liberty.
We should also like to thank United Kingdom for its
prompt dispatch of military forces to Sierra Leone to
secure Lungi airport, which has surely contributed and
will continue to contribute to making the task of
UNAMSIL easier at such a difficult moment.

Finally, I should like to comment on the question of
the necessity of changing the mandate through the
adoption of a new resolution, an issue that has been
raised earlier in the debate by several speakers. My
delegation believes that it might be helpful to review
again the question of the mandate, and we would not
oppose any change in the mandate if it were necessary.
But I should like to emphasize that at this time the

 

mandate given to UNAMSIL in paragraph 10 of resolution
1289 (2000) is sufficiently strong to serve in present
circumstances, particularly in it affirmation that UNAMSIL
can take all necessary measures to guarantee the security
and freedom of movement of its personnel and to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence.

