I want to start by thanking our briefers. We share much of their analysis. I join others in paying tribute to the peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, especially those who lost their lives. I also want to express our solidarity with the Government and the people of the Central African Republic as they face the twin threats of continued violence and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic remains the only viable framework for sustained peace in the Central African Republic, and it must be protected. While condemning the repeated violations of the peace agreements by members of some signatory armed groups, we welcome the recent progress, including ongoing high-level engagement and the legislation adopted by the National Assembly. The Central African Republic is at a crossroads as it approaches the presidential and legislative elections later this year. As many here said today, those elections must be a turning point. In that regard, I want to underline three points. First, the elections must be held in a peaceful, free and transparent manner, and within constitutional deadlines. All Central Africans must have the chance to be heard. The United Kingdom is in the process of reviewing its financial support to the elections, and we hope to make a contribution shortly. Secondly, as certain signatories withdraw participation, we must not be complacent about the risks to the Peace Agreement. We stand ready to impose appropriate measures, including sanctions, in line with article 35 of the Agreement, in response to violations. Thirdly, the United Kingdom reiterates the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic in order to allow health and humanitarian needs to be met. We recognize that the secondary impacts of COVID-19 will require support to address the longer-term fallout from the pandemic. In conclusion, while challenges still remain in the Central African Republic, we should reflect on how far the country has come. Let us all today recommit to ensuring that this year marks a turning point for the Central African Republic and leads to long-term stability and prosperity for the people, because they deserve it.
