The President: It is my pleasure to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the Ministers and the
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. I think that their participation in this meeting
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
that is under discussion.

Under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Belgium,
Burundi, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, South Africa, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda to participate
in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President of the
World Bank, to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kim, who
is joining today's meeting via videoconference from
Washington.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Pierre Vimont, Executive
Secretary General of the European External Action
Service, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/387, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

I wish also to draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2013/394, which contains a letter dated
3 July 2013 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. ofthe United
States Mission to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

Before the Council is a statement by the President
on behalf of the Council on the subject of today's
meeting. I thank all Council members for their valuable
contributions to this statement. In accordance with
the understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2013/ll.

It is so decided.

It is now my enormous privilege to make a statement
in my capacity as the Secretary of State of the United
States of America.

Let me begin by saying how genuinely honoured I
am to be able to participate in this meeting at the United
Nations, presiding over the Security Council in our
role for this period, as the Secretary of State. It is also
a privilege to preside over a meeting of the Security
Council on a subject - a challenge - that is central to
the mission of this vital Organization, that is, realizing
the promise of peace.

For far, far too long, far too many lives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the broader
Great Lakes region have been ravaged by targeted,
grotesque Violence. They have been subjected to human
rights abuses, and the region has been disrupted by
dangerous instability.

The crisis that we are witnessing today underscores
what we already know: it is a stark reminder of what
fills the vacuum in the absence of good governance,
basic dignity and firm leadership that holds accountable
those who violate basic standards of decency.

It reminds - or it ought to remind - all ofus of an
obligation that we all share: not only to end the killing,
the raping, the forcing of children into combat, the
devastation and the fear, but the obligation to establish
a lasting peace and a climate of development. In
doing so, we can create the space for productivity and
partnerships, for greater opportunity for the citizens of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and for the birth
of a new generation of stability and of hope.

We can actually prove to the world that all of us
working together - and, I might add, prove it at a
time when many people are doubting the capacity of
institutions to function and the capacity of political
leadership to solve problems - have the ability to
prove to the world that together, we actually can make
a difference.

The seeds of that promise have already been
planted. But our job does not end with the creation
of the Framework. It continues in the cultivation of
the seeds and in making sure that we implement the
Framework and that we create a vigilant, accountable
and cooperative effort in order to see those seeds grow
into a full-blown peace that is sustainable.

I want to recognize our partners in that effort.
First, I thank the Secretary-General for his personal
engagement. I thank World Bank President Kim for
the same kind of engagement and for their partnership.
President Obama and I are grateful to both leaders and
the institutions that they lead for the very novel United
Nations-World Bank partnership that has been created
which provides incentives for political progress through
projects that create stability and improve infrastructure.
Clearly, boosting regional commerce in the short term
is one path to realizing stability and security in the
long term. I think that we are all very hopeful that this
approach can succeed in the Great Lakes region and
perhaps even serve as a model for other areas, such as
Mali, the Maghreb and beyond.

Regrettably, we have no dearth of locations where
we are challenged and could use this kind of model
today. I would just say parenthetically that, in the
Middle East, the West Bank and Palestine, we are
beginning to look at a similar kind of model, and hope
that we can combine our efforts over the long term to
find new ways to build sustainable peace.

I want particularly to also thank Mary Robinson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. She is a long-time friend and
somebody I have long admired, and I reiterate the United
States support for her work with regional leaders in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We particularly welcome the priority that
she places on including regional women's groups, local
communities and civil society in the Framework peace
process as we seek to break the cycle of violence and
break down the barriers between humanitarian aid and
the people who are desperate for it.

The day before President Obama nominated me
to be Secretary of State, I met with Denis Mukwege,
who just a few weeks earlier had fled the Democratic
Republic of the Congo after an attempt on his life.
Denis has demonstrated the courage to stand up and
protect women and children from the weapons of war,
which too often people only talk about in a whisper.
The victims of these horrific crimes and humanitarians
like Dr. Mukwege, who protect and treat those people,
as well as all the people of that region, desperately need
a voice. I know - and the Secretary-General obviously
knows, because he chose her - that Mary Robinson
to being that voice as the region and the international
community address the full range of issues involved in
translating the broad principles of the Framework into
concrete benchmarks for implementation. I thank Mary
Robinson for what she is doing. We are grateful for her
continued public service.

It is also a great pleasure for me today to introduce
the United States Special Representative for the African
Great Lakes Region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, former Senator Russ Feingold. The suffering in
the Great Lakes, which we are going to debate and talk
about here today, is a high-level priority for President
Obama and for me, and it is one that we believe must
be met by high-level leadership. I had the pleasure of
working with Senator Feingold in the United States
Senate for 18 years. In my judgement, there was no one
in the Senate who was more trusted for his expertise in
African issues. He brings enormous intellect, passion
and courage to this challenge, and I am very pleased
that he has consented to take this on.

I also bring the greetings of former United States
Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice, who has
asked me to convey a warm good morning and hello.
We chatted briefly before I came here so I could get
the latest tips on exactly what to do and what not to do
today.

The United States joins every single participant
in this meeting in welcoming the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. It is a very important first
step. But we also recognize that the progress which the
region has made since February is extremely fragile,
and the key question before all of us today is whether
the commitments prescribed in the Framework can be
and will be kept. Will they come to life, or are they
destined only to live on paper?

Let me underscore that the United States stands
ready to support the signatories and we will work with
them, with focus, energy and persistence, in order to
implement the Framework. But as President Obama
has said, there has to be follow-through. I want to
make it clear in that context that the United States is
deeply concerned about recent reports of resumed
external support to the Mouvement du 23 mars, as well
as of collaboration with the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda. So I want to be emphatic here
today. All parties must immediately end their support
for armed rebel groups. All Governments must hold
human rights violators and abusers accountable. We
must end the era of impunity, which, unfortunately, has
been rampant.

To this end, the United States welcomes the
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade, and
we support its mandate to neutralize all armed groups
and protect civilians so that peace can take hold. We
believe that it is now time for everyone in the region to
exercise restraint, to return to the constructive path that
they have set out for themselves, and to move forward
together so that we can address the root causes of the
conflict and end it once and for all. I believe that this
is doable. I believe that it is the absence of governance
and the absence of an international presence that have
created the vacuum that has permitted people to act with
the impunity with which they have acted. I know that
moving ahead is not easy. I know that it takes courage.
But we all have to accept that this is our responsibility.

So, as President of the Council at this debate and
as the representative of a nation that, like all others
represented here, has a stake in the stability of the Great
Lakes region, I want to urge all of us around this table
to take advantage of the unique opportunity that the
Framework provides. The United States respectfully
challenges all of those who have committed themselves
to the Framework to respect in turn the national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We cannot emphasize strongly
enough how critical it is that everyone foster cooperation
across borders. We challenge everyone to finalize the
benchmarks that are outlined in the Framework and to
adopt them during the plenary session of the General
Assembly in September. We strongly urge everyone
to formally include the voices that Special Envoy
Robinson has engaged - voices that have too often
been excluded, particularly those of women. And we
challenge the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
continue implementing reforms to its security sector
and to re-establish State authority, particularly in the
East. Finally, we pledge to join the Security Council,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, regional
Governments and the international community in doing
everything in our power to achieve a comprehensive
peace accord.

Every one of us here understands the complex
history of suffering in the Great Lakes region, but
we all have a responsibility - a universally endowed
responsibility - to ensure that a history of violence is
not going to be followed by a future of vengeance. The
only way to properly honour the millions of lives that
have been lost is through peace, and the only way to
achieve that peace is for the United Nations, all of the
countries of the region and all of the countries with the
capacity to step up and help show the way forward.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

