Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame',
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, for his instructive briefing on the situation there,
as well as the statements by the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden, on behalf of the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, and by Ms. Hajer Sharief.

In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of advancing the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement and the United Nations
action plan in order to facilitate and mediate the
political process being conducted by the Libyan parties.
The dialogue between the High State Council and the
House of Representatives is a positive step, insofar as it
expresses mutual recognition and interest in progressing
towards a national transition based on implementation
of the Political Agreement signed in 2015. We call on
all domestic stakeholders to participate actively in that
process, which, in the words of Mr. Salame, is Libya's
only path to stability and unity.

We welcome the initiative to convene a national
conference under the auspices of the Secretary-
General. It will be essential to establish a platform for
coordination, commitment and cooperation between
the various political actors and Libyan civil society.
We would like to highlight the importance of involving
all national actors committed to sustaining peace in
the country, especially women and young people, as
Ms. Sharief so eloquently emphasized. The national
conference should be an inclusive space for dialogue
and reconciliation, leading, as soon as possible, to
transparent, credible general elections that are accepted
by all parties. The endorsement and support of the
international community will be essential to achieving
that goal.

However, we are still concerned about the ongoing
violence and acts of terror, such as the murder of the
mayor of Misrata and the recent attack on Tripoli's
airport. We are also worried about the serious and
reprehensible violations of human rights reported by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
including trafficking in persons and the situation of
migrant groups. According to UNICEF reports, more
than 36,000 migrant children in Libya require urgent
humanitarian assistance in Libya. Libya's situation
as an country of international transit demands the
strengthening of appropriate measures for preventing
and addressing abuses and human rights Violations. In
that regard, we think it important to pursue initiatives
aimed at establishing oversight and control mechanisms
in the country.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Salame's work, and we will continue to closely
monitor the Libyan political process with a View to
helping contributing to Libya's efforts to achieve in
the near future the standards of good governance,
sustainable development and guaranteed respect for
and promotion of human rights that it deserves.

