Ms. Gurung (spoke in Nepalese; English text provided by the speaker): Let me thank you for inviting
me. It is a great honour for me.

I am a girl from Nepal. I was born in the central
region of Nepal. I'm here not only to talk about my
own story but on behalf of all children in armed
conflict who face and survive the atrocities of war. I
will start by telling you some of the stories of my past.

In my family, I am the second of five children. I
have a mother and father, one elder sister, two younger
sisters and one younger brother. My family is very
poor. My father drives a rickshaw from morning to
evening and my mom works at home and also does
agricultural work. It is difficult for us to have good
clothing and good food. Despite our difficulties, my
parents had managed to send me and my siblings to
school.

I was 13 years old when I completed fifth grade
and moved to a new school to start the sixth grade. The
new school was a one-hour hike up a steep hill from
my home. At that time, I had just started thinking about
my future. My dream was to complete my education
and become a teacher in my own village. But things
did not happen the way that I had imagined.

That September of 2005, during a school holiday,
I walked to my house to bring some food. As I reached
my home, I realized that the Maoists had organized a
programme at my old school. The Maoists had
demanded that each family should send one family
member to their programme under the one-family/one
member campaign. I had to go there because my
parents were not at home. They had gone to the market.
After the programme, the Maoists told me that I needed
to go with them for seven days.

During that time, they gave me an orientation to
the Maoist party. Seven days passed but they did not
talk about sending me home. When I said that I wanted
to go home, they said "You'll have to come with us
forever". I said, "What is the use of small people like
me in this party?" But they said, "Small people will
one day become big people." I told them, "I'm of the
age for studying, and not of the age to go with you."
But they did not agree to that. At that time, I did not
know that children had rights and that recruiting a
13-year-old was a crime. I did not have a choice, so I
followed them.

There were many other children my age who
were brought forcefully or who had been coerced or
enticed with promises. They would not give us food on
time, and there were many children like me who
wanted to go home. They would not give us clothes,
and we would only receive NPRSO - or $0.75 a
month - for our toiletries. We had to buy
undergarments, toothpaste and toothbrushes with that
money.

Although we were small, we had to work very
hard. The Maoists were organizing a campaign to win
the villagers' trust and would construct roads and
trenches and till land. I had to help with this work. To
construct roads, I would carry heavy loads of boulders
and stones and help dig the roads. We would walk from
10
one district to another, often at night, in groups of 50 to
60 people, through the jungle, for more than 12 to
14 hours at a stretch. I would get so tired I felt I was
dead. I couldn't sleep, and sometimes I would cry a lot.
But there was no one for me to talk to or to help or
protect me.

For a few days, we would stay in one of the hilly
districts or a district in the southern plains and work
for villagers, as instructed by the party. We would stay
and eat in some of the villagers' homes. In one of the
districts, the Party did not have a good reputation and
so we had to move through that place quickly. In other
districts, we would stay longer - up to a month. I was
always afraid because we had to hide from the army
and make sure they did not find us.

While I travelled from one place to another, I saw
many other children going to school. That made me
very sad. I would think that if I were at home I would
be going to school, too. I made friends who were my
age. We shared our emotions and our sadness, but there
was no hope for us. My life had become sad and
painful. I missed my parents a lot and I wanted to run
away from there.

After travelling for almost 12 months, we
returned to my home district. By this time, it was
October 2006 and I was 14 years old. I had not talked
to my family in a year. They knew I was with the
Maoists but did not know where I was. They could not
come for me because they were afraid of the
repercussions that all of us might face. When we came
back to my district, I really wanted to go home. But
what could I do? I was scared that if the Nepalese
Army saw me, they would kill me or my parents. Our
neighbour was a commander with the Maoists, and I
was scared that if I went home the Maoists would again
find me and take me back. There was no way to escape.
When I asked some of my friends if they wanted to go
home, they would say, "Who does not want to go
home? But there is nothing for us at home. Now we
have to live and die here."

But I took a risk and secretly sent a letter to my
mother. I told her where I was and asked her to come
and bring me back home. Despite the risks, my mother
and sister found me and took me back to my village.
The Maoists did not prevent me from leaving but they
terrified us with their threats. They said, "We will find
you again and we can do whatever we want to if we
find you again." I went back to my village, but I never
10-40745
stopped worrying for me and my family. I went back to
school and, after a month, the Maoists held another
recruitment campaign and took students from different
schools to participate. My school was requested to send
seven children to the programme. I was one of them
and so I was taken again.

They made us walk to another district on an
empty stomach. When we arrived, they made us go in
small groups of three to four people to people's homes
and ask for food and lodging. One woman did not have
food for herself and her family, but she feared us and
gave the corn that she had set aside for seed. I had only
one set of clothes and I would wear them for 10 to
11 days. Sometimes I would exchange clothes with
others in the Party.

By the time I had been with the Maoists for
around 15 months, they enrolled me in their training
programme. We would dig tunnels and crawl through
them, and sometimes we had to jump to the ground
from a height of 10 feet. Holding our weapons and
gear, we had to climb ropes. They trained me to use
.303 British rifles, INSAS rifles, single-loading rifles
and AK-47s. They also taught us how to make and
detonate bombs. We had to wear shorts and short-
sleeved shirts and do leopard crawls during training,
and my skin had cuts, scabs and bruises. I was still a
little girl of only 14, and my body was hardly fit for
such intense training. I started developing symptoms
and problems in my heart and throat.

Out of 160 people in my training, I finished in
second place. After the training, many of my friends
ran away, but some of us just could not. Since I
graduated second, they made me the commander over
seven people. It was my turn to train other children.
Many people were forced to marry others within the
Party. This was a way to ensure that they would stay
with the Party. I did not want to marry, and I was
beaten up several times for that. In the meantime, I had
become section vice-commander and my
responsibilities had increased. Days passed and I
started to accept my fate and to understand that this life
had become my life. I felt sad, damaged and hopeless.

One day I fainted. One of my senior commanders
said that I was faking to avoid working and carrying
arms. I was very angry and went to another
commander. In a very angry voice, I told him what had
happened to me and that I needed medical attention. I
said that if they could not give it to me, then I needed
10-40745
to go home. The commander told me that I had violated
the rules by approaching him and asking to be relieved
of my duties and go home. To punish me, they demoted
me and made me work as a cook for six months. After
six months, I asked for a leave and they granted it. I
stayed home for 10 to 11 days, but I could not stay in
the village longer. Villagers treated me badly, bullied
me and talked behind my back. So I returned to the
Maoists.

Within the Party, I had many friends who had not
returned home in more than one or two years. Many of
my friends had died fighting and many had become
disabled while fighting. Most of us were weak. At
times during the war, we would not be able to eat for
an entire week. Sometimes we survived on water and
corn flour. Some of my close friends who had been in
combat told me that it was always the youngest who
were sent to the front line and that the commanders
gave orders from behind. I had not been sent to the
front line yet, since I had not completed the combat
training. Luckily, after I was trained and they were
planning to send me to the next round of active
fighting, the peace agreement was signed and I did not
have to fight.

After the peace agreement was signed, people
from the Maoist Party were gathered into cantonments
and there was talk of a registration and verification
process. The United Nations had been called in, and
many of us went into the first registration that it
conducted. I was one of them. The Maoists constructed
seven cantonments across Nepal.

At that time, the senior commanders used to tell
me, "You are a commander. You need to have more
patience and you need to look after your members."
They also used to give me medicine, saying that it
would cure my heart and throat problems. They would
also tell me that my heart and throat problems would
go away ifI got married. But I still did not want to, so
they continued to harass and threaten me. Because of
my hard work, they made me a section commander. I
think they also thought that if I was promoted, I would
be more inclined to get married. Time passed and my
health worsened. I managed to tell my sister and uncle.
So one day they came, and without asking any of the
commanders, I just left the camp.

In May 2007, I returned home. I was 15 years
old. I was very happy, but I was also scared. I was
afraid that the Party would take me again or that the
11
army would kill me if they found out who I was. In the
village, everyone continued to show suspicion towards
me and to talk behind my back. My parents could no
longer send me to school, and I had to leave. I went to
the nearest city, where I worked as a housemaid.

One day, I received a call from my sister saying
that someone who worked with children affected by
armed conflict had come to our home. She said they
would help children like me. So I came home and met
with them. They convinced me to go back to school,
although I was shy about returning to the sixth grade. I
started my education again. Meanwhile, the Maoists
continued to threaten me. I had to stay at my uncle's
house to hide from them, but they would not leave me
alone. They came to his home and asked me to come
along with them. I was always scared.

Finally, one person who worked for human rights
intervened and helped me formally seek release from
the Maoist Party. Then it became easier for me to stay
in my village. Some of these organizations helped me
readjust to life and build relationships with members of
the community. Now I am well respected in my
community and my school, and I regularly participate
in and lead child rights-related programmes in my
school and village. Now I also have friends, and
children like to play with me and talk to me.

Since my family was poor, some organizations
helped us to generate income. Today, I raise a little
livestock. They also paid for my throat surgery. They
helped me form a children's club which advocates for
children's rights and on HIV issues. I am the president
of the club, which counts 40 children among its
members. Now, I have a new life.

Not long ago, I heard through the radio that there
was a formal discharge process for children who
remained in the cantonments. I am happy that they will
now have a chance to choose what they want to do with
their lives. But I also feel sad for them because I have
been through the challenges they will now have to
face.

I truly thank the Security Council for listening to
my story, for it is the story of hundreds of Nepalese
children. Thanks to the help and trust of the United
Nations, including UNICEF and local organizations,
some of us have been able to recover. I am one of
them. I am very happy now. I am in the ninth grade at
the school in my village, and I still dream of becoming
a teacher.
12

