Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly thank the Under-Secretary-General for the very
useful and detailed briefing he has given us this
morning and Vice-Minister Chikoti for his interesting
presentation.

It has been nearly 18 months since the Security
Council was last briefed on the humanitarian situation
in Angola, so the discussion we are having this
morning is not just timely; I think that it is overdue.
The humanitarian problems in Angola are among the
worst in the world.

It is quite clear from the briefings that we have
heard that this situation requires the concentrated
attention of both the international community and the
Government of Angola. The Government's own
figures, circulated today, show the extent of the
problem that we are facing: half a million people fled
their homes afresh in 2001, and 560,000 people in eight
provinces cannot be reached by the United Nations
agencies.

The recent efforts made by the Government of
Angola to improve the humanitarian situation are very
welcome, but much more needs to be done, as Under-
Secretary-General Oshima has made very clear. The
international donor community also has an important
role to play in improving the humanitarian situation. It
is therefore right for the Security Council to inject a
strong note of urgency into this debate and into the
search for an end to the internal conflict. We welcome
Mr. Oshima's intention to visit Angola this spring.

What is really required is a coordinated approach
by all parties working in Angola to alleviate the
suffering of the Angolan people. This coordinated
effort should lead to positive action - easily
measured, substantive and clear improvements in the
humanitarian situation. Access to populations in need
through improvements in security and infrastructure
would ensure the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian relief.

I think that we all noticed, when we looked at the
map on the screen during Mr. Oshima's briefing, how
much white there was on the map - areas that cannot
be reached by the agencies a some of them quite close
to Luanda itself.

The international donor community has to
respond better to the 2001 United Nations Consolidated
Appeal, which so far has not yet reached the necessary
level of funding, before it addresses afresh the appeal
in 2002.

At the same time, we have to support energetic
efforts to end the civil war, not least those led by the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Gambari. The
United Kingdom also strongly supports the work of the
United Nations Office in Angola.

I should like to put a few questions to Mr. Erick
de Mul, through Under-Secretary-General Oshima.
First, we would welcome the assessment by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
of the extent to which the Angolan Government
contributes to the humanitarian relief effort in
financial, political and other inputs, including military
efforts; and secondly, whether these inputs have
changed either way over the last six to 12 months.

The continuing conflict in Angola is directly
affecting far too many Angolans. UNITA clearly has
minimal concern for the humanitarian effect of its
operations. The Security Council's consideration of the
situation in Angola today is an important opportunity
to focus now on the practical steps that need to be
taken to relieve a situation that shames Angola and the
international community.

The proposals made by OCHA this morning are
an important start to that process. We also look forward
to the discussion in the Security Council next month,
under Norway's presidency, of the aide-memoire that
OCHA is preparing on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and our exchanges on Angola this
morning are entirely relevant to that more general
debate.

