Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I welcome Foreign Minister Le Drian to
the Security Council to preside over today's meeting.
I also welcome Prime Minister Maiga and thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

An outbreak ofviolence in central Mali on 23 March
claimed 160 lives. China strongly condemns that
violence and we would like to express our condolences
and sympathy to the Government and the people of
Mali and the families of the victims.

Last year witnessed the successful conclusion of
a general election in Mali and a peaceful transition of
Government. The peace process in Mali has registered
positive progress since President Keita began his new
term in September. Prime Minister Maiga has been
engaging extensively with the parties and has made
important contributions to that end. China commends
the Malian Government and people for their tireless
efforts in implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. At the same time, we note that
the security situation in the north and centre of the
country continues to deteriorate. Terrorist activities are
rampant. Serious issues such as poverty, unemployment
and underdevelopment are undermining the peace
process. The international community should continue
to provide support for peace and development in Mali.

First, it is important to intensify efforts to advance
the peace and reconciliation process in Mali. China
hopes that all parties to the Malian peace agreement
will consolidate the current positive momentum,
continue to strengthen mutual trust and put the interests
of the country and its people first, while making ajoint
commitment to the development and reconstruction
of the country. The international community should
provide assistance and capacity-building in the areas
of autonomous development and governance on the
basis of respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country. The sanctions
regime for Mali should aim to support the political
process and strictly adhere to the mandate entrusted to
it by the Council.

Secondly, we should help Mali to enhance its
capacity-building in the area of security. In response to
the increasingly complex security challenges in the north
and centre of Mali, the international community should
continue to support and help the Malian Government
to improve its of security and counter-terrorism, as
requested by the Malian Government, so that it can
gradually assume greater security responsibilities
throughout its territory. Peace and security in Mali
is closely related to the overall security situation in
the surrounding areas, which calls for an integrated
approach to international cooperation against terrorism
in Mali and neighbouring areas.

China acknowledges the progress made by the
Malian Government and its security forces in assuming
security responsibilities on the ground and welcomes
the initiative of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in tackling security threats in
the region, such as terrorism. We commend the United
Nations and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
for their support of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

Thirdly, we should support the economic and social
development of Mali. The international community
should continue to step up its support to Mali with
a view to consolidating its economy and achieving
autonomous, sustainable development at an early date.
That will help Mali to address the underlying problems
that it faces. China calls on all the relevant parties
to follow through on their aid commitments so as to
ease the financial pressure on the Government. The
appointment of heads of the interim administration
in the north of the country was completed a few days
ago. China welcomes that development and hopes that
the relevant processes can be advanced so that basic
services can soon be provided to the people in the north
of the country and so that living conditions improve.

Fourthly, it is imperative to support MINUSMA
in continuing its work. The Mission and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, have played an important
role in maintaining stability in Mali, strengthening
the security and capacity-building of the country
and assisting in the peace process. MINUSMA's
mandate is significant for the security and stability
of Mali and the wider Sahel region. We hope that
MINUSMA will continue to cooperate closely with the
Malian Government.

China expresses its condolences and pays tribute
to the MINUSMA peacekeepers who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty. We have taken note
ofthe measures taken by the Secretariat - as set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/262) - as
well as the efforts ofMINUSMA to improve the security
and safety of its personnel. We hope that the Mission
will continue to strengthen the safety and security of
its personnel and ensure that security equipment is in
place. At the same time, it should continue to strengthen
communication with the troop-contributing countries
and the donor community in order to ensure that the
Mission has the necessary equipment and resources to
fulfil its mandate and act in self-defence.

China firmly supports the people of Mali in their
pursuit of peace and development. China is a major
troop-contributing country, with more than 400 of its
peacekeepers assuming responsibilities in the areas
of engineering and medicine, among others. Our
contribution is widely acknowledged, and China will
continue to work with the international community
to contribute to the peace, stability and development
of Mali.

