Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of
Uruguay for having taken the initiative to organize
this important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and for having prepared the concept
note to inform our discussion (see S/2016/22, annex). I
would also like to express our appreciation to Mr. Jose
Luis Cancela, Vice-Minister for External Relations of
Uruguay, for presiding over this debate. And I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
the Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam for
their briefings.

The conflicts in the world today and the plight of
civilians, in particular in the Middle East and Africa,
are unprecedented; they challenge us in our efforts to
enforce the principle of the responsibility to protect
civilians in conflict, in particular the most vulnerable
groups, including women and children. The urgency of
that issue is perhaps best illustrated by the atrocities
suffered by civilians in Syria as a result of the conflict
that has been taking place there for the past five years,
as well as the violations suffered by the Palestinian
people, who have been subjected to occupation for more
than 60 years.

The protection of such groups falls within the
purview of the Security Council. Many United Nations
meetings have been held to discuss the concept of
the protection of civilians. In that respect, it is worth
noting the Human Rights Council resolutions proposed
by Egypt and adopted by that Council in 2011 on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That issue
falls within the scope of the Security Council, which
is why the protection of civilians at imminent risk
has become part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Fifteen years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), and yet the optimum way for
peacekeeping operations to implement their mandates
with regard to the protection of civilians remains
unclear. United Nations States Members have yet to
reach consensus on the scope and feasibility of the use
of force by peacekeeping operations to protect civilians.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
given an active mandate that included an unprecedented
military component in the form of the Intervention
Brigade. Although there were some successes, the
mandate failed to provide sufficient protection for
civilians in that country, who continue to suffer
atrocities at the hands of armed groups.

In South Sudan, the United Nations provided for
the direct protection of civilians in United Nations
compounds; however, the direct protection method,
despite being a moral necessity, is very costly and
unsustainable. It also does not provide protection to
the hundreds of thousands of civilians who are at risk
outside those compounds, a group that continues to
grow in number.

Egypt stresses that peacekeeping operations are
but one tool for the protection of civilians. They are
not necessarily the optimal or most effective way to
address the risks faced by civilians. In that respect, we
stress that the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians lies with the country concerned and that the
objective of peacekeeping operations is to enhance the
capacity of States to fulfil their obligations.

Peacekeeping missions should respect the principles
of sovereignty and national ownership and the cultural
specificity of the host countries. Furthermore, the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflict
should not be limited to physical or bodily protection.
It should also focus on providing political solutions
to end conflict and prevent its recurrence, and should
address the root causes of the conflict. We should adopt
a more comprehensive approach that addresses poverty
and socioeconomic marginalization, and enhances
the role of the national institutions and mechanisms
concerned with the prevention and management of
conflicts, in particular the justice and security sector.
That is perhaps the most important message to take
away from the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and the report
(see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture. In the
future, more attention should be paid to the emerging
challenges faced by civilians, first and foremost
international terrorism.

In conclusion, success in implementing the
principle of protecting civilians in armed conflicts
hinges on achieving global consensus on the concept.
It has to be based on relevant concepts and frameworks
that gain broad consensus here at the United Nations
without addressing any controversial concepts.

