Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting on combating foreign terrorist fighters.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Executive Director Coninsx and Ambassador Umarov
for their briefings.

Terrorism is a common enemy of humankind.
In the face of that joint challenge, the international
community must acknowledge that we are all part of
a community with a common destiny. Enhancing our
cooperation on terrorism therefore demands that we
make the most of the leading role in this area of the
United Nations and the Security Council, and respect
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of all States. We must follow a
uniform standard and reject the practice of associating
terrorism with any particular ethnicity or religion.

In order to respond to terrorism's adaptive nature,
we must take comprehensive measures to eradicate
its root causes and breeding grounds. Terrorist forces
have carried out violent attacks around the world in
the past few years, while the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters has become more organized and their means of
attack more varied. In order to contain the cross-border
movement of foreign terrorist fighters, China would
like to propose the following steps.

First, we must take effective measures to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters. Their outward and
return journeys severely jeopardize the security and
stability of countries of origin, transit and destination.
Member States, especially countries adjacent to conflict
zones, should strengthen border controls and law-
enforcement cooperation and take specific measures
to prevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies and the
relevant international organizations should play their
designated role by establishing databases and fully
information-exchange platforms on the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters, sharing intelligence, helping to block
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and assisting
Member States in capacity-building based on respect
for their sovereignty.

Secondly, we must enhance efforts to combat
terrorist activities conducted through the Internet. In
the age of information and the Internet, organizing
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and of financing
for terrorism has become simpler, easier to hide and
more international. Terrorist organizations use the
Internet and social media to incite and recruit terrorist
fighters and to plan terrorist attacks. The international
community should make blocking the use of social
media for the propagation of extremist ideologies a
top priority, strengthen Internet oversight and prevent
terrorist organizations from using it for their expansion
and financing.

Thirdly,wemustrespectthediversityofcivilizations
and eliminate the root causes of the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters: wars, conflicts, ethnic
hatred, poverty and backwardness. The international
community should remain committed to helping
Member States to alleviate poverty, strengthening the
political settlement of regional issues and promoting
inclusive, universal and balanced development. It
should create an environment conducive to dialogue on
an equal footing and to the peaceful and harmonious
coexistence of our different civilizations and religions.
Furthermore, it should establish a new order of
international relations and build a shared community
of the future.

China is firmly opposed to terrorism in all its forms.
As an important member of international counter-
terrorism efforts, China has actively participated in
multilateral cooperation mechanisms, such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum. China is ready to join hands
with other countries and international organizations to
jointly address the threats and challenges of terrorism
and maintain international peace and stability.
