Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): What is happening right now smells bad.
Let me explain. A few days before the release of the
report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), a draft resolution (S/2017/884) on
extending it for a year is thrown together. In the run-
up to that, a major information campaign is under way
in the media. Ambassador Haley gives a number of
interviews in which she unambiguously accuses Russia
of wanting to torpedo the work of the JIM. She sends a
letter to Security Council members on the urgent need
to extend the Mechanism's mandate for a year.

At the same time, it justifies the lack of action by
the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), based on a
conveniently timed note from the Fact-finding Mission
supposedly explaining * but actually justifying that
lack of action - why a fact-finding mission did not
attempt to establish the facts and did not even visit the
scene of the incident under discussion. We will come
back to the Fact-finding Mission later. The note from
the Permanent Representative of the United States
suddenly, and clearly accidentally, falls into the hands
of the The New York Times, which last Saturday,
21 October, publishes a long article on the subject,
beginning with the words "A confrontation that is
looming at the United Nations between the United
States and Russia".

What do we call that? We call it preparing your
artillery. Let me remind the Council that the JIM
was established in August 2015 as a joint - I repeat,
a joint - initiative of Russia and the United States.
It was established in order to conduct a thorough,
professional and objective investigation and to identify
the perpetrators of incidents involving the use of
toxic chemical agents. The Mechanism was given a
broad mandate and provided with everything needed
for its implementation. On 26 October i that is, this
Thursday - the JIM. report on the 4 April incident in
Khan Shaykhun is due to come out. Naturally, we have
all been eagerly awaiting the release of the report and
its conclusions.

Incidentally, contrary to what Ambassador Haley
claimed in one of her interviews, Russia has not read
the JIM. report in advance and is not familiar with its
conclusions. So why extend the Mechanism's mandate
two days before the release of the report? We all want
to familiarize ourselves with it, discuss its content and
conclusions calmly, and then, just as calmly, return to
the issue of the extension of the JIM, whose mandate
expires on 17 November. Which means we have plenty
oftime to extend it. Is that illogical? Or confrontational?
Then why put the cart before the horse?

There is something else I should explain. Let me
remind the Council of the facts. On 4 April, there was
an incident involving the use of chemical agents in Khan
Shaykhun. The United States and its allies were quick
to blame Damascus for it and on 7 April, violating every
norm of international law, the United States launched
a missile strike on the Shayrat airbase. From day one,
before any conclusions and before the investigation
itself, it had already decided on the perpetrators.
Clearly, then, that illegal action can be justified only
if the JIM. investigation's findings confirm its version.
And should the JIM. dare to come out with a different
version, that would raise the question of why it bombed
Shayrat. And that would not be very convenient.

The United States is not interested in either the lack
of evidence or the laughable techniques and methods
of the investigation. It has decided on the guilty party,
and decided it in advance. Let me point out that it has
said that at every opportunity. In human terms, this is
understandable. A bad performance, badly directed,
has not done the job. There is no evidence for an air
strike, and what there is is all too clearly a stitch-up.
We have to shove it out of sight so that no one is any the
wiser and extract ourselves from an awkward situation
without losing face. How do we do that? Easy. After all,
we can always blame Russia for everything.

So how do we arrange the cover-up? We can throw
together a draft resolution extending the JIM. mandate
a few days before the report's release on 26 October,
even though that is not remotely urgent. The JIM. will
be operational until 17 November and there is nothing
forcing us to take the decision to extend it before
then. So why do we do so now, and in such a hurry?
Does nobody find that strange? Is it not the case that
the American side knows the report's conclusions and
understands that the evidence for their theory will not
stand up to any criticism and that in turn could call into
question extending a mechanism that is not equal to its
task and serves only to justify unseemly political aims?

The United States - and, incidentally, not only
the United States - has accused Russia of putting
pressure on the JIM. To quote Ambassador Haley, in an
interview on 18 October she said,

"The Russians have made it very clear that
should the report blame the Syrians suddenly, they
won't have faith in the JIM. If the report doesn't
blame the Syrians, then they say that they will".

We have never said that, and there is no record of
any such quote from us. And if it is not a quote but
the Americans continues to assert it anyway, that is
defamation. What we have always said is that what
we are expecting from the JIM. is a fair, objective,
professional, unbiased investigation. We have said that
we are relying on the fact that the JIM. will not go the
route of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission and repeat its
obvious mistakes, which I fear are deliberate. We have
also said that if the report presents irrefutable proof of
the guilt of any of the parties, we will agree with it.

But, yes, we really have said that we doubt that any
such proof will be presented. And we have reason to
doubt it, because the JIM's methods of work, which we
have indeed criticized, give cause for concern. Because
it is impossible to conduct a full-fledged, objective,
professional investigation with such methods. But we
have also said that we should not anticipate. Let us
wait for the release of the JIM's report and then judge
it on its professionalism and objectivity. Note that I
do not say judge it based on whom it accuses, but on
its professionalism and objectivity. But in the same
interview I cited, Ambassador Haley said,

"It would be a shame if Russia chose to decide
whether to have an investigative mechanism based
on who was to blame in Khan Shaykhun".
Let me repeat that we have never raised any
such question.

I will cite one more quote from Ambassador
Haley's interview - I like quoting her. "We can't go
and pick and choose who we want to be at fault." There
I fully agree with her. Only this is the problem - it is
not us but the United States that has already decided
who is to blame. From day one, the United States has
asserted that the Syrian Government was at fault, and
it punished Syria for that with a missile attack on the
Shayrat airbase. It has asserted that the Syrian Air Force
dropped a sarin bomb on the heads of its own citizens.
I am not even talking here about the feeble evidence
presented to us or the obvious signs that the video they
showed us of the scene of the incident was staged. We
discussed all of that during the briefing on the margins
of the General Assembly on 13 October. If anyone is
not yet familiar with it, we can circulate copies of the
statement in English right now. But has anyone thought
about the sense of Syrian aircraft using a sarin bomb? Is
anyone here capable of understanding how pointless its
use would be from a military point of view when there
are other conventional and far more effective means of
destruction at one's disposal? Has it never occurred to
anyone that there is less reason to blame Damascus for
using chemical weapons than anybody else?

By introducing this draft resolution now, the United
States is destroying the Security Council's unity and
artificially dividing it. We all understand how important
that unity is. We understand it. Our colleagues in the
Security Council understand it, as do the other Member
States. But something else is important to the United
States. It needs to show that Russia is to blame for not
extending the JIM. and proclaim to the whole world that
it is Russia that has divided the Council.

(spoke in English)

The United States is begging for confrontation in
the Security Council.

(spoke in Russian)

But right now we are trying to help the American
delegation save face. They will not be able to show
Russia in an unattractive light, which is what they are
obviously trying to achieve.

We will not allow the adoption of the draft resolution
now because, as we have said, and as they were well
aware, when they proposed the text of this hastily drawn
up draft resolution we said that the extension should
follow the report and its discussion - in that order.
However, nothing is preventing us from going back and
extending the JIM. mandate after the report has been
published and we have taken our time to review and
discuss it in the Security Council.

Moreover, when the issue of extending the
JIM. mandate is discussed in the Council, we will
insist upon amending its mandate to ensure that it
succinctly includes the elements of professionalism
and impartiality that we want to see. Others should not
try to give the impression that, unless they take our
arguments into account and, contrary to the voice of
reason, adopt the draft resolution today, the JIM. will
become a dead letter. They know that we will not allow
the draft resolution to be adopted today. Could it be
that this is an an intentional attempt to demonstrate
to the world that Russia wants to close down the JIM
at any cost? That is not true. We are ready to return
to negotiations aimed at extending the JIM. mandate
following the publication ofthe report and its discussion
after 26 October.

For the time being, I call on the United States
delegation to postpone the adoption of the draft
resolution until the report's publication. I should not
like to feel obliged to repeat the words of the United
States representative who proposed postponing a vote
in 1946 "in order to avoid the painful necessity of
casting a negative vote at this time" (S/PV55, p. 68).

