Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
convened this open debate, presided over by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, and for
promoting the adoption of the presidential statement
on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2013/2). I also
take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence of
the Secretary-General this morning and his statement,
as well as the participation of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

The protection of civilians is a matter that affects
all of us, and no one can be indifferent to it, since it is
part of the very essence of the notion of humanity and
international humanitarian law, which is universally
accepted. Between the primary responsibility of the
State to exercise such protection and the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, there
is an endless array of standards, mechanisms and
actors who, on an daily basis, both individually and
collectively, are making good faith efforts to prevent
or minimize the harm done to civilians as a result of
conflict.

It is regrettable that, despite the important advances
seen in recent years - for example in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, to which we, as a troop-contributing
country, can bear witness - the civilian population
remains the main victim of armed conflict and counts
the majority of victims. Sadly, the situation in Syria
reminds of that every day.

Prevention is the best remedy for this scourge.
Preventing massive human rights violations is
an extremely complicated and, in many cases, an
impossible mission. However, the question that comes
to mind is whether we could do more in that respect.
The timely identification of signals from the ground
and sending appropriate early reminders to participants
of their obligation to respect peoples' physical and
moral integrity are crucial.

Peaceful solutions, inclusive political dialogue,
strengthening State institutions and thereby the rule
of law, and promoting sustainable socioeconomic
development and reconciliation are inseparable
elements of prevention and fundamental in establishing
a strong protective environment. However, it is clear
that too often prevention is lacking or falls short. In such
cases, facilitating access for humanitarian personnel
must be prioritized along with respect for international
humanitarian law on the part of all participants and in
all situations in order to ensure appropriate security
conditions as they carry out their tasks.

Another basic element in preventing the most
serious human rights violations is accountability. In
that respect, competent bodies must consistently use
the tools established by the international community,
including the International Criminal Court and fact-
finding mechanisms. The registration of victims is
among the areas of growing interest and possible
benefit in terms of the protection of civilians. My
country appreciates the importance of such activity
in line with the principles of humanitarian law. In
view of its relation to some of the most basic values of
human dignity and its potential practical effects, such
a registry could clarify the causes of harm inflicted on
civilians and the measures necessary to end such harm
and to prevent its recurrence.

Lastly, and bearing in mind the Council's
agenda in the coming weeks, Uruguay reiterates the
importance 4 in the upcoming and final United Nations
conference on the arms trade treaty - of bearing in
mind the human cost of the lack of regulation in the
arms trade and the broad availability and wrongful
use of such weapons. The humanitarian dimension
must be rightly prioritized in the treaty, for example
through criteria banning arms transfers in the case ofa
clear risk of the use of such weapons to commit serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights norms.

The protection of civilians is not a political concept,
yet it is regrettably becoming increasingly politicized.
It is therefore crucial that, on the one hand, we receive
in the most transparent and precise manner possible
information from conflict zones through competent
humanitarian and human rights authorities. On the
other hand, we must step up our efforts to strengthen
consensus and trust in the concept of the protection of
civilians, based on respect for universally recognized
norms of international law, international humanitarian
law, and human rights and refugee law.
