Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefing by Mr. Jean Arnault and we
commend the work he and his team are doing. We
also welcome the participation of Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and
Mr. Emilio Archila, High Counsellor for Post-Conflict.

Peru follows with special attention and firmly
supports the peace process in the sister Republic of
Colombia. We underscore the country's commitment
to building sustainable peace, and the steps taken by
the Government of President Ivan Duque to implement
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace on the basis of
national consensus.

We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
which reflects the will of the parties to continue to
enjoy the qualified support of the Organization, as well
as the unity of the Council in its support for the peace
process. In that regard, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of Mr. Arnault and his team.

We also welcome the appointment of senior officials
to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, the National Reintegration Council and
the National Commission on Security Guarantees.
We believe that this should revitalize the established
mechanisms for implementing the peace agreement.

We also highlight the new Administration's
initiative to work on a pact against corruption with all
political parties and with civil society. We consider it
to be a top priority for the Government to convene and
lead national efforts on this key theme for building a
peaceful, just and inclusive society. In our View, all
of these developments are good news and allow us to
look optimistically towards the future and to address
the challenges posed by the process in issues related to
security, the reintegration of former combatants and the
rule of law.

With regard to the security situation, we underscore
the importance of the national pact in which the
country's political forces condemn the assassinations
of political leaders and human rights defenders that
regrettably have occurred. In that context, we stress the
importance of the measures adopted in the so-called
territorial areas and of close protection mechanisms to
counter the presence of criminal groups in rural zones
throughout the territory.

We also underscore the need for the Attorney
General to carry out timely investigations of the cases
before him and to ensure access to justice. We commend
the work of the Ombudsman, particularly through the
early-warning system, and the importance of close
coordination with other relevant national institutions in
order to reduce the vulnerability of women, children
and ethnic minorities.

As for the reintegration process, we note the
transformation of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo into a political party
and its participation in democratic life. We also note
the recent visit of the Senate Peace Commission to a
territorial area for the training and reintegration of ex-
combatants in San Vicente del Caguan. Additionally,
the increased allocation of resources for their
socioeconomic reintegration, with a territorial and
communal focus, will undoubtedly promote economic
development and the reconciliation process. In that
connection, we welcome the recent visit to the country
ofa Peacebuilding Fund mission.

We want to highlight the fact that more than
77,000 Colombian families have signed voluntary
crop substitution agreements. Our own experience
in alternative development has demonstrated the
effectiveness of such initiatives as long as participating
communities have the full support of the national
authorities. We highlight the support of the mission for
reintegration programmes and its strategy to implement
the recently adopted Security Council resolution 2419
(2018), on youth, peace and security, and commend its
work with civil society and UN-Women to promote the
participation of women in dialogue and reconciliation.

On the rule of law, we underline the important role
ofthe Special Jurisdiction for Peace in promoting access
to justice and national reconciliation in Colombia.

In conclusion, I welcome the progress made in the
Colombian peace process, which serves as an example
to the rest of the world and is of crucial importance
for consolidating Latin America and the Caribbean as
a region of peace.

