Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Let me also thank the Secretary-
General for his eighth report on this topic
(S/2010/579), and Under-Secretary-General Amos for
her presentation. Azerbaijan aligns itself with the
statement delivered today on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to make a few additional remarks
in my national capacity.

The attention of the Security Council to the
situation of civilians in armed conflict remains vital
and must be at the centre of the Council's deliberations
and actions. As the Secretary-General pointed out in
his report, that is particularly the case in the many
protracted violent crises and conflicts with little
prospect of a peaceful resolution in the near future.

Indeed, civilians continue to suffer from
inadequate protection in situations of armed conflict. A
defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts remains
the failure of parties to respect and ensure respect for
their obligations to protect civilians. The heightened
vulnerability of civilians in wartime - in particular
that of forcibly displaced persons, refugees, women
and children - brings an element of urgency to our
protection efforts and to the imperative to restore the
rule of law.

Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts aggravated by
population displacement and foreign military
occupation. There is increased recognition of the need
to address the impact of conflict on housing, land and
property, in particular in relation to the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees.

More focused efforts are necessary to end illegal
policies and practices in occupied territories, including
forced demographic changes and the destruction and
appropriation of historical and cultural heritage, as
well as various forms of economic activity that directly
affect the property rights of inhabitants who are
considering returning to their places of origin.

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation, be applied by the international
community with more systematic regularity, including
concrete measures to overcome obstacles that prevent
return. Ensuring the right to return is to categorically
reject the gains of ethnic cleansing while at the same
time offering an important measure of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land and deprived of
their property, thereby removing a source of possible
future tension and conflict.

Azerbaijan is of the view that the lack of
agreement on political issues should not be used as a
pretext to ignore problems caused by continued and
deliberate disrespect for international humanitarian and
human rights law in situations of armed conflict and
foreign military occupation. The fact that illegal
situations continue because of political circumstances
does not mean that they should be tolerated and
allowed to continue forever. In that regard, my country
considers it important to reaffirm the continued
applicability of all relevant norms of international
humanitarian and human rights law to such situations
in order to invalidate activities aimed at consolidating
military occupation, initiate urgent measures aimed at
eliminating the adverse effects of such activities and
discourage any further practice of the same or similar
nature.

The need to enhance accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
is fundamental to enhancing compliance with
international law by parties to conflict. In that regard it
is important to emphasize that ending impunity is
essential not only for the purpose of prosecuting those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide or other serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, but also for
ensuring sustainable peace, justice, truth,
reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims and
the well-being of society at large.

Any steps aimed at promoting a culture of
impunity - including measures to promote a war of
aggression - or to glorify perpetrators of the most
serious international offences or promote the odious
ideas of racial superiority can contribute to further
violations of humanitarian and human rights law, in
particular with respect to peoples uprooted from their
homes through continued acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression or occupation.

