Ms. O'Brien: I am pleased, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, to have this opportunity to present
his report on specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia
and other States in the region (S/2012/50), alongside
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The Secretary-
General has consistently pressed the United Nations
and other international organizations to do more to
contribute to a solution to the complex problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. He has been concerned
also by the spread of this scourge to other regions and
the consequent human and economic costs.

The United Nations continues to stand ready to
assist the international community to respond in the
most effective way possible to counter piracy. Council
2

members will recall that, as far back as March 2009,
the Secretary-General dispatched me on a mission to
Kenya to discuss the issue with the Kenyan authorities
and the United Nations offices active on the ground. In
April last year, he dispatched me again to represent
him at the conference organized and hosted by the
Government of the United Arab Emirates on "Global
Challenge, Regional Responses: Forging a Common
Approach to Maritime Piracy".

The Secretary-General himself will attend the
London conference on Somalia, to be attended by
Heads of State and Government and other senior
representatives. Today's meeting of the Security
Council to consider the Secretary-General's report
marks the beginning of a busy schedule in which the
international community is focusing its attention on the
need to counter piracy effectively and to bring the
terrible human suffering and economic costs to an end.

The London conference will provide an important
opportunity for the international community to discuss
piracy in the context of the wider issues facing
Somalia. The hope and expectation are to drive forward
the progress that has been made in a number of areas.
It will be followed in March by meetings of the
working groups of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, which will be able to follow up and
implement the elements agreed at the political level.

The priority and importance that my Office gives
to piracy reflect the Security Council's close attention
to that serious issue. The human cost of piracy off the
coast of Somalia is incalculable, with killings and
widespread hostage-taking. Although the numbers of
incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia declined
during 2011, as did the success rate of such attacks,
there were nevertheless 265 hostages being held at the
end of 2011. Increasing levels of violence and the
expanding geographical scope of the attacks are all
extremely worrying.

As I said when presenting the previous report
(8/2011/360) on behalf of the Secretary-General in
June last year (S/PV.6560), the problem of piracy
clearly demonstrates the increasing interdependence of
States and people in a globalized world. The human,
commercial and security interests under threat engage a
large number of States and international and regional
organizations that all have a stake in finding a solution.

Against that background, the Secretary-General's
report on specialized anti-piracy courts is the third in a
12-23794
series of such reports requested by the Security
Council that I believe will assist the Council's
deliberations. As with the previous reports, it has been
prepared by my Office in close consultation with
Mr. Fedotov's Office and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). We have, of course,
been working very closely throughout the entire
process with our colleagues in UNODC, both in Vienna
and in Nairobi.

The report has also had input from the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and the International
Maritime Organization. Consultations have been held
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Safety and Security, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and INTERPOL. In responding to the Security
Council's request in resolution 2015 (2011), UNDP and
UNODC have conducted detailed consultations with
the relevant police, prosecution, judicial and prison
authorities in the concerned regional States. Senior
members of the Office of Legal Affairs have followed
up with consultations with the Governments concerned
through their Permanent Missions in New York.

The Security Council's request to the Secretary-
General in resolution 2015 (2011) focuses on further
consultations with Somalia and other States in the
region willing to establish specialized anti-piracy
courts. At the outset, it is important to recognize that a
great deal is already being done to ensure the
prosecution of piracy suspects. A total of 20 States
worldwide have been prosecuting, or have prosecuted,
a total of 1,063 piracy suspects since 2006. Of that
total, more than 900 of the suspects have been
prosecuted in 11 States in the region.

Of those 11 States in the region, five are
prosecuting piracy suspects with the assistance of the
United Nations, or are seriously considering doing so.
They are Somalia, Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and
Tanzania. I am most grateful to those States for their
cooperation in the preparation of the report and for
their dedication in combating piracy. In respect of
Somalia, the report deals with Puntland and
Somaliland, as those are the regions where the security
situation, although not ideal, allows for international
assistance for prosecutions to be delivered.

A point made firmly to us in the course of the
consultations, which has been reflected in the report, is
12-23794

that the States in the region that are conducting piracy
prosecutions have taken on a heavy responsibility that
entails a commitment of national resources, as well as
security risks. It is key that the international community
both acknowledge the important prosecution role that
they are playing and match their commitment with
strong international support and assistance. They each
underlined the continuing need for contributions by
States, international organizations and the shipping
industry to the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of
States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
Before outlining the substance of the report, I would
like to mention three initial points as to its scope.

The first point is that the Security Council's
request in resolution 2015 (2011) concerns national
courts in Somalia and other States in the region. It does
so by requesting the Secretary-General, UNODC and
UNDP to conduct consultations with Somalia and other
States in the region that are willing to establish
specialized anti-piracy courts, and that the
consultations concern the kind of international
assistance, including the provision of international
personnel, required to make such courts operational.

The courts that are the subject of the Security
Council's request, therefore, are courts established by
the regional States themselves - their own domestic
courts. The request does not concern the range of other
options for special domestic chambers, possibly with
international components, a regional tribunal or an
international tribunal. Those were all the subject of the
Security Council's first request to the Secretary-
General in resolution 1918 (2010), and were dealt with
in the Secretary-General's report dated 26 July 2010
(S/2010/394).

Secondly, the Security Council's request in
resolution 2015 (2011) does not expressly mention the
possibility of a Somali specialized anti-piracy court
sitting extraterritorially in the territory of another State
in the region, as proposed by the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jack Lang. That was the subject
of the Secretary-General's second report, dated 15 June
2011. However, as Mr. Lang's proposal concerns a
national Somali court, not any form of international
court, we have briefly reviewed it again in the context of
the current report. That can be found in paragraphs 37
and 38 of the current report.

The third point that I would like to make
concerns the words "specialized anti-piracy courts" in
3
the Security Council's request. Consultations with the
national authorities of the five States concerned
indicate that they would not favour establishing new
special courts with jurisdiction exclusive to piracy
offences. They consider that that would constrain
scarce prosecution and judicial resources to piracy
cases in the absence of any certainty that they would be
consistently and fully occupied. The term "specialized
anti-piracy court" is therefore used in the report to
refer to a court operating under national law, with
international assistance, with a focus on the
prosecution of piracy cases.

Turning to the substance of the report, the
Security Council's request asks, in particular, about the
kinds of international assistance needed for specialized
anti-piracy courts, including the provision of
international personnel, the projected case capacities of
such courts, and the timeline and costs for their
establishment. We have addressed each of those aspects
of the request through detailed consultations with the
relevant police, prosecution, judicial and prison
authorities of the five regional States.

In respect of each of Puntland, Somaliland,
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania, the report
analyses, first, the current capacity to investigate and
conduct piracy prosecutions and to imprison those
convicted. In doing so, it sets out the international
assistance that has been provided to date. Secondly, the
report analyses the potential case-load capacity that
each of those jurisdictions could achieve through the
provision of further international assistance. In other
words, it sets out the number of cases that could be
prosecuted per year in accordance with international
standards if capacity were maximized through the
provision of further international assistance.

On that basis, the conclusion of the report is that
those jurisdictions collectively could achieve a total of
around 125 piracy prosecutions per year, with up to 10
suspects in each case. Therefore, if international
assistance were maximized, up to 1,250 piracy suspects
could be prosecuted each year in accordance with
international standards. That increase in capacity could
be achieved within two years in Puntland and
Somaliland, with an additional year of mentoring and
monitoring, and within one year in each of the other
jurisdictions, although the assistance should be
maintained beyond one year in order to sustain the
results.
The cost of the assistance for prosecutions set out
in the report over a three-year period in Puntland and
Somaliland would total a little more than $7 million,
and over a two-year period in the four remaining
regional States around $9.5 million. The potential is
therefore for more suspects to be prosecuted per year in
those five regional States than the total number of
piracy suspects prosecuted globally since 2006, and at
a cost that is modest, I suggest, compared to that of any
of the existing international or hybrid tribunals.
However, the maximum caseload capacity that I have
just described is not necessarily a recommended target.
I will outline the reasons for this.

First, the size and resources of the various
jurisdictions considered in the report vary
considerably. The projected maximum capacities for
each are based on the best estimates of UNDP and
UNODC. They are not necessarily guaranteed.

Secondly, the report outlines a possible
discrepancy between the maximum achievable
caseload capacity and the actual demand for
prosecutions being generated by the capture of piracy
suspects at sea by naval forces off the coast of Somalia.
The three naval coalitions engaged in anti-piracy
operations off the coast of Somalia made only three
requests to regional States - Kenya and Seychelles -
for the transfer of piracy suspects in 2011, involving a
total of 42 suspects. The transfer of all of these
suspects was accepted. Only one incident was reported
by the naval coalitions in which the suspects were
released in circumstances where there may have been
sufficient evidence to pursue prosecution.

We do not know the reasons underlying this low
number of requests for transfer to regional States. It
may be, therefore, that some further research and
analysis would be needed before any decisions are
finalized regarding the caseload capacities that should
be aimed for in the courts of the regional States. The
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Jack
Lang, reported in January 2011 that around 90 per cent
of those apprehended at sea are released. If such a large
number of suspects are being released at sea, it would
be key to the effectiveness of the international
community's efforts to combat piracy to determine why
this is the case.

Working Groups 1 and 2 of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia might wish to take up
this question. These are the Working Groups dealing
12-23794
with operational coordination matters and legal issues,
respectively.

A further important development that I would like
to draw to the attention of the Council is the
willingness of the Government of Seychelles to host a
regional prosecution centre. UNODC is already
providing assistance to this end. Consistent with the
principles identified by Mr. Jack Lang, the purpose of
the centre is to act as a focal point for regional and
international support for the prosecution of piracy
suspects, and to provide a location offering relative
logistical ease for their transfer by naval forces.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Government of Seychelles for this initiative. The
willingness of the Government to host a regional
prosecution centre is, understandably, contingent upon
there being an effective post-trial transfer framework in
place so that those convicted can serve their sentences
in Somalia. This is a further important consideration
that has been prominent in each of the three reports of
the Secretary-General. Prosecutions in the region will
meet a bottleneck unless there is international
assistance to ensure sufficient prison spaces to
accommodate those convicted, ideally in Somalia.

Seychelles will also open, in the course of this
year, the Regional Anti-Piracy Prosecution and
Intelligence Coordination Centre. The Centre will
develop the regional expertise to track piracy finances
and develop cases for the prosecution of those who
plan, organize and finance piracy attacks. This is a
most important development that accords with the
emphasis of the Security Council in its resolution 2015
(2011) on the need to prosecute not only suspects
captured at sea, but also the key figures of the criminal
networks who organize and profit from piracy attacks.

In this regard, I would also like to draw attention
to the newly established Working Group 5 of the
Contact Group, chaired by Italy, focusing on the illicit
financial flows associated with piracy, with a View to
disrupting the financing and planning of piracy attacks.

Finally, I would like to draw attention to the
detailed implementation proposals for specialized
anti-piracy courts set out in the report, as requested by
the Security Council in resolution 2015 (2011).

These are divided into measures of a more
general nature, including a number that may be
considered by the Council itself, and specific measures
12-23794

of assistance to be taken by UNDP and UNODC.
Again, I should underline that these specific
implementation measures are included on the basis of
maximizing the caseload capacities of the courts in
Puntland, Somaliland, Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius
and Tanzania. Before such measures are taken, it may
be necessary for further research and analysis to be
carried out to consider the actual demand for
prosecutions in these States, which is likely to be
generated by requests for the transfer of suspects
apprehended at sea by naval forces.

