Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic Conference) (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset to join previous speakers in congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

I am again honoured to be able to address this
Council, and I am particularly pleased to be taking part
today in this meeting dedicated to the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflict.

In general, peacekeeping activities have become
more complex. They are increasingly multifunctional
and cover areas as vast as they are diversified, such as
the building or consolidation of institutions, the
observation and monitoring of elections, the
reconstruction of infrastructure and the disarmament of
rival factions.

That is why it is clear that prevention should be
one of the main tasks of the United Nations system,
because it is less costly in terms of human life and less
disastrous for the societies concerned and, indeed, for
the whole of humankind. It thus facilitates a transition
from a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention.
This development has been recognized many times by
the Security Council as one of the priority objectives
for the future development of the Organization.

Conflict prevention calls for the convergence of
very different activities, ranging from early warning to
preventive diplomacy, mediation, and reconciliation.
But is also requires the adoption of long-term structural
measures to tackle the root causes of conflicts, thereby
touching on the rehabilitation of the societies
concerned, development, the eradication of poverty and
the control of arms sales.

Conflict prevention differs from one region to the
next, because the causes of conflict also differ from
one region to the next. That is why creating effective
mechanisms to coordinate both prevention and peace-
building activities among United Nations agencies and
regional organizations is extremely important, as it
would enable us together to face the challenges implicit
in effective and sustainable peacekeeping.

The variety of questions to be settled range from
political and socio-economic to humanitarian and
human rights issues. The participation of regional
organizations, as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter,
would make it possible for us to derive benefits from
the comparative advantages of every organization.

In this context, I welcome the initiatives of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to hold periodic
meetings with the Secretaries-General of different
regional and subregional organizations- such as
mine, the Organization of the Islamic Conference - to
discuss the part they can play in conflict prevention. I
should also like to congratulate him for his idea of
creating a high-level panel to be chaired by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to undertake an in-depth
reassessment of peacekeeping.

We believe these initiatives to be among the most
important elements in conflict prevention, management
and resolution. Ultimately we must bear in mind that
conflict prevention is a field in which more can be
done, and done better, and that it is and will remain the
supreme responsibility of the Security Council. Joint
resolve and clear objectives are therefore required,
because activities for peace in different parts of the
world are an interdependent and indivisible whole.

