The Niger would like to thank France, in its capacity as penholder, for the preparation and presentation of resolution 2531 (2020), on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Multidimensional Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We also commend the delegations of the other members of the Council for their constructive spirit during the negotiations. The Niger, as a country impacted by the crisis in Mali, agreed to join the consensus by voting in favour of resolution 2531 (2020), convinced that support for the United Nations and for bilateral and multilateral partners is essential to the search for a lasting solution to this crisis. We welcome the efforts of the Government of Mali to stabilize the centre and the north of the country. The importance of MINUSMA in this hitherto volatile context is no longer in doubt, both for the lasting stabilization of Mali and for its salutary support for the efforts of the Sahel region. It is in that regard that we continue to call for more MINUSMA - a robust MINUSMA that is free from any counterproductive differences of opinion within the Council. With regard to MINUSMA's support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), we welcome the progress that we have been able to achieve in this resolution, which will have an immediate operational impact for the Joint Force. However, given the gravity of the situation, more could have been done. It is clear that this support falls far short of what would be needed to eradicate the scourge of terrorism. The longer we delay in mobilizing the necessary support, the more complicated the situation will become. There is an urgent need to update resolution 2391 (2017), in this regard. Indeed, peace is a global public good. The security threat facing the Sahel today is not only a local problem; it is global in scale and scope. The efforts of the Sahelian States must therefore be adequately accompanied, both bilaterally and multilaterally, particularly in their collective initiative through the G-5 Sahel. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that in this asymmetrical war, terrorists support and reinforce one another in their own interests throughout the Sahel. The Niger would recall the support options for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force recommended by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/476). As an interim measure, it advocated option 1, consisting of the establishment of a United Nations support office that would provide logistical and operational support, including transport, as well as tactical and strategic support to the Joint Force. We are in full agreement with the Secretary-General and call on Council members to be ready to consider this issue as soon as possible. While we understand the concerns of some Council members that support for the Joint Force should not affect the ability of MINUSMA to implement its mandate and strategic priorities, we believe that MINUSMA and the Joint Force play mutually beneficial roles and should be complementary. On the other hand, the Niger and all countries of the Sahel remain concerned about respect for human rights issues, which is a clear prerequisite for ensuring the necessary confidence among the population and thus the effectiveness and legitimacy of the difficult combat that our defence and security forces and the Joint Force are carrying out. That willingness is reflected in the measures taken to protect peoples through the commitment of our countries to the human rights compliance framework. In view of our clearly expressed commitment on this issue, the Council should be careful not to send a signal that would discourage certain partner countries from joining the Sahel alliance and encourage our enemies, the armed terrorist groups, to take advantage of the situation.
