Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita
and Permanent Secretary Sidikou for their excellent
briefings. We are encouraged to hear that the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) continues
to make progress towards full operationalization. We
also thank Ambassadors Mohammed and Almeida for
their briefings and insights from the perspectives of
the African Union (AU) and the European Union (EU).
The engagement of the AU and the EU is invaluable as
we work together to improve the prospects for peace,
security and opportunity in the Sahel region.

The G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force continue to be a
priority for the United States. We support the holistic
and African-led approach of the G-5 Sahel as the best
way to achieve long-term security and development in
the Sahel, and we are committed to engaging bilaterally
with the G-5 Sahel member States. While much of the
Council's focus, as well as that of the international
community, has been on the modalities of support to
the Joint Force, it is important to note that security
solutions alone will not solve the underlying political
and economic issues. As many here have noted, security,
governance and development are closely linked and
countries cannot achieve long-term security without
good governance, economic development and respect
for human rights. The United States looks forward to
seeing the G-5 Sahel member States build on their good
foundations and the G-5 Sahel's priority investment
projects. We should therefore not lose sight of the peace
process in Mali or the importance of addressing the
root causes of the conflict. The Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process remains the best tool that we have for beginning
to resolve the situation in northern Mali, and we urge
the parties to implement what they agreed to as part
of the Agreement. The Council should consider using
all of its available mechanisms, including the sanctions
regime adopted under resolution 2374 (2017), in order
to foster better political outcomes. There is simply
too much at stake for Mali and the region to continue
waiting for substantive results.

We are encouraged by the Joint Force's
operationalization, but we all recognize that there
is a long way to go. We urge all of the donors who
made generous pledges at the February conference in
Brussels to disburse those funds as soon as possible.
We also encourage them to contribute to the European
Union Emergency Trust Fund for logistical support
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as outlined
in the technical agreement, in order to expedite
engineering projects for the Joint Force.

We are all deeply concerned about the likelihood
of violent extremist efforts undermining the security
situation in the region. Nevertheless, as the Joint Force's
operationalization continues, respect for international
human rights and international humanitarian law
will be paramount. To that end, we salute the EU
and the Peacebuilding Fund's contributions towards
the establishment and implementation of the human
rights compliance framework included in the technical
agreement. However, we were very concerned to hear
reports of an incident in Bouleke'ssi, Burkina Faso, last
weekend, where what may have been a Violent extremist
attack on a Malian soldier under G-5 Sahel command
was followed by the deaths of more than a dozen others.
We anxiously await the results of the MINUSMA, G-5
Sahel and Government investigations into those deaths,
and we call for additional investigations, as appropriate.

Although we all agree that the purpose of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force is an important one, the
implementation of the technical agreement should not
overstretch MINUSMA. We remain concerned that the
Mission does not have the capacity to take on additional
tasks as it struggles simultaneously to protect itself and

fulfil its mandate. We look to its excellent leadership
to make the best determination of when and how to
support the Joint Force in the face of the myriad and
unpredictable security challenges that MINUSMA
faces on a daily basis.

The United States believes that a combination of
bilateral and regional support by the Sahel countries
and international stakeholders can best address the
ongoing financial and logistical needs of the Joint
Force. As Ambassador Haley stated in December (see S/PV.8129), the technical agreement represents the
full extent of any support role that the United Nations
should play beyond continued coordination and
technical assistance on a voluntary basis. In February,
the parties signed the technical agreement in Brussels
and hundreds of millions of dollars were pledged to
support the G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force. We would
like to reiterate our principled position in that regard,
which is our objection to authorization of the use of
United Nations assessed funds for the Joint Force under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, a
Security Council mandate. The United States will not
accept any proposal to move such an authorization
forward in the Security Council.

The United States has contributed significant
resources to the G-5 Sahel member States, providing
more than $822 million in security assistance since 2012,
and last October we pledged an additional $60 million
directly to the Joint Force's successful deployment and
operationalization. We are working closely with the EU
coordination mechanism to optimize that contribution,
and we encourage other donors to do likewise. The
United States believe that that is the best way to increase
the G-5 Sahel members' capacity to fight the terrorist
and security challenges that they face, and we intend to
look for additional ways to support the Joint Force in
the near future.

Stability in the Sahel is a multilayered challenge
of security, politics, development and humanitarian
causes. The attention that those causes have received
from the region and its dedicated partners is already
leading to better outcomes. Continued international
engagement will be one component of that process,
but enduring success in the region will ultimately be
determined by the G-5 Sahel member States themselves.

