Mr. Mbeki: We will give a very brief and, I hope,
succinct report about what is happening with regard to
various matters relating to the Sudan.

We would first like to inform the Council that,
happily, within the past hour, the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM) signed an agreement on Abyei. As the Council
is aware, we have been negotiating that agreement with
them for several days, but now the agreement has
finally been signed.

Indeed, both parties have asked us to commend
the agreement to the Security Council. I am quite sure
that, when the Council looks at the agreement,
members will see that the parties are requesting various
interventions by the United Nations with regard to the
implementation of that agreement. We would certainly
like to very strongly commend the agreement.

We hope that the Council will consider the
agreement as soon as possible, in particular with regard
to matters that will result in the demilitarization of
Abyei and the replacement of all Sudanese military
forces by forces to be supplied by the Government of
2

Ethiopia. We would like for that to happen as quickly
as possible because, among other things, it will enable
the people displaced from Abyei to return to their
homes. Their return is conditional on the withdrawal of
all other military forces, the demilitarization of the
Area and the replacement of the Sudanese military
forces by the Ethiopian forces.

As I was saying, that would expedite the return of
those displaced to their areas and would therefore
improve the possibility of addressing all humanitarian
matters. Of course, it would also bring to an end the
threat of violence and actual violence in the Area.
Thus, we are really hoping that the Security Council
will look at the agreement as soon as possible and take
all decisions necessary to ensure that its various
provisions can be implemented.

We would also like to inform the Council that we
are dealing with the current situation in Southern
Kordofan. Again, as the Council may have heard, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, as well as ourselves, the
United States Special Envoy and members of the
political leadership of the SPLM. from northern Sudan
went to Southern Kordofan last week to meet with the
leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Army, Abdel
Aziz Al-Hilu. Our objective was to encourage them to
participate in a process that would peacefully resolve
the conflict in Southern Kordofan. We were very
fortunate to be able to immediately travel back to
Addis Ababa with people whom he delegated to
participate in those negotiations.

We are hoping that, with the arrival tomorrow
morning in Addis Ababa of senior political leaders
representing the people of Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states and representatives of the Sudanese
Government, we will seriously engage in
comprehensive negotiations on Southern Kordofan.
Those talks will relate to the security and the political
situation and will begin tomorrow.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haile Menkerios has also been engaging with the
Government of the Sudan on the need to urgently
address the humanitarian situation in Southern
Kordofan. I am quite sure that he will be able to report
on that. Indeed, I believe we have positive news with
regard to that matter as well. We are hoping to move on
the matter of Southern Kordofan so as to immediately
address the humanitarian situation. We also hope to
11-37934
begin urgent and comprehensive discussions on the
issue tomorrow to finally resolve its political and
security aspects.

Of course, we are also continuing negotiations
with the Sudanese parties on post-referendum
arrangements, which mainly involve how relations
between the North and the South will be structured
once South Sudan gains its independence on 9 July. I
am very pleased that good progress is being made. We
have already finalized discussions on assets and
liabilities, which include provisions for addressing the
issues of Sudan's international debt. That particular
series of negotiations has been concluded.

We have presented the parties with an agreement
comprised of a package of measures relating to the
economy, covering such issues as trade, currency and
oil. The parties now have a comprehensive proposal
and will be studying it beginning tomorrow. Hopefully,
if we can agree on that proposal, then we will have
resolved the matters related to cooperation between the
North and the South on economic issues.

The parties are close to also concluding
discussions on and resolving security matters, which
broadly include border security. In reality, the one
outstanding issue is the size and composition of an
international force that will assist the two Sudanese
States in ensuring security along their shared border,
including the policing of the demilitarized zone, to
which they have already agreed.

What I am trying to say to the Council is that we
are attending to the urgent matters of Abyei and
Southern Kordofan, where conflict has arisen. At the
same time, however, we are pushing ahead with other
necessary discussions in order to properly define the
nature of relations between the North and the South.
We are hoping that by the end of June we will have
concluded all of these, so that by the beginning of July
there will be a clear picture as to what will happen.

I should have said that, with regard to the Abyei
matter, it has also been agreed by the parties that it was
necessary to resolve the current issues that relate to the
security of Abyei before we come back to a
consideration of the matter of the final status of Abyei.
As a Panel, we will be consulting with the principals,
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva
Kiir, as to when they propose we might make our
presentation to them about what the final status of
Abyei should be. Given that this agreement has now
11-37934
been reached and, as I was saying, hopefully will be
implemented quickly, we can then engage them on the
matter of the final status of Abyei.

That is the report we wanted to give. Again, we
would like to thank the Security Council for the
attention it is paying to the issue of the Sudan, and we
hope that it will continue to extend to all of us - the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
ourselves and everyone else, and, of course, the
Sudanese parties - all of the assistance and the
support that we need to ensure that we can resolve all
of these particular challenges, which are facing an
important part of our continent.

