Mr. Egeland: This has been another day of
sitting and listening to many good interventions and
proposals and, first and foremost, the expressions of
support of Security Council members for what we are
trying to do to protect civilians.

Certainly the good news is that that there are
fewer conflicts and we are probably doing better
humanitarian work, better peacekeeping work and
better good offices mediation work in the United
Nations than ever before. We are making progress
overall. The bad news is that the armed men in the
remaining armed conflicts, wars and internal strife are
more ruthless than ever. They are better armed than
ever, and their whole purpose seems to be to make the
situation as bad as possible for the defenceless civilian
population. So in 2007 we will really be back to the
darkest ages in terms of not protecting civilian
populations. And it is really a question of crimes
against humanity and war crimes - in certain cases
amounting to genocide. I will on my many missions
never forget the abused women of eastern Congo, the
kidnapped children of northern Uganda, the camp
population in Darfur or the relatives of the killed
civilians in Iraq and the Palestinian areas and
elsewhere.

There is, of course, one major remedy to this
situation, and that is united action, as so many have
stated today - united action by all internal actors,
their Governments, civil society and all military and
armed groups, as well as united international action.

When I started my work, the worst cases of
abuses of civilian populations were found in pockets of
southern Sudan, in eastern Congo, in northern Uganda
and in Liberia. In all of those cases, we have made
progress. But the situation has become worse in other
areas. In those other areas, including Darfur, Gaza and
Iraq, there has not been any united action, at either the
national or the international level, to put an end to the
suffering of the civilian population. Only through re-
achieving unity of purpose and unity of action will we
be able to make progress on these issues.
I have been heartened to see growing support for
the agenda of the protection of civilians. There are
virtually hundreds, if not thousands, of civil society
groups and non-governmental organizations following
this, in the east, in the west, in the north and in the
south. I have been heartened to see that an
overwhelming majority of Member States now believe
that this is the core of what the United Nations is all
about.

As this is my swan song, I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council for
your kind words. I should like to thank the secretariat
of the Security Council for always helping us. I should
like thank my staff, which has been writing all of these
long drafts for me to be presented here. I should like
also to thank the non-governmental organizations, the
United Nations agencies and all of the partners that
have developed the agenda for the protection of
civilians and have made humanitarian work more
20
effective in these last, long and tough but very
rewarding years.

