Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me start
by congratulating you on your assumption of your
important post and by expressing my pleasure at seeing
you in the Chair. We are confident that, under your able
stewardship, the Council will effectively discharge its
tasks, dealing with the issues of high importance being
brought before it in this very busy month.
My appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2006/628) and to the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, Mr. Ian Martin, for his
informative briefing.
Permit me to join the previous speakers in
welcoming His Excellency Foreign Minister Jose Luis
Guterres of Timor-Leste to today's Council meeting.
His statement before the Council provides guidance for
the creation of a new mission of the United Nations in
his country.

We continue to follow closely the situation in
Timor-Leste, and we are heartened that the country has
managed to emerge from the recent crisis there. The
new Government, which enjoys support from a wide
spectrum of Timorese society, has been installed. In
this regard, words of appreciation go to Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal for their valuable
efforts.

In order to achieve sustainable peace and stability
in the country, we continue fully to support Timor-
Leste in advancing political dialogue and community
reconciliation, particularly by addressing the
underlying causes of the recent crisis. We are confident
that, under the wise guidance of its leaders, Timor-
Leste will be able to put its democratization process
back on track and resume its national development on a
stronger foundation.

Despite all the hardships being faced by Timor-
Leste on account of the recent crisis, that country
continues to enjoy an excellent level of bilateral
relations with Indonesia. The rapport between leaders
of the two countries is firm, assured and growing.
President Xanana Gusmao of Timor-Leste flew to Bali
to meet his counterpart, President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono of Indonesia, on 17 June 2006, to brief the
latter on the situation in his country and the actions
being taken by his Government to address the situation.
Indonesia has shown its full understanding of the
situation and is demonstrating its commitment to help
Timor-Leste to address the crisis, including by
providing humanitarian aid. As Timor-Leste's closest
neighbour, we are very interested in seeing a stable,
prosperous and democratic Timor-Leste. We are fully
aware that dealing with the daunting challenges it faces
is beyond that country's existing national capacity.
Hence, it is the responsibility of the international
community to continue assisting that country to
achieve self-sufficiency. In this regard, we support the
establishment of a new United Nations mission in the
country.

We believe that the United Nations mission,
which is recommended for an initial period of 12

months, should focus on helping the country to meet
the pressing challenges ahead and the real needs of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste. These
include the promotion of national reconciliation and
social cohesion; capacity-building of various State and
Government institutions, including the enhancement of
further public confidence in them; poverty reduction
and humanitarian assistance; and democratization,
which includes electoral assistance for the presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2007.

Let me now turn to the issue of justice and
reconciliation for Timor-Leste. We hope that the
Secretary-General's report on this subject (S/2006/580)
provides a new departure for the Organization in
dealing with this issue in a practical and feasible
manner. As has been stated on many occasions, the
Governments of Indonesia and of Timor-Leste are
committed to resolving residual problems from the past
and to opening a new chapter by developing forward-
looking relations and cooperation. In this spirit, the
two countries agreed to settle the human rights
violations reported in East Timor in 1999. Due to the
complexity of the problem, an innovative and creative
solution has been devised that would also strengthen
further good relations between the two countries in the
future.

The Commission of Truth and Friendship (CTF)
has achieved meaningful progress. It has agreed on the
elaboration of basic issues relating to its terms of
reference and has adopted a glossary of terminology as
the operational reference; these constitute clarification
and the CTF's creative interpretation of various
provisions in its terms of reference, including the one
on amnesty, on the basis of relevant international
norms, standards and practices that take into account
local needs and challenges. It has also adopted guiding
principles as the overarching guide to document
review, fact-finding methods, information clarification
with respect to relevant parties, naming names and
standards of evidence.

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General, the CTF has identified 14 groups of priority
cases. These consist of high-profile cases that are often
referred to in media reports; events that continue to be
commemorated emotionally by Timor-Leste society as
a collective memory; cases that reflect crimes as
defined in article 7 of the Rome Statute on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) regarding crimes
against humanity; and cases referred to in the final
report of the Indonesian national Commission of
inquiry into Human Rights Violations in East Timor in
1999, and other documents, as mandated in article 14
of its terms of reference.

The CTF is currently focusing on completing
document review through document matching,
corroboration and analysis, based on the report of the
Indonesian national Commission of inquiry into
Human Rights Violations in East Timor in 1999, the
documents of the proceedings of the Indonesian Ad
Hoc Human Rights Court, the documents of the Special
Panel for Serious Crimes and the report of the Timor-
Leste Commission on Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation.

While completing the document review and
analysis, the CTF has now moved into the second stage
of its work programme, namely, fact-finding, which
employs four methods: statement taking, submission,
investigation and hearings.

In order to garner support and input, the CTF has
carried out consultations with other stakeholders in
both countries, including parliaments, civil societies
and Government officials. With a view to expanding its
vision and getting inputs, the CTF has invited
international experts and prominent figures to share
their knowledge and experience.

On a regular basis, and as required in its terms of
reference, the Commission reports to the two
Governments on progress, as well as on challenges and
obstacles it encounters in implementing its mandate.
The heads of State of Indonesia and Timor-Leste, on
7 February 2006, agreed to extend the CTF's mandate
until July 2007. My Government has strong confidence
in the work of the CTF and is very much committed to
continuing to ensure its credibility.

In conclusion, Indonesia, as a neighbour which
shares a common vision with Timor-Leste, based on
the principles of peaceful coexistence, forward-
looking, reconciliatory and mutually beneficial
relations, will, for its part, continue to assist Timor-
Leste to make further progress in consolidating peace,
stability and democracy in the country.

