Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome your presence among us today,
Mr. President, as well as to thank you for providing us
an opportunity once again to express ourselves on the
important issue of peacebuilding, which is the subject
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/304).
Before moving to the issue before us, allow me to
welcome the Secretary-General's important statement,
as well as the outstanding statements delivered by our
special invitees.

We welcome the conclusions of the report of the
Secretary-General, which, let us recall, was explicitly
requested by the Security Council at the end of its
debate held on 20 May 2008 on this same issue.
Everyone agrees that the immediate post-conflict
period is a decisive moment in providing every
opportunity for the success of the peacebuilding
process - given, of course, that there a commitment
first on the part of national actors, who have the
primary responsibility in that regard, then on the part
of the international community.

National ownership is therefore crucial if a
peacebuilding process is to be viable. In particular, that
entails meaningful political commitment on the part of
all members of society, including the most vulnerable
and marginalized groups. The national dynamics must
nevertheless be accompanied by an effort by the
international community to provide support, especially
to overcome challenges associated with security,
socio-economic recovery and relaunching rule-of-law
institutions, which cannot be left solely up to post-
conflict countries.

We therefore agree with the Secretary-General in
emphasizing the crucial duty of the international
community to respond appropriately, quickly and
effectively in priority areas such as the security sector,
providing basic social services, re-establishing State
authority and revitalizing the economy. That should be
done while strengthening and supporting available
local, national, regional and international capacity on
the ground. Above all, after clearly identifying a
country's specific priority needs, that entails
responding appropriately to the root causes of a
conflict in order to prevent the recurrence of hostilities.

Given their knowledge of the situation on the
ground, the involvement of regional and subregional
actors is also a major factor in the success of the
peacebuilding process. The participation of the
Economic Community of West African States in the
peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone and that of the Central African Economic
Community in the Central African Republic, as well as
the peacebuilding experience in Burundi, which was
led successfully by Uganda and South Africa, all attest
to the importance of that involvement.
The United Nations is called to play a leading
role in that joint effort. We would in particular like to
emphasize the need to pursue efforts to improve the
coordination and coherence of the Organization's
actions in order to clearly identify responsibilities and
improve the predictability of international support.

We also support the Secretary-General's
recommendation concerning the need to establish a
programme aimed at improving United Nations action
and facilitating that of other participants by making it
more coherent and timely. Ultimately, the goal is to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system to
provide expertise and staff who are ready to be
deployed quickly to the field to respond to the priority
needs of countries emerging from conflict.

Moreover, we would like to commend the
important role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which is the best framework for coordinating the
efforts of the international community in the area of
peacebuilding. We also welcome its efforts to respond
to requests from countries emerging from conflict, in
particular with regard to mobilizing international
financial, material and logistical support. In that
regard, we also welcome the commitments made by the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

In conclusion, we express the hope that the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and the positive contributions
emanating from various discussions at the
Peacebuilding Commission will make it possible to
redress the shortfalls in the collective response to post-
conflict challenges. We nevertheless trust that the
commitment and concerted efforts of the entire United
Nations system, along with those of the international
community, will help to make the peacebuilding
process more viable and effective, so as to ensure
lasting peace and development in countries emerging
from conflict.

We of course also support the draft presidential
statement that has been circulated by the delegation of
Uganda.

