Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing and commends him for leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in the enormous amount of work it has done over the
years. We also listened carefully to the statements by
Afghan youth delegate Ms. Khurram and Ambassador
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations.

China has been following the developments in
Afghanistan closely. The realization of peace and
stability in that country is not only the goal that the
Afghan people strongly aspire to but also a shared
expectation of the countries in the region and the
international community. The results of Afghanistan's
presidential elections have yet to be announced. Its
security situation is disconcerting, its peace and
reconciliation process beset by growing uncertainties
and its humanitarian situation dire. The international
community should therefore continue to provide
Afghanistan with support and assistance. We need to
continue to help it improve its security environment, as
the situation on the ground has recently been worsening,
with air strikes and search operations that have led to
a considerable increase in civilian deaths. Terrorist
groups remain active and drugs are still an important
source of funding for them.

As the Afghan presidential elections enter their final
stage, China applauds Afghanistan for the tremendous
efforts it has made to ensure their smooth conduct. We
respect the choice of the Afghan people and support
the work of the Independent Election Commission. At
the same time, we will be watching closely for any new
challenges to Afghan security and stability following
the release of the election results.

China calls for foreign troops to withdraw from
Afghanistan in an orderly and responsible manner
and for all Afghan political parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue in order to ensure a stable
and smooth transition of power. The international
community should provide training, funding and
technical support for capacity-building in the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and assist
the country in effectively countering terrorism,
transnational crime, drug trafficking and other threats.
We should provide rigorous support to Afghanistan
in advancing its peace and reconciliation process. The
international community and other countries in the
region have recently been actively promoting direct
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban,
lending impetus to the peace and reconciliation
process. China calls on all Afghan parties, including
the Taliban, to prioritize the interests of their country
and people, seize these historic opportunities and
engage in intra-Afghan talks in order to establish
an extensive and inclusive political framework as
early as possible and open the door to reconciliation.
China is a staunch supporter of the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process. We have been actively exercising
diplomacy and our good offices, and will continue to
engage the parties in talks through channels such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Contact Group
with Afghanistan, the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan
Foreign Ministers' Dialogue and the China-United
States-Russia-Pakistan consultations on Afghanistan.
Our efforts are aimed at building regional consensus
and an environment that is conducive to peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan, while also providing a
platform for intra-Afghan talks.

It is important that we provide tangible assistance in
promoting Afghanistan's socioeconomic development.
Its Government and people need continued attention
and significant assistance if they are to improve
their humanitarian situation, while help is also
needed to enable Afghanistan use its own advantages
and participate in regional economic cooperation
and connectivity in order to eradicate poverty and
overcome the challenges caused by natural disasters.
In our communications with Mr. Yamamoto, we have
expressed deep concerns about the worsening poverty
situation in Afghanistan, which deserves our joint
efforts. UNAMA should therefore play an active role
in that regard by implementing its mandate, supporting
Afghanistan in post-conflict reconstruction and
enhancing its cooperation with regional countries
and organizations.

To boost Afghanistan's socioeconomic
development, China will focus the assistance it
provides to the country on areas relating to people's
lives. We have helped Afghanistan to build the Republic
Hospital, Kabul University and the Afghanistan
Technical Vocational Institute. Every year, we provide
scholarships to Afghan students and treat Afghan
children with congenital heart problems. We have
also been carrying out regional cooperation projects
in disaster risk management and other areas. China
will continue to work with Afghanistan to actively
implement the China-Afghanistan memorandum
of understanding on jointly advancing the Belt and
Road Initiative, thereby supporting the country in its
reconstruction and integration into regional economic
development. Thanks to our concerted efforts, China
and Afghanistan have opened direct flights, established
direct transport links and expanded economic and
trade ties.

We stand ready to work with Afghanistan in a spirit
of consultation, cooperation and mutual benefit to
strengthen economic cooperation in the region, create
connectivity partnerships, promote regional peace
and stability through development and help to achieve
lasting peace in Afghanistan. Let us work together to
build a community united by the vision of a shared
future for all humankind.

