Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by extending our sincere thanks to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jean- Pierre Lacroix for his very comprehensive briefing. I would also like to express my sincere appreciation for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General and all the personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) on the ground. As stated by the Secretary-General, Mali is one of the most challenging and dangerous operational environments for United Nations peacekeepers. Yet, despite these challenges, MINUSMA continues to show outstanding performance and leadership, which calls for rightfully deserved recognition. Having said that, allow me to share three points. First, itis important to speed up the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which remains the most viable solution for lasting peace and stability in the country. We welcome the conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue, which resulted in important resolutions, including with regard to legislative elections and constitutional reform. We call on all parties to continue their endeavours aimed at advancing the peace process and key reforms. In addition, we would like to emphasize the importance of redeploying Malian defence and security forces in order to restore State authority, particularly in northern Mali. We also welcome the reintegration of 1,330 former combatants. We hope that any outstanding issues can be resolved, and that the redeployment plan can be adopted. More efforts are also needed to ensure the functioning of local authorities and to address outstanding matters related to the operationalization of the northern development zone. Secondly, with regard to the addressing security situation, we note with concern the terrorist activities, the proliferation of self-defence militias, intercommunal clashes and the negative sentiment of the population directed towards international forces. Efforts must be made to address the deteriorating security situation. The role of national and international security forces iscritical in this regard. We commend MINUSMA for its role in supporting the peace process and in stabilizing the situation in Centre. As stated in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/983), MINUSMA's added focus on central Mali has put additional pressure on the Mission. While the Mission continues to try to adapt and rebalance its capacity, it is necessary to focus on a more sustainable approach. We concur with the Secretary-General's observation that organizational partners are better placed to conduct counter-terrorism operations beyond the mandate and capability of the Mission. In this regard, it is necessary to enhance effective partnerships. It is regrettable that despite national, multinational and international efforts, the security situation has not been improving. We believe that this is testament to the fact that a military solution alone will not be sufficient to solve the problems Mali is facing. Accordingly, with regard to my third point, on the need to address root causes of instability, support for the peace process and efforts aimed at improving the security situation will be realized and succeed only if they are translated into an improvement in the living conditions of the Malian population. The alleviation of poverty and food insecurity and the creation of opportunities, including income-generating activities, are therefore critical. In conclusion, obtaining a national commitment to the Agreement's implementation, restoring State authority and addressing the security and humanitarian situations are of crucial importance to achieving peace, stability and sustainable development in Mali.
