Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Let me also join
others in thanking His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his very
useful statement this afternoon. We would also like to
thank Mrs. Vlora Citaku for her statement and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto
Zannier for his comprehensive update on the situation
in Kosovo.

Nigeria welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/201l/43) pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999). We also welcome the continued collaboration
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the other
facilitators in fostering peace and stability in Kosovo
and the region. However, it is evident from today's
briefings that there are still difficult challenges in
Kosovo and in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). That situation requires the careful
consideration of the Council.

In that regard, we want to observe that UNMIK
continues to operate in difficult circumstances, with
sustained media attacks undermining efforts by the
Mission to fully deliver on its mandate. We deplore
those attacks and urge restraint on the part of the
parties involved. Nigeria believes that UNMIK still has
an important role to play and that its presence and
support is required to bolster efforts at assisting the
communities to overcome their various challenges.

Nigeria shares the Secretary-General's concerns
about the fragile security situation in northern Kosovo.
Inter-ethnic tensions and attacks against the minority
communities, as well as members of the international
community, undermine the prospects for peace and
stability in the territory. We believe that the
perpetrators of crimes should be properly brought to
justice, and efforts made to reach out to the victims. It
is important to prevent such incidents from reoccurring
by enhancing the necessary mechanisms for the
protection of lives and property and by promoting
mutual tolerance, harmony and coexistence among the
people.

1 l-23 603
Nigeria remains convinced that sustained
dialogue is indispensable to achieving a mutually
acceptable solution to all outstanding issues in Kosovo.
The parties should therefore remain fully committed to
dialogue, in furtherance of General Assembly 64/298,
adopted on 9 September 2010. We urge the parties to
redouble their efforts to commence that process in the
shortest possible time, taking into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all communities. The
resulting overall peace dividend would be far-reaching
for Kosovo and the region, as it would not only address
the problem of insecurity but also open up economic
opportunities for the various communities.

On the issue of illicit trafficking in human organs
in Kosovo, highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report, Nigeria considers it a very serious human rights
issue that requires an international investigation, taking
into account the various jurisdictions involved in the
matter. We encourage UNMIK to provide the support
that may be necessary to the process.

We welcome the increased support for returnees
recorded during the reporting period. Efforts should be
deployed to address concerns over the viability of
conditions of return, including security, access to
public services, housing and property rights and
socio-economic opportunities. The absence of these
critical elements will constrain efforts to promote the
sustainable return of displaced persons, as well as
reconciliation, longer-term stability and the
development of Kosovo.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for their unrelenting
efforts in promoting peace and stability in Kosovo, as
well as the region, and assure the Mission of our
continued support.

