Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): While in recent
days the international community has focused its attention
and activities on the exodus of many thousands of refugees
from Croatia rather than on the tragic humanitarian
situation that has not ceased in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
bloody details of the expulsion of some 60,000 civilians
from the so-called safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa have
disappeared. The destiny of at least 10,000 civilians who
never reached the safety of the territory under the control
of my Government has been hidden under the dark,
deadly curtain that Mladic and Karadzic have thrown over
these unfortunate regions - regions that have simply
been abandoned by the world.

Behind the slow advance of an ever wider flood of
Serbian refugees from Croatia, light has never been shed
on the incomparably more severe suffering of those
Bosniac Muslims, who, barehanded, stood no chance
against the Pale war criminals. With this humiliation and
extermination, many of those who even today are not
clear whether or not they would protect the remaining
safe areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina have claimed that
their mandate was not to protect the civilians or to defend
the safe areas.

These very same interpreters of the mandate of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have not shown nearly as much interest,
or made nearly as much effort, in preventing the Pale
Serb leaders from starting a new series of cruel and
savage crimes. Today's discoveries by the United States
Government, which appears very lonely in its efforts to
establish the truth, disclose the facts and empower the
work of the war crimes Tribunal. These discoveries have
finally shed more light on what took place in Srebrenica
and Zepa. We owe much gratitude to the German
delegation and to delegations of the caucus of the Non-
Aligned Movement, which have repeatedly raised the
issue of the people missing from Zepa and Srebrenica.

The savage terror inflicted by the criminals against
the innocent civilians of Srebrenica and Zepa did not
manage to receive more attention, despite the repeated
appeals by my Government, except for a couple of
presidential statements and the occasional statement to the
Press.

Today's resolution, we feel, is a small step forward.
Nevertheless, this is a resolution that more clearly
articulates care, even though it may be irreparably late for
many.

When speaking on the draft resolution on Croatia, I
expressed my satisfaction that in the alleviation of the
situation of Serb refugees from Croatia, certain standards
for minimizing the suffering and helping the Victims of
humanitarian crises have improved, and have risen to a
higher level. With this improvement comes swiftness of
action and the inventiveness of humanitarian organization.
One proof for this is the intention to use for humanitarian

 

purposes the military airport in Banja Luka, which until
now has been used only for carrying out destructive actions
and acts of killing Bosnians from the air.

In the meantime, all the appeals of the Bosnian
Government directed in the past two years to the United
Nations Secretary-General and the Security Council to open
the Tuzla airport for humanitarian purposes have not borne
fruit. Moreover, Sarajevo airport continues to be closed,
upon the dictates of Karadzic's Serbs, despite its status
being completely clear and its purpose solely humanitarian.
For the fourth month, Sarajevo airport remains closed. The
humanitarian situation in the city, coupled with continuing
artillery attacks and sniping, is unbearable. We would hope
that the criteria and standards of humanitarian actions
would be unified, since any classification of Victims is only
a first step in the chain of injustice.

The humanitarian situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been remarkably alleviated, thanks to the joint actions
of the Bosnian and Croatian armies to lift the monstrous
siege of Bihac and stop the terrorization resulting from the
coordinated actions of the armed gangs of Serbs from
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Subsequently, 200,000 inhabitants of the Bihac
enclave, who spent three years in complete isolation,
without any humanitarian assistance, have been saved.

The joint action of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia most likely saved the face of the international
community, whose key members built for weeks the myth
that practically nothing could have been done around Bihac,
and justified this with the argument that there were too
many armies there that were difficult to distinguish. I think
the picture of the Bihac pocket is much clearer now.

The humanitarian situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in Croatia will be easier to normalize and maintain if
UNCRO ensures that its commitments, as accepted in the
agreement with Croatia's Government, are fulfilled and that
armed Serbs from Krajina surrender their weapons before
they cross Bosnia on their way to Serbia. These weapons
directly endanger the safety of Serb refugees, since the
armed Serbs are provoking actions by firing from the
refugee convoys - a matter on which the United Nations
Secretariat has or could have some information.

In this draft resolution on Bosnia there is no mention
of the destiny of those who have found refuge in Serbia
from Zepa, but who have unfortunately become the subject
of propaganda exploitation, and, we fear, new tortures,
humiliation and even murder.

We request international humanitarian organizations
to, without delay, if possible, complete their work on the
registration of all those refugees, to continue to search for
them and locate them, and to prevent their disappearance
or further abuse and subjection to violations of the
Geneva Conventions and humanitarian law.

We look forward to prompt reporting by the
Secretary-General on these issues, as requested by the
Council in the draft resolution.

