Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
honoured by the Minister's presence here today at this
important debate.

I want to begin by joining my colleagues in
thanking you, Mr. Special Representative, for your
extraordinary leadership. I know how deeply my
Government, up to and including President Obama, has
been grateful for your service, your enormous
contributions, your personal sacrifice and your success
in this important endeavour. You will be missed. I just
wish to underscore how deep our gratitude truly is. I
also want to thank you for reminding us of the
enormous contributions and sacrifices that so many
have made on behalf of the United Nations, as well as
many other countries, foremost the people of Iraq,
towards the achievement of a sovereign, democratic
and stable Iraq. Your mention of Sergio today is
moving and timely, and we thank you again for that.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and all the men and women of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their
tireless work to support a more peaceful and
prosperous Iraq.

Rooted in our shared strategic interests with the
Government of Iraq, heartened by the heroic service of
thousands of brave Americans and many others, and
mindful of the future of millions of Iraqis, the United
States remains deeply committed to Iraq. As this
Council knows, the United States plans, in accordance
with the United States-Iraq security agreement, to
withdraw its combat troops from Iraq's cities, towns
and villages no later than the end of this month. That in
turn will pave the way for the withdrawal of all United
States forces by the end of 2011. Our drawdown and
withdrawal, however, in no way diminish our long-
term partnership with Iraq. During this transition
period, the United States will continue our firm support
for the Iraqi people as they assume full responsibility
for their sovereign nation. We will continue to build a
strong, lasting, strategic relationship with Iraq, one that
respects the sovereignty and serves the interests of both
our countries.

As a friend and as a strategic partner, we will
work with Iraq's Government to strengthen democratic
institutions, uphold the rule of law and develop
peaceful and cooperative relations with its neighbours.
We will also continue to encourage the international
community to deepen its engagement with the
Government of Iraq to further secure and build upon
Iraq's political, economic and security gains.

The United States would like to acknowledge the
vitally important work that the United Nations is doing
in Iraq. Under the leadership of Special Representative
De Mistura and at the invitation of the Iraqi
Government, UNAMI continues to expand the United
Nations presence and capacity throughout Iraq. From
helping to address disputed internal boundaries to
helping hold free and fair elections, from pursuing
national reconciliation to easing the suffering of
refugees and the displaced, UNAMI continues to play a
critical role in promoting the long-term peace, security
and prosperity of Iraq.

In the days and months ahead, UNAMI's work
will be critically important. Allow me to highlight just
three areas where its efforts will matter most.

In January, Iraqis chose new provincial councils
in 14 of Iraq's 18 provinces. That vote was marked by
a heartening and diverse voter turnout and a
significantly improved security climate. Based on that
success, UNAMI will once again provide technical
assistance and advice to Iraq's Independent High
Electoral Commission as it prepares for two upcoming
votes: the Kurdistan regional government elections in
July, and the Iraqi parliamentary elections in January
2010.

Secondly, UNAMI will also continue to play a
crucial role in supporting efforts to address Iraq's
disputed internal boundaries. By promoting constructive
dialogue about a mutually acceptable solution, UNAMI is
helping to provide a key requirement for lasting stability
in Iraq, and we call upon all relevant parties to advance
this process in earnest.

Thirdly, UNAMI will provide valuable support to
the Iraqi Government as it facilitates the safe,
voluntary and orderly return of displaced Iraqis. Here,
too, UNAMI's work is critically important. The
sustainable and voluntary reintegration into Iraqi life of
refugees and internally displaced persons is essential
for the country's long-term stability. To support and
sustain the return of those uprooted by war and chaos,
UNAMI is working with the Iraqi Government to
provide them with security and access to housing, jobs
and basic services. We welcome additional efforts on
this issue by the Government of Iraq.

All of us here can be proud of UNAMI's
outstanding record of accomplishment. We deeply
appreciate its work and look forward to its continued
success.

The United States firmly supports Iraq's
continuing development as a sovereign and democratic
nation, a country in which all of its diverse and vibrant
communities can participate freely in political, social
and economic life and in which human rights are
protected, a country that contributes to the peace and
security of the region, a country that is sovereign,
stable and self-reliant.

To build on the progress we have made, regional
and international support for Iraq is essential. We
encourage all countries to help Iraq meet its goals and
to support the Iraqi people as they pursue prosperity
and peace. The United States unequivocally encourages
UNAMI's work and its expanded footprint in Iraq. My
Government stands ready to continue to assist UNAMI
as necessary, and we encourage all countries to do the
same.

Finally, the United States fully supports the
presidential statement circulated by the Turkish
presidency. It is an important signal of support for
UNAMI and for the people of Iraq.

