Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to express my appreciation to President
Mkapa, Chairperson of the Secretary-General's Panel
on the Referenda in the Sudan, and Mr. Mahmoud
Kane, Head of the African Union Liaison Office in
Khartoum. I would also like to thank Mr. Haile
Menkerios, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan, as well as the head of regional
cooperation office in South Sudan for their opening
remarks.

It is worth recalling today the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, which was signed in 2005 and
helped our brothers in Southern Sudan and Northern
Sudan to overcome an atrocious war that left countless
victims over many years. Despite the events of the
past, the parties were able to initiate cooperation,
which helped them to implement the Agreement, with
assistance from the United Nations, the African Union
and the League of Arab States. Thus, they were able to
conduct a referendum in a peaceful and honest
atmosphere in Southern Sudan so that the people could
take charge of their own future in a free and democratic
manner. They have honoured their commitments and
respected the will of the people of Southern Sudan to
live in independence, in accordance with the official
results of the referendum, which were announced
yesterday.

That does not mean, however, that the North and
the South have reached the end of the path between
them, as indicated by the Prime Minister of the Sudan.
The Prime Minister stated that there would be no
hostility between the North and the South, but instead
strong ties between the two parties and the two
countries. In that context, we applaud the initiative of
the Sudanese President, who issued a presidential
decree announcing the results of the referendum and
making further commitments to work on the various
pending matters related to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

Those principles and actions strengthen the
atmosphere of optimism that currently prevails and will
create closer ties between the North and the South,
with a view to increasing coordination and
cooperation. That coordination will be undertaken in a
new political context in the service of their mutual
interests. It goes without saying, however, that we must
monitor pending issues very closely. Those issues
include the situation in Abyei and post-referendum
matters, such as citizenship, wealth-sharing, oil and
water revenues, debt and others. We hope that the
agreement will have a positive impact on the situation
in Southern Sudan. We believe that the adoption of a
Darfur peace agreement will have a positive impact on
the overall situation in the Sudan.

The Doha process requires the participation of all
parties in Darfur. We agree with the call for the
Council to strengthen that participation by way of the
sanctions list, among other means. We would
encourage the Sudanese Government to pursue positive
measures so as to create an environment conducive to
talks and cooperation, including between the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the Government of the Sudan. It would be best to not
set definitive dates for talking about the end of Doha,
nor create parallel or competing portfolios; rather, they
should be complementary.
Returning to the situation in Darfur, I would like
to congratulate Mr. Haile Menkerios and Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari on their respective roles in that regard.

