Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation shares our common
commitment to a world free of chemical weapons
and is concerned about the continuing incidences of
chemical terrorism in the Middle East. Our position is
unchanged. We condemn the use of chemical weapons
by anyone in any circumstances. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable.

Russia was part of the successful chemical
demilitarization of Syria from the start and was one of
the founders of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) to investigate incidents of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We believed that,
working professionally, responsibly and impartially,
the Mechanism would do a good job of clarifying who
might be the perpetrators of possible chemical weapons
attacks, based on irreproachable data. However, it
became clear that there were fundamental flaws in
the Mechanism's activities that would not permit us to
formally consider the question of extending its operation.
They include its method of working remotely, the fact
that it focused exclusively on dubious testimony from
opposition groups and even terrorists, and its disregard
for the entire range of rules and methods provided for
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.

In the past few weeks we have frequently brought
up the impossibility of considering extending the
JIM's mandate without considering the conclusions
of its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex), which are a
complete shambles. The analysis of Russian specialists
in that regard was submitted for the consideration of
the States Members of the United Nations, and we
discussed it at the Council's meeting on 7 November
(see S/PV.8090). Suffice it to say that the version
according to which a Syrian military aircraft dropped
a sarin bomb on Khan Shaykhun is completely
unrealistic, going as it does against the laws of physics
and ballistics. A plane following the trajectory recorded
by American radar would have been physically
incapable of being involved in this act. An unguided
missile could not have been dropped perpendicular
to the aircraft and then have exploded more than five
kilometres from it. Our country's specialists know the
tactical and technical details of the Su-22 aircraft better
than anyone and therefore categorically exclude that
possibility. The report contains a ton of other errors
and inconsistencies for which we did not receive any
convincing explanations, though Ms. Nakamitsu, the
High Representative on Disarmament, did attempt to
respond to some questions - with no success, frankly.
Her answers essentially refer back to the JIM's report
and the very conclusions we wanted clarified, and we
therefore got no real explanation. Mr. Mulet, the Head
of the JIM, focused on discussions with the press in
a very strange way for someone running a supposedly
independent investigative unit, and in an interview
on 9 November with the New York Times, he took the
liberty of making unfounded and insulting attacks on
Russia that did his dignity no service.

Against the backdrop of a pseudo-investigation
that cannot tolerate any criticism, and testimony
cooked up by who knows what witnesses or where that
collapses like a house of cards when checked up on,
the JIM. had the nerve to issue a guilty verdict against
an entire State, the Syrian Arab Republic. In doing so,
the leadership of the Mechanism sacrificed its own
reputation and inscribed its name in the inglorious
history of political speculations about Syria. However,
we know that blaming the Mechanism alone for this is
pointless. It has merely functioned as a means to an
end by executing the political instructions of its puppet
masters. And we know who they are.

Nonetheless, we want to preserve the Mechanism.
The draft resolution (S/2017/968) that was first
submitted today by us and has now been resubmitted
by Bolivia, and which we will now put to the vote,
is designed to extend the mandate with significant
improvements in the quality of the JIM's work and
to bring it fully in line with the high standards of the
Chemical Weapons Convention. We are not about
to infringe on the independence of the Mechanism's
investigators. The task consists of establishing clear,
transparent parameters for its activity, which would
also help to prevent any further manipulation of the
investigation's activities as supplied up until now by
opponents of the Syrian Government.

The draft resolution directs the JIM. to conduct
its investigations in accordance with Chemical
Weapons Convention practice, working at the actual
sites of chemical incidents and using the entire range
of methods and means at its disposal. The Security
Council must be immediately informed of potential
issues with access. If an investigation on the ground is
still impossible, we propose that the Mechanism should
retain the results of its own investigations and remote
findings from the OPCW's Fact-finding Mission until
a fully fledged investigation is possible, strengthening
the ties between the two entities and enabling them to
function as effectively as possible.

We cannot consider the investigation of the
sarin incident in Khan Shaykhun concluded until the
JIM. has visited the site and collected samples at the
Shayrat air base. The draft resolution includes specific
provisions for that. It directs the Secretary-General to
provide additional recommendations for building the
JIM's capacity within a 20-day period and requires the
Security Council to consider those proposals promptly.

We firmly believe that the Mechanism must take a
more responsible approach to its obligation under last
year's mandate to investigate chemical-related acts by
non-State actors. So far we have seen no activity on it,
and the numerous complaints from Syria in that regard,
as a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, have
been ignored.

In our revision of the draft resolution we tried as
much as possible to take the views of our Security
Council partners into account, and have included in it
a number of ideas from the United States and several
other Council members. In particular, we agreed to
extend the mandate for a year rather than six months, as
provided for in resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016).
We were willing to correct the operational paragraph
on the re-evaluation of the conclusions from the JIM's
reports of last year, confining it solely to the episode
in the Sarmin area. At the time, the Mechanism based
its conclusions on a version in which a chlorine-filled
barrel bomb fell from a high altitude into a ventilation
shaft ofa diameter similar to the bomb's, even though the
Mechanism itself termed that unlikely. Unbelievable.

We call on the members of the Security Council
to vote in favour of the draft resolution, which,
together with Bolivia and China, we are submitting for
their consideration.

