Mr. Shah (India): Allow me first of all, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month.

The television screen has once again brought into
our homes heart-rending scenes of death and destruction.
We thought that such scenes from the West Bank, Gaza
and Jerusalem had been firmly put behind us. We grieve
for those who have been killed and pray for the recovery
of those who have been injured. This loss of life, which
should never have occurred, has been caused by the
actions of the Israeli authorities in opening a tunnel
beneath the Temple Mount in East Jerusalem.
The avoidable loss of innocent lives and the large-
scale injuries following the violent clashes have horrified
us. The current situation underlines the need for
immediate and effective measures to end the violence and
create a climate which will allow for purposeful
negotiations based on recognition of the underlying causes
of the clashes.

The tragic developments in the West Bank and Gaza
serve to emphasize the moral, legal and humanitarian
imperatives of the Middle East peace process and the
necessity of building further on the agreements and
understandings, on the basis of the principles and time
schedules already agreed upon. At the same time, no
unilateral steps should be taken that are not in conformity
with the interim agreements and understandings.

India's bond of friendship with the Palestinian
people is firm and abiding. Our historic contacts cover
almost every aspect of human life and endeavour. This
tradition has been renewed and strengthened in modern
times. India continues to believe that the question of
Palestine remains at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In this context, India has extended unqualified support to
the Middle East peace process on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425
(1978)

Following the recent political changes in the Middle
East, India had been encouraged by the reiteration by all
parties of their continued commitment to the Middle East
peace process based on the framework established by the
Madrid Peace Conference. At the same time, we are
concerned that these reaffirmations do not appear to have

 

manifested themselves in commensurate progress in the
peace process.

Less than 48 hours ago, the Non-Aligned Foreign
Ministers expressed their concern at the recent Israeli action
of opening the tunnel beneath the Temple Mount and called
for its immediate reversal. I would like to underline the
urgent need for this step to be undertaken, even now, to
ensure that a process of reconciliation can be initiated
without any delay.

The international community has wholeheartedly
supported the peace process in the Middle East. Successes
that have been achieved so far have not been easy in
coming and it would be tragic if these successes were
allowed to be whittled away. The international community
can provide the necessary support, but it is for the parties
to ensure that the impetus that was generated during the
recent past is sustained. India would urge all parties to
intensify their efforts towards realizing the mutually agreed
objectives of the Middle East peace process, keeping in
view that lasting peace and stability in the Middle East
require the complete solution of the Palestinian question.

