Mr. Gilmour: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the human rights
situation in South Sudan and its impact on peace
and security.

In line with the important progress that Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), has just reported, since last
September the Human Rights Division of UNMISS
has documented a significant and welcome decrease
in the number of human rights Violations and abuses
perpetrated by Government forces and organized armed
groups throughout the country. A major exception
to this, however, has been the continued prevalence
of sexual violence by parties to the conflict, which
Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, has briefed the
Council about and which I will not repeat.

Crucial though it is, the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan does not address all divisions, with their
increasingly ethnic dimensions, that lie at the root of
the conflict or the extremely high levels of corruption,
which continue to undermine sustainable peace and
justice in South Sudan, as well as the economic and
social rights of the population.

We have just heard about the continued serious
violations in Central Equatoria; I will not repeat them.

In other parts of South Sudan, the Violence has
shifted primarily to acts perpetrated by community-
based militias and armed elements. Frequently referred
to as cattle raids or intercommunal violence, these
incidents have largely evolved from a traditional
practice to acts of political violence involving State
actors, including State security forces, elements of
organized armed groups and self-defence groups
established by local communities. Since the signing of
the revitalized agreement in September 2018, civilian
casualties resulting from this form of violence have far
exceeded those resulting from violations and abuses by
conventional parties to the conflict.

The restriction of political and civic space is also
a worrying trend. Freedom of expression is under
constant attack in the country and is closely linked with
the unfettered power of the National Security Service to
impede citizens' civil and political rights. Surveillance,
intimidation and arbitrary arrests are commonly used
to restrict the activities of human rights defenders,
critics and journalists. The case of Mr. Peter Biar Ajak
is noteworthy in that regard.

The real guarantee of lasting peace in South Sudan
lies with efforts to end impunity. Many reports have
concluded that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that gross violations of international human rights law
and of international humanitarian law, and international
crimes have been committed by the parties to the
conflict. Those include joint reports by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and UNMISS, those of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) as well as the reports
of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan,
established by the Human Rights Council.

Despite all that evidence, however, no significant
action has been taken against the perpetrators. And
to break the long-standing cycle of impunity, as well
as to prevent future violations, we believe that the
transitional justice mechanisms outlined in the peace
agreement must be implemented. The Government
has not yet signed the memorandum of understanding
with the African Union for the establishment of the
hybrid court.

UNMISS has supported the State in its efforts
to deliver justice at local levels, offering what David
Shearer has just called some important glimmers of
hope amid the challenges facing the country, including
through mobile court initiatives. The UNMISS-
supported mobile courts in Bentiu and Malakal have led
to the conviction of at least three members of organized
forces for rape. We are encouraged that, on 14 March,
Government speakers - including the Minister of
Defence and Veterans Affairs and the Chief of the
South Sudan Defence Forces - publicly conceded
that members of the Government security forces had
been involved in perpetrating sexual violence and
urged commanders to ensure that the perpetrators of
these acts are held accountable. Real change starts with
an acknowledgement of the problem, so we welcome
that step.

The UNMISS Human Rights Division also
regularly engages with and provides support to national
authorities, security forces, civil society organizations
and community groups on a range of human rights
issues. It supports human rights forums in all ofthe field
offices, such as that held in Bentiu last week, chaired
by the state Governor and attended by key partners, to
address justice and sexual violence in hotspot areas.

In conclusion, we hope that the international
community and the Security Council will continue to
urge as strongly as possible the South Sudanese parties
to implement their commitments to ending hostilities
and to stopping the sexual Violence. As we have just
heard Special Representative David Shearer say, let us
be frank. The fighting has stopped because the leaders
ordered the soldiers to stop. That surely applies to
the continued human rights violations and the sexual
violence. If the leaders order the soldiers to stop those
crimes, they too will largely stop. We also hope that
everyone, including the Council, will continue to press
the parties for the establishment of the accountability
and transitional justice mechanisms outlined in the
revitalized agreement.

