Mr. Kfirfisi (Hungary): The Republic of Hungary
fully aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the European Union. Let me
extend my gratitude to Ambassador Wittig for being a
driving force as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. It is indeed a great
pleasure for us to co-sponsor a resolution such as
resolution 1998 (2011), adopted this morning.

In our view, the Security Council, in adopting
today's landmark resolution, will strengthen the United
Nations protection framework for children affected by
armed conflict. My country pays special attention to
preserving the cultural heritage of all nations, and to
preserving their identity and building on these things
both in peacetime and during conflict resolution. But
we are also convinced that no country's culture and
heritage can endorse attacks on schools and hospitals.
We are convinced that the abduction of children from
such targets is a crime against the children, their
families and the communities concerned.
Hungary therefore welcomes the recommendation
to expand the triggers for listing to parties who attack

schools and hospitals. Only through an effective
monitoring and reporting mechanism can the
perpetrators be held accountable. It is of key
importance that perpetrators be held accountable for
violations and abuses for which they are responsible.
Hungary is of the firm opinion that grave violations
against children should be incorporated as criteria
meriting sanctions in the mandates of the Security
Council's sanctions committees. We strongly believe
that the international community should spare no effort
in taking effective steps to respond and put an end to
attacks, abuses, assaults and any other kind of violence
aimed at children.

The Republic of Hungary strongly supports the
work of the Security Council. We would like to
reaffirm the importance of family, childhood, education
and mental and physical health in all people's lives.
Hungary would also like to further encourage the
Council to maintain its campaign against the
recruitment and abuse of child soldiers.

