The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/800, which contains a letter dated
15 December 2005 from the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1535 (2004), by which it decided to establish a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (hereinafter 'CTED') as a special
political mission under the policy guidance of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to enhance
the Committee's ability to monitor
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
effectively continue the capacity-building work in
which it was engaged. At the same time the
Security Council decided to carry out a
comprehensive review of CTED by 31 December
2005.

"During today's consultations, the Security
Council undertook this review and came to the
following conclusions:

"The Security Council endorsed the report
prepared by the CTC and forwarded to the
Council in S/2005/800 and agreed with its
conclusions.

"The Security Council noted that CTED had
the

only been fully staffed since 6 September 2005
and welcomed the start that CTED had made on
its objectives as set out in the revitalization
process. It welcomed the fact that the CTC, in
consultation with the Secretary-General, had
decided to declare CTED operational on
15 December 2005.

"The Security Council recalled that CTED's
mandate flows from that of the CTC and
reaffirmed that the Committee has the sole
responsibility for providing policy guidance to
CTED. It also welcomed the fact that such
guidance would be accompanied by
implementation plans to enhance the Committee's
ability effectively to implement its mandate.

"The Security Council agreed with the
Secretary-General and with the CTC that there is
a need to clarify CTED's reporting lines, within
the framework of resolution 1535 (2004), and
welcomed the Secretary-General's initiative in
this regard. The Security Council expressed its
readiness to work with him on this matter.

"The Security Council welcomed the
integration into the work of the CTC of the issue
of implementation by Member States of
resolution 1624 (2005).

"The Security Council decided to carry out
another comprehensive review of CTED by
31 December 2006, prepared by the CTC."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/64.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
