Mr. Lacroix: Since the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
briefed the Security Council on 14 November (see S/PV.8399), a number of developments in Kosovo have
heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
On 21 November, following Kosovo's failed bid to join
INTERPOL, the Government of Kosovo announced an
increase in the tariff on goods imported from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina from 10 to 100 per cent. In
response, the mayors of the four Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities of northern Kosovo announced their
resignations and the decision ofthe respective municipal
assemblies to cease all official communication with the
Pristina authorities. The main Kosovo Serb political
party - the Serbian List - has organized daily
protests, centred in North Mitrovica, that have at times
involved up to 5,000 people.

Belgrade, for its part, stated that Pristina had
violated the Central European Free Trade Agreement
and stressed that it would resume its involvement in
the European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue only
once Pristina revokes the import tax. Key international
partners, including the European Union, also urged
the Government of Kosovo to revoke the tax, while
in Pristina Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tanin issued a statement expressing concern
about the potential impact of the decision on the
population of Kosovo and on the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

Amid the tense atmosphere, the Assembly of
Kosovo adopted on 14 December three laws, namely,
the law on the Kosovo Security Force; the law on
service in the Kosovo Security Force; and the law
on the Ministry of Defence. The laws do not change
the name of the Kosovo Security Force, which would
require a constitutional amendment, yet they provide
for substantial changes to be implemented over a
period of time to the mandate, role and strength of the
Kosovo Security Force. The Kosovo Government, in
a statement issued following the adoption of the laws,
underscored the right of Kosovo to have "an army; a
multi-ethnic and professional force built under the
highest NATO standards". In Belgrade, the Serbian
authorities condemned the adoption of the laws as
an act of "political aggression" against Serbia and a
violation of resolution 1244 (1999). They also called on
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) not to allow the operation of
any Kosovo army on the territory of Kosovo.

Among international partners, the Secretary-
General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) declared that the transition of the Kosovo
Security Force is, in principle, a matter for Kosovo
to decide upon. He nevertheless expressed regret at
the decision of the Assembly of Kosovo, which he
characterized as ill-timed and in disregard of the
concerns previously raised by NATO. He also stressed
the continued commitment of NATO, through KFOR, to
a safe and secure environment in Kosovo. The European
External Action Service stated that the mandate of the
Kosovo Security Force should be changed only through
an inclusive and gradual process, in accordance with
Kosovo's Constitution, and expressed the expectation
of the European Union that Kosovo would continue
to uphold its obligations under the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
April 2013 and its security arrangements.

The Secretary-General has noted with concern
the adoption of the laws by the Assembly of Kosovo.
He underscored that resolution 1244 (1999) provides
the sole legal framework for the international security
presence, the Kosovo Force, which is entrusted with the
responsibility ofensuring a safe and secure environment
in Kosovo and that "any restriction to the discharge
by KFOR of its security responsibilities would be
inconsistent with that resolution." The Secretary-
General has called on all parties concerned to exercise
restraint and to refrain from actions that could raise
tensions and cause a further setback in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue for the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. Special
Representative Tanin issued a similar statement in
Pristina.

The recent developments in Kosovo have further
deteriorated relations between Belgrade and Pristina,
which have been strained for some time, with no progress
on the EU-facilitated dialogue. We are concerned by the
risk of tensions on the ground, particularly in northern
Kosovo. It is therefore crucial that Belgrade and Pristina
avoid any steps that could further worsen the situation,
but rather find ways to re-engage in the dialogue aimed
at the normalization of their mutual relations.

In adhering to its status neutral approach, UNMIK
is committed to working closely with KFOR, in line
with resolution 1244 (1999), as well as with other
international actors in Kosovo. Under the leadership of
Special Representative Zahir Tanin, the Mission will
continue to focus its activities, among other priorities,
on intercommunity trust-building, which is essential
to the long-term normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina.

