Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): As one of the more advanced nations from
the standpoint of developing nuclear energy
technologies, the Russian Federation attaches great
importance to ensuring the maintenance of a high level
of nuclear security, not only in our country but also
worldwide. We are fully implementing our
international obligations in the area of nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
security, and we reaffirm the political obligations in
that context set forth in the final documents of the
Nuclear Security Summits held in Washington, DC,
and Seoul.

In Russia, the physical protection of nuclear
material remains at the requisite level. All nuclear
material in our territory and corresponding installations
has been provided with reliable, physical protection.
On Russian territory, no nuclear material or installation
entails a level of physical protection that could cause
fear. Russia continues to enhance those protections
according to the norms governing physical and
technical nuclear security.

We are maintaining our consistent policy of
supporting international efforts aimed at strengthening
nuclear security across a broad spectrum on this topic,
including through the organization in Russia of
international training courses to train experts in that
area on various subjects.

We are pleased with our engagement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on those
issues. Our reaffirmed intention to support the Agency
in that area is represented by our decision to earmark,
beginning in 2010, annual voluntary contributions to
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund.

The recent Nuclear Security Summit held in
Seoul saw the President of the Russian Federation
announce Russia's plan to hold in Russia, in the third
quarter of 2012, exercises under the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism on the theme of curbing the
illicit movement of nuclear material and radioactive
sources. We anticipate that they will involve numerous
representatives from Member States participating in the
initiative from various regions worldwide. We also
hope that they will serve as a concrete contribution to
developing the unique and important area of ensuring
physical nuclear safety.

In the area of nuclear crime, we are currently
accelerating our work within the country as well as our
international cooperation. We are strengthening our
system for monitoring the movements of nuclear and
radioactive materials, including customs controls. In
the area of Murmansk, we are developing a pilot
programme for the prevention of illicit trafficking in
radioactive materials.

We have set forth in greater detail our
achievements in the area of physical nuclear safety in
our memorandum prepared for the Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit, which has been published on the
official website of the Russian Foreign Ministry. It is
unfortunate that, for various reasons, many countries
have still not given due attention to those important
issues.

The world continues to face the threat of nuclear
terrorism and the possibility of trafficking in nuclear
materials and radioactive substances. In that context,
export-control measures are not always sufficiently
effective. We are also concerned that States are not
hurrying to assume their specific legal obligations in
that area. In particular, the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the Amendment
thereto, as well as the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, have not yet
become fully universal legal instruments.

The Russian Federation intends to build on its
capacities in the area of nuclear energy, viewing it as
one of the strategic areas for our country's
development. We are certain that despite the gravity of
the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant, alternatives in the near future to nuclear energy
do not exist. Without that, it will not be possible to
meet the challenge of supplying humankind with
energy.

As of today, among the major sources of energy,
nuclear energy is not only environmentally friendly
and cost-effective, it is also a safe source of energy -
if one treats it responsibly, of course.

A mandatory condition for the use of nuclear
energy is ensuring and maintaining a high level of
physical and technical safety. The accident at
Fukushima demonstrated the need to strengthen the
international legal basis for ensuring the safety of
nuclear energy facilities, in terms of building and
operating such installations.

In that respect, in 2011 the Russian Federation
introduced amendments to the Convention on Nuclear
Safety and to the Convention on Early Notification of a
Nuclear Accident and also initiated the strengthening
of the IAEA nuclear safety standards. We are confident
that the early adoption of our proposals will help to
avoid or to minimize the negative consequences of
nuclear accidents in the future.

