Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Minister Davutoglu
and to thank the Turkish presidency for having
organized this important and substantive meeting, as
the United Nations has a central role to play in fighting
terrorism. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable briefing. We support the draft
presidential statement before the Council for adoption
at this meeting.

Lebanon strongly condemns all acts of terrorism
in all its forms and considers them to be a dangerous
threat to international peace and security and basic
human rights, especially the right to life. Modern
history has seen several forms of terrorism, to which
innocent people of different religions, nationalities and
cultures have fallen Victim. The attacks of
11 September 2001 in New York were among its worst
examples, as noted by the Lebanese President before
this Council last Thursday (see S/PV.6389).

Terrorism has afflicted many parts of the globe
quite indiscriminately 4 from Japan and Sri Lanka to
Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, and from India,
Pakistan, Uganda and Kenya to Britain, Russia, Spain
and other countries. While we have endeavoured for
years to define a unified concept of terrorism, innocent
people fall victim every day, many of them present by
coincidence at the moment terrorists strike.
Condemning terrorism, killing and destruction is no
longer sufficient, as it does not change the situation or
protect the innocent.

Lebanon strongly rejects conflating terrorism
with any religion, especially Islam. Islam is not a
religion of extremism. The Koran says "And thus We
have made you ajust nation" (The Holy Koran, II:143).
Islam is a religion of dialogue. The Koran also says
"and have disputations with them in the best manner"
(ibid., XVI:125).

Terrorism has not spared Muslims or Islam. Many
Muslims fell Victim to the horrific attacks of
11 September 2001. Today, many Muslims continue to
fall Victim to bombings in Iraq, Afghanistan, Yemen
and Somalia - some even in mosques. There are
consistent attempts to distort this divine religion, which
calls for tolerance and acceptance of others. A campaign
is afoot - a culture of intellectual terrorism - to spread
a horrifying image of Islam, which has led to
Islamophobia. We would like to sound a note of
caution that taking these provocative acts lightly - the
desecration of religious sites and ignoring the feelings
of believers - may be extremely dangerous. While we
completely respect the freedom of expression, such
acts do not fall within the purview of freedom; they are
nothing more than provocations that undoubtedly fan
the flames of terrorism.

Lebanon distinguishes between terrorism and the
legitimate right of people to resist foreign occupation,
which has been enshrined in all international
resolutions, instruments and norms. The best example
of this is that no one applied the label of "terrorism" to
the resistance mounted by the French against the Nazi
occupation during the Second World War. You,
Mr. President, are the best person to confirm that
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk became a symbol of Turkish
independence when he led the resistance to the foreign
presence in Turkey.

Lebanon appreciates the efforts of the United
Nations and all its organs and agencies to combat
terrorism. We reaffirm our resolve to cooperate with all
of them, including the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004).

We encourage assistance to States to strengthen
their institutions and legal capacities to combat
terrorism. In that context, we call for respect for human
rights and the rule of law in all measures to combat
terrorism. We have to pay attention to the relationship
between all the tools of terrorism, such as
transboundary organized crime, trafficking in persons,
weapons and drugs, and money-laundering.

Lebanon believes that terrorism cannot be
combated by military means, exchange of intelligence,
financing or borders alone. It should be done by
dealing with the root causes of terrorism and removing
the factors that feed it, through the elimination of
hotbeds of tension, renunciation of double standards in
the implementation of international resolutions,
accepting others and respecting rather than eliminating
the specificities of each country or distorting its image.
We should also end foreign occupation, injustice,
poverty and the trampling of human rights and dignity.

We must also stress the role of dialogue among
cultures and civilizations. Lebanon advocated that
theme during its presidency of the Council last May.
The initiative of an alliance among civilizations
launched by Turkey and Spain plays a desirable role.

As we emphasize the importance of dealing with
the root causes of terrorism, we do not have to recall
that Al-Qaida tries to exploit the suffering of the
Palestinian people as one of the means for recruiting
terrorists. That alone is a reminder that we should
affirm the need for the international community to
accelerate the achievement of a comprehensive, just
peace in the Middle East.

Lebanon - which has signed most of the
international conventions on combating terrorism -
has also suffered from terrorist bombings that have
claimed the lives of a number of politicians, foremost
among whom was President Rafik Hariri, plus many
journalists and many innocent people killed in the past
five years. Lebanese forces have fought terrorist
groups and still are fighting them. The army was able
to eliminate one of the most dangerous of them -
Fatah al-Islam, in Nahr al-Barid in northern Lebanon.
That movement had nothing to do with the national
Palestinian liberation movement Fatah or with Islam.

In addition, Lebanon has suffered from Israeli
State terrorism over the decades. I will recall that Israel
bombed civilian installations, including electrical,
water and oil installations, the airport, bridges,
commercial planes, even hospitals and Red Cross Red
Crescent ambulances, as well as the United Nations
headquarters in Qana - which was supposed to be a
refuge for the elderly, women and children, who
thought that the Blue Flag could protect them.

The General Assembly has reached by consensus
a unified counter-terrorism strategy. Lebanon hopes it
will be reflected in a comprehensive convention that
will deal with terrorism in a unified way. That is
possible if we decide to deal with this phenomenon
objectively and in a manner in consonance with the
rules and provisions of international law.

