The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to Mr. Stephen, Ambassador
Kumalo, Ambassador Grey-Johnson and the
representative of Guinea-Bissau for their participation
in this meeting and their contributions to the
discussion.

Like other Council members, we agree with the
major conclusions of the Secretary-General's report.
We note with concern the ongoing deterioration of the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, as has already been noted
in some detail, and agree that rectifying the situation
and a genuine resumption of democratic processes in
that country depend directly on the holding of free, fair
and credible parliamentary elections. We believe that
the Government of Guinea-Bissau is doing its utmost
to ensure a prompt and full conclusion of the necessary
pre-electoral work and the conduct of parliamentary
elections on a democratic basis.

Given the exacerbation of social tensions in
Guinea-Bissau, we also believe it important for the
donor community to respond favourably to appeals by
the country's Government for financial, logistical and
technical support. Like other Council members, of
course, we support and highly appreciate the efforts of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the Group of Friends of Guinea-
Bissau.

The work of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and Social Council has
created a new mechanism of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
with respect to countries engaged in post-conflict
peace-building. We consider the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group to be a useful instrument, allowing the
Economic and Social Council, within its mandate, to
become more actively involved in the practical issues
of prevention and peace-building. We have already
heard specific examples today of how useful it has
been in Guinea-Bissau. We recognize the importance of
this and similar groups in averting renewed conflict in
the country and in serving as a focal point of
international efforts to meet the critical challenges of a
return to normalcy, of fulfilling the attendant urgent
needs of the population, and of developing a long-term
programme to assist in the country's sustainable socio-
economic development.

We believe it would be useful to establish a
mechanism for two-way liaison between the Economic
and Social Council and the Security Council, whereby
political issues that arise in the course of peace-
building are brought to the Security Council's attention
in order to ensure subsequent political support for the
post-conflict restoration of Guinea-Bissau.

Today's discussion confirms the importance of
increasing interaction between the two Councils in the
area of post-conflict peace-building and recovery. This
is an area in which there is a pressing need for
mutually complementary efforts between these major
United Nations bodies.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous statements on Guinea-Bissau, including
the statement of its President of 29 November
2000 (S/PRST/2000/37), having considered the
report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
that country (S/2003/621), and anticipating the
Council mission to Guinea-Bissau, expresses its
concern with regard to the fragile political
situation in Guinea-Bissau, to the persistent
economic and social crisis and to continuing
disturbing information regarding the human rights
situation. It urges the country's leaders and the
international community to work more
purposefully together to ensure that the
development, humanitarian and peace-building
agendas are quickly put back on track.

"The Security Council appeals to the
President and Government of Guinea-Bissau to
timely and effectively organize the forthcoming
legislative elections and to ensure that these
elections are conducted in a transparent, fair and
credible manner, in accordance with the
Constitution and the electoral law. It is the
Council's expectation that candidates as well as

political parties will not be subjected to violence
and intimidation, and that the presence of
international observers at these elections will be
acceptable to all parties. The Council also
expresses the hope that, following the successful
conduct of the elections, the Government will
embark on additional concrete measures to show
further proof of its commitment to democracy and
the rule of law by promulgating the new
Constitution and by having the President and
Vice-President of the Supreme Court duly elected
without further delay.

"The Security Council calls on the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to take the
necessary steps to facilitate a constructive
dialogue with the international community and
the Bretton Woods institutions and to fully
endorse the partnership approach defined by the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the United Nations
Economic and Social Council on Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council appeals to the donor
community to contribute financially to the
implementation of the political and economic
process in Guinea-Bissau, including necessary
support for the legislative elections.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
with regard to the situation of human rights and
civil liberties and urges the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to take the necessary measures in
order to improve this situation. It stresses the
importance that freedom of speech and freedom
of the press be fully respected.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
importance of the regional dimension in the
solution of the problems faced by Guinea-Bissau
and, in that regard, calls on the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Organization of Portuguese-speaking
African Countries (PALOPS) to further
strengthen their involvement and expresses its
intention to intensify its cooperation with these
organizations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
willingness of President Kumba Yala to host
negotiations on the issue in Casamance and
appeals to him to continue to cooperate
constructively with the Government of Senegal in
order to contribute to a solution of this issue.

"The Security Council recognizes and
commends the important role played by the
Representative of the Secretary-General as well
as by the United Nations country team towards
helping consolidate peace, democracy and the
rule of law and expresses its appreciation for their
activities.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the forthcoming mission to Guinea-
Bissau, to be led by the Permanent Representative
of Mexico and which will be the first part of an
overall mission to West Africa, and looks forward
to its conclusions and recommendations.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau
under regular review."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/8.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.
