Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): My briefing to
the Council this morning will focus on the widespread
violence that racked Kosovo in March, the responses to
that violence and the implications of those events.
As the Council is aware, the violence appears to
have been directly sparked by a series of events in the
days preceding the clashes, which raised the level of
tension between the Kosovo Albanians and the Kosovo
Serbs. In particular, the shooting of a Kosovo Serb
youth on 15 March in the village of Caglavica, near
Pristina, and the death by drowning of two Albanian
children in the Ibar River on 16 March - the body of a
third Albanian child believed also to have drowned has
yet to be found and the circumstances of the drowning
have not been established - were a catalyst for the
violent acts that ensued. Inflammatory and often biased
media reporting on both incidents contributed to
raising tensions.

The demonstrations that followed the incidents
that I have just referred to, although apparently
spontaneous at the outset, were quickly taken over by
organized elements with an interest in driving the
Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo and threatening the
international presence in Kosovo. The results of these
two days of violence in Kosovo speak for themselves:
19 persons died; 954 civilians were injured in the
course of the clashes and rioting that occurred in
Kosovo; 65 police officers of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
58 Kosovo Police Service Officers and 61 KFOR
personnel were injured; approximately 730 houses,
nearly all of which belonged to Kosovo minorities -
basically Serbian - were burned or damaged; more
than 150 vehicles, including 100 UNMIK vehicles,
were destroyed or severely damaged; KFOR itself had
one armoured personnel carrier and three other vehicles
destroyed.

The situation throughout Kosovo is currently
quiet, though it remains tense. The potential for further
violence there continues and sporadic attacks continue
to occur, including attacks against international staff
and the Kosovo police presence. The worst of those
occurred on 23 March, when a Ghanaian UNMIK
police officer and an Albanian colleague of the Kosovo
Police Service were killed when a group of Kosovo
Albanian uniformed men fired on their police patrol
vehicle. Seven individuals have been subsequently
detained by UNMIK following that attack. In a
separate attack, in Mitrovica on 24 March, a Kosovo
Serb threw a grenade at a KFOR checkpoint and
slightly injured two KFOR soldiers. That individual
was subsequently arrested by other Kosovo Serbs and
handed over to UNMIK Police.

(spoke in English)
The onslaught led by Kosovo Albanian extremists
against Kosovo Serbs, Roma and Ashkali communities
was an organized, widespread and targeted campaign.
Attacks on Kosovo Serbs occurred throughout Kosovo,
in larger cities such as Pristina and anilane, as well as
in small villages such as Belo Polje in the Pec region,
where groups of Kosovo Serbs had recently returned
and had planned to rebuild their lives in Kosovo.
Properties were demolished, public facilities such as
schools and health clinics were destroyed, communities
were surrounded and threatened and residents were
forced to leave their homes. The inhabitants of entire
villages had to be evacuated and, following their
departure, their homes were burned to the ground. For
instance, in Vucitrn, in the southern Mitrovica region,
the Ashkali neighbourhood in which Kosovo's returns
process was officially launched, was entirely burned,
displacing some 300 individuals who had returned to
Kosovo over the past two years. Similarly, a Kosovo
Serb village Svinjare, also in the southern Mitrovica
region, was completely destroyed.

Perhaps most disturbing and reprehensible, mobs
looted, burned and damaged or destroyed 36 Serbian
Orthodox churches, monasteries and other religious
and cultural sites. Of these sites, 30 are Orthodox
churches, two are Orthodox monasteries, one is the
Episcopal residence of the Serbian Orthodox bishop,
one is an Orthodox theological school and one is an
Orthodox Serbian cemetery. The places of worship that
were attacked date as far back as the fourteenth
century. Two of these have been listed by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) as major sites of universal
significance and a third is listed as a site of regional
significance.

The attacks were therefore attacks not simply
against places of worship, but against Kosovo's
cultural heritage, Kosovo's common collective
memory, of which the Serb Orthodox church - as we
can see from the exhibition now at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art - is an important part. It was an attack
against our own collective heritage and many of these
sites had remained untouched for centuries through
various conflicts. UNMIK is working on establishing
assessment teams, led by international heritage experts
appointed by UNESCO and the Council of Europe and
comprising both Serb Orthodox experts and officials of
the Ministry of Culture of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government (PISG). Equally regrettable was
the retaliatory burning of mosques by Serb extremists
in Belgrade and in other parts of Serbia.
The violence has completely reversed the returns
process, which prior to the recent events had shown
signs of limited but encouraging progress. The total
number of persons displaced as a result of the wave of
violence is 4,100 people, which is more than the total
number of returns for 2003. UNMIK has responded to
the crisis and, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, has moved
to ensure the urgent distribution of humanitarian
assistance and to gradually stabilize the conditions of
the displaced. The United Nations country team
assumed the lead in managing and coordinating the
humanitarian response to the current crisis. The priority
now is to assist those of them who are prepared to
return.

The initial response by the leadership of
Kosovo's Provisional Institutions was ambivalent.
While Prime Minister Rexhepi should be commended
personally for his public pronouncements and actions
and his calls for an end to the violence, the Kosovo
Government issued a statement which focused on the
drowning of the Kosovo Albanian children and
assumed it was caused by Serbs and was a result of
inter-ethnic hatred. As mentioned earlier, this claim
was unsubstantiated at that time and still is. Others
within the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
including Government ministers and municipal
assembly presidents, initially condoned or justified the
violence. A statement issued by the Assembly focused
on parallel structures rather than on the evolving
violence. With regard to non-governmental actors,
Kosovo Albanian civil society generally failed to take a
responsible stand against the ethnic violence.
Moreover, there were reports of cases in which
members of veteran groups of the Kosovo Liberation
Army participated in the violence.

Only following the strong reaction and pressure
by the international community did the leadership of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government come
to realize that attempting to justify the violence was
unacceptable. While representatives of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government did move to condemn
the violence, their statements largely failed to
expressly condemn the attacks on the Kosovo Serb
community. Subsequently, representatives of the three
main Kosovo Albanian parties, along with
representatives of the Turkish, Bosniac, Egyptian and
Ashkali communities, signed an open letter to the
people of Kosovo condemning the violence and calling
for mutual respect among all of Kosovo's communities.
The PISG have also committed funds and logistic
support for the reconstruction effort, including for the
rebuilding of destroyed or damaged religious buildings
or monuments.

It should be noted that, during and immediately
after the violence, the authorities in Belgrade played a
constructive role in collective efforts to stem the
violence and stamp out any extremist reaction. We
welcome in particular the fact that Belgrade has
regretted the burning of the mosques and has pledged
to rebuild them.

The steps taken by the leaders of Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions are commendable and
necessary and should be supported, although they came
late and only under outside pressure, but they are not
enough. What is clearly needed is for Kosovo's leaders
to identify those officials - at both the local and the
central levels - who may have provided active
backing or passive support to the extremists and who
may have used these events to further promote
intolerance in Kosovo. Kosovo's leaders must leave no
doubt of their wholehearted commitment to tackling
and confronting extremism and extremist positions,
including within their own ranks, and to holding those
politicians responsible and to disciplining those civil
servants who may have played an instrumental role in
fomenting or participating in the violence.

As the events were unfolding, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
immediately moved on a number of fronts in an effort
to stem the spread of violence. On the political front, in
close coordination with the Commander of KFOR, he
convened Kosovo's leaders and asked that, as a first
step, they call for an immediate cessation of the
violence. To reinforce this message publicly,
Mr. Holkeri made a number of statements in the
Kosovo and international media calling for calm.
Consultations with UNMIK's partners and with
Member States' liaison offices on the ground were held
throughout the crisis. On the operational front, UNMIK
and KFOR established a senior crisis team to
coordinate policy and security actions in response to
the crisis, which focused on re-establishing a safe and
secure environment, immediately launching efforts to
apprehend and investigate those involved in the violent
actions and to ensure a rapid return to stability and
normalcy.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) for the speed and
determination with which it responded to the crisis and
for the additional troops that were provided on short
notice as part of the collective effort to re-establish
safe and secure conditions for Kosovo's population and
the international presence there. I also welcome
NATO's intention to retain the additional troops in
Kosovo.

UNMIK has launched an investigation as well as
an assessment of the violence and the extent to which it
was organized. A task force and incident room
coordinates the investigative efforts and works in close
coordination with the criminal division of UNMIK's
Department of Justice. So far, investigations have
resulted in 183 arrests in connection with the violence.
International prosecutors are currently working on 42
cases and an additional 90 are being handled by the
local judiciary. However, given the scale of the
violence, it is clear that additional investigative
capacity will be needed in order for law enforcement
authorities to be able to fully, vigorously and
effectively pursue these investigations. To this end,
UNMIK has asked for 100 additional police
investigators and I would take this opportunity to urge
those Member States which have been contacted with
this request for a speedy and positive reply and to
thank those that have done so already.

Although it is early to make a comprehensive
assessment of the role of the Kosovo Police Service, it
should be noted that many officers performed
courageously and professionally in extremely difficult
conditions. While the performance of those officers
should therefore be commended, there are also reports
that some may have taken no action to prevent the
violence or, worse still, may have participated in it. All
these reports will be thoroughly investigated and
necessary measures taken against any officers who did
not behave according to professional standards.

The brutality and breadth of these events have
indicated to all of us that Kosovo still has a long way
to go on the path to multi-ethnicity. The violence
represents a huge setback for the stabilization and
normalization of Kosovo's security and political
environment and for the efforts by UNMIK and the
international community in Kosovo to continue to
promote reconciliation. The events have also
demonstrated the need for a genuine commitment of
the leadership and of the people of Kosovo not only in
words, but also in deeds, to the standards of a truly
democratic and tolerant society.

What is now required is that the standards
implementation process be put back on track.
Mr. Holkeri, together with Prime Minister Rexhepi, has
gone ahead with the launch of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan in order to move the process
forward and not to lose momentum. The Plan contains
key priority actions in the areas of returns and freedom
of movement in response to the violent events in
March. Further review and revision of the Plan, with
additional emphasis on security and the rule of law,
minority rights and protection and returns, and on
decentralization, may be necessary in the wake of the
violence.

Those who seek to undermine Kosovo's progress
through violence must know that violence will not be
rewarded and that the international community remains
determined and committed to move Kosovo forward. In
this regard, it is important that the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, which is currently on hold,
resume as soon as possible.

Steps are under way within UNMIK to learn from
what has occurred and to take necessary corrective
measures. A crisis management review body to
evaluate and assess UNMIK's response has been set
up. UNMIK is also engaged in efforts at all levels to
establish a basis of confidence for Kosovo Serbs and to
foster reconciliation among Kosovo's communities.
This is clearly an extremely difficult challenge, and it
cannot be accomplished without the full commitment
of Kosovo's leaders and institutions.

The events have shown us that the international
community's determination to ensure that Kosovo
progresses on the path of coexistence and then
reconciliation among communities is, on its own, not
sufficient. What is required now is concrete action by
Kosovo's leaders and its people to address the root
causes of the ethnically motivated violence that
continues to plague Kosovo and to implement measures
that ensure that that violence will not be repeated.
Indeed, beyond the immediate measures that are being
taken to address the consequences of the violent events
and take necessary corrective measures, there needs to
be a collective effort to address their causes.

Kosovo's leaders bear a responsibility in this
regard, and they will be judged on how they do so.
They are therefore called upon once again to exercise
true leadership and responsible government and to
marginalize and hold politically accountable those
among them who may have condoned or supported the
violence. The message they are called on to convey to
Kosovo's representatives and its population is simple
and clear: there can be no peaceful and prosperous
future for Kosovo without respect for the diversity of
its people - violence will not be rewarded.
