Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Allow me, at the
outset, to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council, for having convened
this meeting to discuss the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to West Africa
(S/2003/1147). That is a further indication of the
Council's concern for West Africa.

Speaking on behalf of the chairmanship of the 15-
member Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and with due deference to the Council, I
must, however, add that the rather short notice given
for our participation in this meeting does not give a
good indication of the improvements advocated by the
wider United Nations membership in the working
methods of this organ with a view to ensuring more
effective participation in its deliberations. The paucity
of speakers from West Africa and, indeed, from Africa
as a whole, in this debate, should therefore not be
misconstrued as a lack of interest by African countries
in matters affecting their own region.

We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report under discussion. As a general assessment, we
concur the report's observation that although, overall,
appreciable progress has been chalked up in some areas
in the affected countries in West Africa, much more
remains to be done in pursuit of peace, security and
development in the region.

It is gratifying to note the considerable progress
that has been achieved in Guinea-Bissau under the able
leadership of the transitional President, Mr. Henrique
Pereira Rosa - especially the transitional Government's
declared commitment to restore legality and hold
legislative elections by the deadline of the end of
March 2004.

It is evident that Guinea-Bissau needs adequate
resources to get back on its feet and back on track. As
stated in the report, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the
Economic and Social Council, in its report on a joint
mission with the Security Council to Guinea-Bissau,
stressed that holding legislative elections in Guinea-
Bissau was a high priority and that international
assistance was urgently needed in that regard.
ECOWAS appreciates all the collaborative efforts that
are being made by the international community to
provide assistance to Guinea-Bissau to get it over the
hump. The twenty-seventh ECOWAS Summit, held in
Accra on 19 December 2003, took note of the positive
engagement of the Bretton Woods institutions and the
United Nations Development Programme in assisting
the transitional Government to draw up a short-term
economic plan. The heads of State or Government called
on the European Union and all partners to help mobilize
international donor assistance for Guinea-Bissau.

We further welcome the determined response
with regard to the implementation of the Liberian
peace process. ECOWAS is particularly encouraged by
the timely transformation of its intervention force into a
blue-helmeted peacekeeping force and by the recent
moves to further extend the reach of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) into the troubled hinterland.

In that connection, we wish to endorse the
recommendation contained in the Secretary-General's
progress report, as we re-echo the call made by the
twenty-seventh ECOWAS Summit for the accelerated
deployment of the full authorized complement of
UNMIL throughout the country so as to promote
security and facilitate the successful implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration (DDRR) process.

On the particular issue of DDRR, I wish to evoke
the image of young people who have known nothing
but the trade of war. Without the concerted effort
needed to redeem them, could the global community be
unwittingly breeding tomorrow's international
mercenaries and, I daresay, terrorists?

Evidently, Liberia - like the rest of the conflict-
afflicted regions in West Africa - is not yet out of the
woods and will continue to need international
assistance and support for some time. I would therefore
like to use this opportunity to further urge the
international community to generously support the
peace process in Liberia by ensuring a successful

outcome of the donor conference for Liberia, scheduled
to be held on 5 and 6 February 2004 at United Nations
Headquarters.

With regard to Sierra Leone, while we share the
optimism generated by the progress being made in
consolidating peace, we recognize the need for great
discretion to ensure that the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) from the
country continues to take into account the
Government's ability to assume its primary
responsibility for the nation's overall security, to
enhance control over natural resources and to
consolidate civil administration throughout the country.
In that regard, ECOWAS commends the Secretary-
General for his decision to dispatch an assessment
mission to Sierra Leone to evaluate the progress made
in implementing the benchmarks identified to inform
the Mission's drawdown.

Sierra Leone will particularly need the assistance
of the international community in providing additional
resources to enable the country to address the twin
problems of education and unemployment. As stated in
the communique of the ECOWAS Summit, such
assistance should focus on resuscitating the economy in
order to create more jobs and business opportunities for
adolescents and ex-combatants. As a noted figure once
remarked, "Youth is the first victim of war and the first
fruit of peace. It takes 20 years of peace to make a
man; it takes only 20 seconds to destroy him". We must
not shirk our duty to the leaders of tomorrow.

In our sister republic of Cote d'Ivoire, the major
current preoccupation of ECOWAS is to ensure the
restoration of peace and security. It is our conviction
that that can be best and most expeditiously achieved if
the Council heeds the calls by ECOWAS leaders and
others for an increase in the troop strength of the
United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (MINUCI)
and for its early transformation into a full-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping mission that will include
troops already serving with the ECOWAS Mission in
Cote d'Ivoire (ECOMICI).

I wish to recall that, when a ministerial delegation
of the African Union's Peace and Security Council met
with the Security Council last fall, the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire was so precarious that there were some
concerns about sending a United Nations force into that

environment. Since then, intensified efforts have been
made and continue to be made to implement the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and the Accra Agreement, and
the situation has improved considerably. We are happy
to inform the Council that, subsequent to the issuance
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2003/1147) now
under discussion, the standoff between the Government
and the Forces nouvelles has given way to a new,
healthy engagement between the parties with the return
of the Forces nouvelles to the Government of National
Reconciliation. It would be most regrettable if the
Security Council, with its rich experience and varied
knowledge in conflict prevention, management and
resolution, were to allow itself to be lulled into a false
sense of security and fail to take advantage of the
momentum generated by recent positive developments
in Cote d'Ivoire.

I wish to emphasize that, while some appreciable
progress has been made in a number of significant
areas, the situation is far from satisfactory. As the
Secretary-General notes in his progress report, the
territory of Cote d'Ivoire is effectively partitioned,
with about 60 per cent of the national territory under
the control of the Forces nouvelles. What is required at
this stage is a strong presence of assurance to seize this
moment of respite and constructive dialogue between
the belligerents. Not to do so could lead to a relapse
into conflict. The United Nations should provide
credible security guarantees to all major actors and
should interpose between the potential combatants.

Indeed, it is time for the Security Council to live
up fully to its obligations by authorizing a full-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping mission for Cote d'Ivoire
when MINUCI's mandate expires on 4 February 2004.
The Government of cote d'Ivoire has agreed to host
such a mission. The rebel group Forces nouvelles
eagerly anticipates a strong United Nations presence in
Cote d'Ivoire. ECOWAS - which, together with France,
is currently shouldering the burden of maintaining
peace in Cote d'lvoire - has advocated a full-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping mission in that country.
The Secretary-General has identified the need for a
strong United Nations peacekeeping presence in Cote
d'Ivoire and has made specific proposals in that regard
for the Council's consideration.

As regards the recommended size of 6,240
personnel, we trust that, as always, the Secretariat has
arrived at that figure in a professional manner.
Moreover, the mandate of the proposed force will be
completely different from that of MINUCI, which was
more of a holding operation covering only a small part
of the country. Comparisons are not always appropriate,
but the Council may wish to note that Liberia - where
the United Nations has approved a mission of 15,000 -
is a country with a population of 3 million, while cote
d'lvoire is far larger and has a population of about 16
million. Therefore, it is our considered view that there
are cogent reasons underlying the figure proposed by
the Secretariat with a view to ensuring that the United
Nations mission is able to successfully implement a
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation (DDRR) and to ensure peace and
stability as the country moves towards elections.

We share the view - stated clearly in the report -
that, although encouraging steps have also been taken
to address cross-cutting regional issues, several
obstacles still stand in the way of efforts to stabilize the
West African subregion and to promote good
governance and development. We therefore welcome
the continued efforts being made to implement the
recommendations made by the Security Council
mission, including exploring ways to increase
cooperation between the international community and
ECOWAS, helping to strengthen the United Nations
Office for West Africa, mobilizing support for the
reactivation of the Mano River Union, providing donor
support for security sector reform, combating the use
of mercenaries and child soldiers and protecting
children and women from sexual violence and
exploitation.

In that regard, I wish to emphasize that attention
should be focused particularly on the problems related
to the prevalence of the armed groups that move from
one country to another in West Africa, the existence of
a huge number of small arms and light weapons, the
use of mercenaries and child soldiers, and youth
unemployment. It may be pertinent to emphasize the
reality of the linkage between the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflicts, on the one hand, and the
proliferation of and trafficking in light weapons in West
Africa, on the other. ECOWAS, through its moratorium
on small arms and light weapons, has demonstrated its
commitment to curbing that phenomenon. However,
that will require the cooperation of its global partners
in ways such as those I outlined earlier on the issue of
comprehensive DDRR and action by the arms-
exporting countries to exercise the highest degree of
responsibility on transactions related to small arms and
light weapons. ECOWAS fully subscribes to the
Security Council's encouragement of international and
regional cooperation in tracing the origin and transfer
of such weapons in the fight to effectively curtail such
arms trafficking. Given the regional dimensions of
conflicts in West Africa and the related problem of
youth unemployment, we are eagerly awaiting the
submission by the United Nations Office for West
Africa of the report expressly requested by the Council
on the question of youth unemployment.

Finally, I wish to place on record the deep
appreciation of ECOWAS to the United Nations, and to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
personal commitment to seeing the West African
subregion emerge from the sad spectacle of civil strife
that has plagued some of its countries for more than a
decade. Our appreciation, of course, also goes to the
Security Council for giving high priority to meeting its
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in West Africa. As ECOWAS ministerial
delegations have often stated in this forum, the region
is always ready to cooperate and engage with the
Council to promote peace, security and development in
our region.

I apologize, Mr. President, ifI have exceeded my
time limit, but I was speaking on behalf of 15 countries.

