Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I will begin by stating frankly that we
were surprised by the inclusion of the issue of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) in the context of country-specific topics.
There are other, more inclusive, formats for that. In
our View, the most appropriate format for Security
Council meetings on non-proliferation is one involving
a discussion of general principles for solving the
problem rather than picking fights with States that have
had the misfortune to be designated so-called rogue
countries by individual members of the Council. That
is the approach in the concept note from the United
States delegation, which artificially links three country
situations that have nothing in common. To understand
the essence of what is happening, a brief history lesson
is in order.

Russia and the United States were at the forefront
of developing the concept of international cooperation
aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the hands of non-State actors, as embodied
in resolution 1540 (2004). Our countries affirmed the
importance of setting up a judicial and law-enforcement
bulwark designed to prevent such evils through
intergovernmental cooperation. Thereafter, however,
the landscape began to change significantly, and the
concept was sacrificed to the geopolitical manoeuvres
of some of our partners, leading to acute destabilization
in a number of regions around the world. We are all well
aware of what the result of exploiting non-proliferation
mechanisms to put pressure unpopular regimes was.
The fate of Saddam Hussein, who, as we know, had
no weapons of mass destruction but was accused of
possessing them, and of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, who
voluntarily gave up his own programme, became a
pretext for certain States to accelerate their programmes
for developing weapons of mass destruction. While that
in no way justifies the nuclear-missile programme of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, it is short-

sighted to ignore or fail to understand the reasons
behind it.

Taking advantage of the externally generated
chaos - and sometimes military interventions, such
as in Syria, Iraq and Libya - extremists of all stripes
have been granted a broad range of opportunities
for acquiring and making use of weapons of mass
destruction. What is that if not a gross violation of
resolution 1540 (2004)?
An unprecedented new challenge has emerged.
Attempts to get the Security Council to at least pay
attention to various glaring facts, let alone take action,
continue to be deliberately blocked without any serious
justification. Consider, for example, that resolution 2118
(2013) includes a provision obliging Governments that
are neighbours of Syria to inform the Security Council
immediately of any attempts by non-State actors to
acquire weapons of mass destruction or their means
of delivery. Judging from the lack of any such reports
to the Council, one might suppose that the problem
simply does not exist. However, our attempts to raise
that issue in the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) were firmly suppressed by our
Western partners. We have repeatedly heard about
the use of poisonous substances by combatants of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
groups. There are reports of their access to both the
technologies and infrastructure needed to manufacture
such weapons. Such problems should be thoroughly
investigated by the Security Council, but thanks to
the efforts of some of our partners, they continue to be
passed over in silence.

Let us speak frankly. Syria no longer has any

Government chemical-weapon programmes, and the
task of ensuring the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in Syria is now limited to preventing
them from falling into the hands of non-State actors.
As far as we know, no one has presented convincing
evidence to the contrary to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Moreover,
the Russian-Syrian proposals for conducting a
comprehensive investigation of the United States version
of the tragic events of April in Khan Shaykhun were
met with active opposition. The result is that so-called
reliable reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons
at Syria's Al-Shayrat airbase, which was used to justify
an act of aggression against a State Member of the
United Nations, has still not been confirmed by OPCW
inspectors or experts from the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, despite the fact that the
facility has been open to them since April. We firmly
believe that it is the efforts by a number of our partners
to force the facts of these matters to fit the Procrustean
bed of their political purposes that constitute the main
reasons for the appearance in the Middle East and North
Africa of the chimera of chemical terrorism, which has
begun to abate only since the Syrian people have made
a major breakthrough in the fight against terrorism.

We believe that the key to an effective WMD
non-proliferation regime lies in renouncing interference
in the internal affairs of States and the policy of
overthrowing unpopular regimes, as well as in
establishing aunified and indivisible security system for
all countries, without exception. If the those issues are
not dealt with, the Security Council's non-proliferation
sanctions will merely freeze the current issues without
helping to resolve them for good, especially at a time
when the Council's primary role in the maintenance of
international peace and security is being undermined
by the introduction of illegitimate, unilateral measures.

We have seen the effectiveness of respect for
those principles in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which has
becomeasymbolofthetriumphofmultilateraldiplomacy
and an affirmation of our ability to settle highly
complex problems through negotiation as long as the
requisite political will exists. The information-sharing,
verification and control mechanisms developed within
the framework of the JCPOA are enabling us to make
progress on a path to a broader conclusion by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as to the
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. Based
on regular inspections, the Agency has confirmed
that Iran is fully complying with its obligations. We
were surprised today to learn from the United States
Secretary of State that Russia is apparently undermining
the IAEA. That is, of course, news to us. Unfortunately,
we have recently seen irresponsible, unilateral attempts
to torpedo that breakthrough collective agreement. We
hope that common sense will prevail in the end, and that
the Plan will be allowed to become fully operational,
thereby allowing it to reach its full potential. In that
regard, implementation of their voluntary commitments
in good faith by all States Parties to the JCPOA is key.

At the beginning of my statement, I said that
these country situations are not linked to one
another, but I would like to correct myself. Iran and
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea became
linked today, because a withdrawal from the JCPOA
by the United States would be the worst possible
signal we could send to North Korea. Similar and
even more intensive diplomatic efforts are now needed
on the Korean peninsula. We need to start now so
as not to waste any more time or wait for the logic
of confrontation to prevail. We are convinced that
the reasons for the tensions on the peninsula are not
just Pyongyang's nuclear-missile programme and the
pretext it creates for heightened military activity in the
region but are also the result of the lack of mechanisms
providing a single and indivisible security system
for every country in North-East Asia. It is clear that
without such mechanisms, a political and diplomatic
settlement of the problems on the Korean peninsula is
impossible. We do see a solution in the implementation
of the Russian-Chinese initiative, which at present is
the only plan of action on the table. It would be a step
in the right direction if the Security Council endorsed
the well-known "four nos" concept, spelled out by
Secretary of State Tillerson, who is present here today.

In conclusion, I would once again like to stress
that the future prospects for non-proliferation cannot
be considered in isolation from the overall strategic
context. Realpolitik presupposes that all factors with a
bearing on strategic stability and international security
must be considered. Among others, they include the
continuing establishment by the United States of global
missile defence systems and NATO's joint nuclear
missions, which it carries out in violation of articles
I and II of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

Strengthening the WMD non-proliferation regime
is important to Russia, and we will do our utmost in
support of that goal, with a focus on active cooperation
with our regional and international partners.

