Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking Togo, on Morocco's
behalf, for having taken the initiative to convene this
debate, thus completing the general overview of the
situation in West Africa with today's focus on the Gulf
of Guinea. Your presence, Mr. Minister, and that of the
Minister of Defence of Benin clearly demonstrate the
importance that the two brother nations represented
attach to this debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his clear and concise briefing on the important
assessment work undertaken by the United Nations in
the countries affected by piracy in that maritime
region. The light shed by the representatives of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission is very useful to our
discussions.

In solidarity with the threatened countries, in
recent years my country has continued to alert the
international community to the developments and
threats posed by the phenomenon of piracy in that
region. It is quite logical that Morocco should welcome
with satisfaction the work undertaken by the United
Nations assessment mission that visited Benin, Nigeria,
Gabon and Angola in December 2011 to evaluate the
scope of the challenges posed by that scourge in the
region. We are extremely interested in the follow-up to
the report drawn up by that mission (see S/2012/45).

The impact of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is no
longer just a security matter, but also a trade and
economic issue. International shipping, international
maritime trade and energy security, as well as the
economies of the coastal and landlocked countries of
the region, are significantly and worryingly affected by
that alarming phenomenon. The first observation of the
assessment mission's report is that many States of the
region have difficulties in terms of their capacities to
effectively combat the phenomenon. The second
observation is that, to date, the various subregional
cooperation mechanisms have been unable to bring
tangible, satisfactory and lasting responses to that
scourge. We therefore support the assessment mission's
recommendations concerning national and regional
responses to the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

In terms of the capacities of States of the region,
we believe that the United Nations system is in a
position to play a key role in helping States, in
particular with the assistance of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to develop their capacities
and their national strategy to combat piracy and
transnational organized crime, including the drawing
up of a national legal framework that makes it possible
to charge and try alleged perpetrators of acts of piracy
and to promote cross-border judicial and security
cooperation.

The material, technical or financial contribution
of several bilateral partners seeking to support the
countries of the region, from whom we have received
very clear and precise information this morning, must
be commended. We support its continuation and
strengthening, as well as the exchange of good
practices among countries of the region.

With regard to regional cooperation, my country
has invested a great deal in establishing and
strengthening cross-regional cooperation among the
African Atlantic coastal States in order to meet the
challenges posed by that ocean. My country welcomes
the political decision taken by the countries of the
region to convene a regional summit among the
presidencies of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
That meeting will provide the opportunity to develop
an in-depth dialogue and cooperation mechanism at the
interregional level between the two subregional
organizations and with the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the Maritime Organization of West and Central
Africa. More precisely, it will enable the countries of
the region to establish a comprehensive cross-regional
cooperation mechanism, facilitating exchanges and the
pooling of efforts to make that region more secure.

We agree with the report's recommendation on
the need to strengthen the regional security architecture
and to ensure a greater balance between the
mechanisms of Central Africa and West Africa.

Any measure seeking to combat piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea will be sustainable only if the
underlying causes allowing the spread of that scourge
are also addressed. In that regard, it is crucial to
include in any anti-piracy strategy elements linked to
strengthening institutions responsible for implementing
the rule of law and the fight against transnational
organized crime, as well as development issues in
particular.

All challenges posed not only by piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, but also by transnational organized
crime and terrorism in West and Central Africa, must
also be addressed and considered in the context of a
comprehensive strategy. The international community
must focus on the connection and ties among the
various criminal and terrorist networks that are
increasingly destabilizing the African continent. As
Council members know, the awareness of that
connection has led the ministers responsible for
shipping and port activities of the Ministerial
Conference of Atlantic Coastal States to hold talks in
Libreville since May 2011 on cooperation to secure
their infrastructure and to protect merchant shipping
from such threats.

The adoption of resolution 2018 (2011) is an
important landmark in the debate on piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. It is essential that the international
community continue to pay particular attention to that
matter and support the States of the region in
combating the scourge. For its part, Morocco will
continue, together with you, Mr. President, and our
friends of South Africa, to keep this challenge at the
heart of the Security Council's interest. Finally, my
delegation would like to indicate its full support for the
draft resolution on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
submitted by your country.

