Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs for, their valuable briefings. I would also
like to welcome the new Representative of Yemen,
His Excellency Mr. Abdullah Al-Saadi, whom I wish
every success.

In my statement I will focus on two main topics:
first, the consultations in Sweden between the Yemeni
parties; and secondly, developments in the humanitarian
and economic situation in Yemen.

On the first topic, we listened with great interest
to the briefing of Mr. Griffiths, which delivers a
message of hope with a view to mitigating the scale of
the crisis that has beset Yemen since 2014. The round
of consultations between the Yemeni parties - hosted
by the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden, which
we thank for providing all the necessary elements
for its success - is a reflection of the international
community's commitment and concern to address that
crisis, which has reached regrettable proportions and
threatens regional peace and security. It also resulted in
negative consequences for the humanitarian, economic,
and political situations in brotherly Yemen.

The relative and noticeable progress achieved
in that round of consultations should be considered
a great success in the light of the Yemeni crisis and
its circumstances. That progress would not have been
achieved without such key factors as the unity of the
Security Council vis-a-vis the Yemeni issue, as well as
the great role played by the coalition countries through
their legitimate support for efforts to overcome all
obstacles to the convening of those consultations, not to
mention the serious commitment of Yemeni stakeholders
to actively engaging in them and cooperating with the
Special Envoy.

The State of Kuwait has been supporting efforts
to resolve conflicts through peaceful means and
mediation, all the more so given that the United Nations
role as mediator. We believe in the utmost importance
of the United Nations and the resolutions taken by its
various organs, especially the Security Council as the
responsible organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In the light of all this, and given that the solution
to the crisis in Yemen must be a political one, the State
of Kuwait provided a private plane to transport most
of the Yemeni delegation from the Yemeni capital,
Sana'a, to Sweden in order to participate in the recent
consultations. We hope that all Yemeni parties will
invest in the outcome of those consultations and
complete the steps specified hereto in order to achieve
a comprehensive agreement that will eventually end
the disastrous repercussions of the crisis faced by
brotherly Yemen.

On the second topic, developments in the
humanitarian and economic situation in Yemen, the
consultations in Sweden did not lead to a compromise
regarding all issues that were discussed there. However,
there has been agreement on the port and city of
Al-Hudaydah, as well as a declaration of understanding
on Taiz. Moreover, an agreement was reached on
an implementation mechanism for the exchange of
prisoners, which will help to address the adverse
humanitarian impact on the brotherly Yemeni people.

The port and the city of Al-Hudaydah exemplify
the aggravated difficult humanitarian situation. We
believe that the staged agreement reached would,
if implemented, lead to a ceasefire and the mutual
redeployment of forces to areas outside the ports and
cities, allowing the United Nations greater freedom of
movement to ensure the safe arrival of humanitarian
aid without being impeded or looted as before.
Undoubtedly, the agreement would also facilitate the
arrival of commodities and commercial goods. The
United Nations would scale up its Verification and
Inspection Mechanism in that regard.

It is important that revenues from the three ports
be channelled to the Central Bank in Al-Hudaydah in
order to pay the salaries of civil servants throughout
Yemen. That would have a positive impact and alleviate
the difficult economic repercussions of the crisis while
improving the exchange rate of the national currency,
which has recently risen to and stabilized at 450 rials
to the dollar.

The Yemeni city of Taiz has endured a painful siege
for the past three years. Its inhabitants have suffered
deplorable circumstances. We hope that the declaration
of understanding reached by the Yemeni parties will
end the negative impacts of the siege and spare its
inhabitants the risks of the humanitarian crisis. We also
hope that Yemeni parties will be seriously committed to
implementing the outcomes of the consultations held in
Sweden, insofar as that will be a key factor in alleviating
the humanitarian suffering and crystallize the efforts of
the international community and the important donors
towards supporting the humanitarian situation.
Brotherly Yemen looks to the international
community and the Security Council to support the
positive tangible results of the consultations reached
in Sweden. Those results have specific features and
will constitute the bedrock of future consultations, to
be held early next year. The Council must maintain its
consensus-based spirit concerning Yemen, reflecting
its unity and ensuring that no messages may be
misinterpreted by any Yemeni party.

To conclude, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths. We underline the importance of
his efforts to end the crisis in Yemen being based on
the three political terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue
and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2216 (2015). That would ensure
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Yemen, as well as non-interference in Yemen's
domestic affairs.

