Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I wish to thank you for having convened this
important meeting on the issue of South Sudan. I should
also like to thank in particular Special Representative
of the Secretary-General David Shearer for his briefing
and for his leadership of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) since taking up his functions
in January. I also welcome the briefing by the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, and
I congratulate Senegal for its resolute action at the helm
of the Committee.

One month ago, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4) listing the actions expected
ofthe South Sudanese parties by the end oprril in order
to stabilize the situation. However, as the briefers have
underscored, it is clear that these demands have not been
complied with. Hostilities have not ceased, far from it;
the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic; there
has been weak implementation of the peace agreement;
the inclusiveness of the national dialogue has not been
ensured; and UNMISS and humanitarian actors remain
subject to intolerable restrictions and attacks.

Given this situation, the international community,
and in particular the Council, must take action along
two main, complementary lines.

The first priority is to protect civilians. Once
again, civilians are the victims of the worst atrocities
perpetrated in South Sudan. The situation has
deteriorated even further in the country in recent weeks
and months. The relative calm that prevails in Juba
should not distract us from the violence of the fighting
in many parts of the country, including the Upper Nile
area, Bahr el-Ghazal and the Equatorias. As a result,
human rights violations have multiplied, in particular
against women and children, who are subject to the
worst atrocities. Those civilians who are able to escape
the Violence are forced to leave their homes and swell
the ranks ofthe already more than 1.6 million displaced
persons in the country.

The protection ofcivilians requires the mobilization
of the international community, guided by several
concerns. The first priority is the implementation
of the cessation of hostilities. This will require all
international actors to bring pressure to bear on the
South Sudanese parties to impress upon them the fact
that their weapons must fall silent.

Regional organizations, including the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU), naturally have a leading
role to play.

We must also ensure humanitarian access to the
civilian population. The resurgence of attacks against
humanitarian actors is intolerable. We were particularly
shocked by the recent killings of three humanitarian
workers in Wau and six others in March, near Pibor.
Those responsible for these crimes, as with any attack
of this kind, must be identified and brought to justice.

Full support also must be provided to UNMISS in
its efforts to protect civilians. We welcome the more
robust stance that it has adopted in recent months. Yet
we cannot stand by as the Mission, which received its
mandate from the Council, continues to be subject to
restrictions on its movement as well as to bureaucratic
impediments that prevent it from fulfilling its mandate,
which is today more necessary than ever. The Council,
like other regional actors and all partners in South
Sudan, must unequivocally condemn such practices.

Finally, an arms embargo must be imposed, as the
Panel of Experts has recommended once again. France
has long been in favour of such an embargo. This is a
sine qua non both for the protection of civilians and for
the establishment of conditions conducive to a genuine
political dialogue.

The second area of action is to achieve progress
with respect to a political solution to the conflict. To
reach this goal, we must first of all be realistic about
the current situation. The recent spike in clashes
between Government troops, the opposition and the
various armed groups makes clear that these actors
continue to seek above all to consolidate their military
positions as the rainy season approaches. This type of
behaviour unfortunately makes it abundantly clear that
South Sudanese stakeholders are continuing to choose
a military approach over a political one.

Indeed, while the fighting is intensifying, the
political process remains at an impasse. The peace
agreement of 2015, the result of IGAD's efforts, must
remain the cornerstone of the solution to the conflict in
South Sudan. It is the responsibility of the Transitional
Government of National Unity, which itself came out of
the agreement, to ensure this. The responsibility also
falls to all South Sudanese stakeholders concerned to
ensure that the agreement is effectively implemented.

This applies also to the national dialogue, which
can have value only if it includes the full political
spectrum of the South Sudanese population and civil
society, and ifit is conducted in a transparent, impartial
and independent manner, one that will make it possible
to identify lasting solutions to the country's problems.

In this context, we welcome the efforts of the
Chairman of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Mr. Festus Mogae, as well as those of the
African Union High Representative for South Sudan,
Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, to ensure progress in the
implementation of the peace agreement, including
the national dialogue. To that end, they must be able
to count on the steadfast support and continuing
and coordinated mobilization of the international
community and in particular of IGAD, the AU and,
of course, the Council. We also reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General's commitment to creating a
positive dynamic and ensuring optimal coordination
among all actors in this respect.

Finally, we wish to recall that, in order to shift
the mindset of spoilers to the peace process in South
Sudan, the Council has a relevant tool at its disposal:
targeted sanctions. We should not hesitate to apply
them when the situation warrants it. This applies
also to perpetrators of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

The efforts that need to be made by the Security
Council are clear. The Council will have to take all
necessary actions if its expectations, as set forth on
23 March, are ignored by South Sudanese stakeholders.
Along with IGAD and the AU, we must take action so
as to ensure that weapons in South Sudan fall silent
and that the intolerable suffering of civilians comes to
an end.

