Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. Your experience and leadership
will undoubtedly facilitate and guide our deliberations in
the Security Council. My delegation pledges its full
cooperation to you as you discharge your tasks.

My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to your and other delegations for the kind
words addressed to Ambassador Nugroho Wisnumurti, and
I wish to assure you that I will convey these kind words to
him.

The Indonesian delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his informative report on the situation
in Rwanda (S/l995/678) of 8 August 1995 and his
subsequent letter of 25 August 1995, which provides
recommendations on the establishment of an International
Commission of Inquiry to address allegations about illegal
flows of arms in the Great Lakes region of Central
Africa.

We are deeply concerned about recent allegations
concerning the sale and supply of arms and related
materiel to the former Rwandese government forces. We
believe that the uncontrolled circulation of arms in the
Great Lakes region of Central Africa is a major source of
destabilization. We are therefore convinced that this
situation should be improved in order to create a climate
conducive to peace, stability and development in the
region. My delegation is of the view that this draft
resolution has the potential to deter those factions which
seek further to destabilize an already delicate and fragile
situation in Rwanda and throughout the Great Lakes
region of Central Africa.

We are particularly appreciative of the efforts made
by the Government of Zaire in initially proposing this
Commission and emphasizing the urgency of the need for
it for facilitating regional stability. This proposed
Commission to invest the United Nations with the
authority to investigate the alleged illegal supply of arms
symbolizes the political will of Zaire to contribute to the
peace process in the region. My delegation therefore
believes that the Commission should establish close
cooperation with the countries of the Great Lakes region
of Central Africa to ensure the successful implementation
of its mandate.

My delegation is confident that a termination of the
brutal hostilities and human carnage that Rwanda has
endured for a good part of this century can most
effectively be pursued through political means that
emphasize peaceful solutions while being cognizant of the
regional dimensions of the issues that confront Rwanda
and impact its internal and external security. We are
confident that this proposed Commission articulates a
sound structure for the identification and resolution of this
current conflict.

The situation in Rwanda and in the broader context
of the Great Lakes region represents the quintessential
expression of the challenges that confront the Council in
dealing with the political, social and economic
interdependence of the post-cold-war world. That is, we
are experiencing on a massively universal scale a
convulsive in-gathering of people across tribal, racial,
linguistic, religious and national lines. The recent crises
in Bosnia, Burundi and Rwanda are powerful reminders
of the need to develop viable security structures based on

 

the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity -
principles we all espouse. The justification for such
reasoning can be extrapolated from the fact that over the
past 45 years the developing world has endured 145 wars
and witnessed the killing of over 40 million people.

We are profoundly aware of the toll that the ebbs and
flows of progress and disappointment has taken on all who
have dealt with the seemingly intractable problems in
Rwanda. Moreover, we are sensitive to the concerns voiced
by the respective Governments in the region in their efforts
to face this crisis. In this regard, it is the view of my
delegation that the pertinent resolutions previously adopted
by the Council have made progress with respect to the
problems of refugees, arms, humanitarian needs, security
zones and the development of judicial institutions.

A window of opportunity is at hand to enhance the
progress made so far between the Government of Rwanda
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) and the attempts to engage Burundi, Rwanda
and Zaire in joint military patrols along their common
borders. Many challenges, however, lie ahead as Rwanda
aspires to achieve its objective of national reconciliation,
reconstruction and national security. We trust the Council
will continue to exercise responsibility and act with a sense
of urgency and expedition in this matter.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution to establish such a Commission. Its creation is
necessary to investigate alleged violations of resolutions
918 (1994), 997 (1995) and 1011 (1995), which, inter alia,
placed an embargo on the sale and supply of arms to
former Rwandan government forces. We hold the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity in high regard, and
we have faith that the Commission is aware of the sanctity
of these ideals as it embarks on its mandate.

We expect that the Commission's findings will clarify
the current ambiguity that surrounds these issues and will
contribute to Rwanda's aspirations of achieving national
reconciliation, stability, peace and prosperity.

