Mr. Eitel (Germany): Allow me, too, to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of your high
office. The German delegation trusts that you will lead
the Council successfully through this month and pledges
its support. Allow me, at the same time, to express my
delegation's thanks to Ambassador Qin Huasun and his
collaborators for the excellent work done in chairing the
Council last month.

Once again, the Security Council is confronted with
a situation in which Iraq is preventing a team of
inspectors of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) from carrying out an inspection. While there
have been several such cases in the past, the incidents of
yesterday and today are particularly grave: first, because
the Iraqi leadership is trying to define a category of sites
to be excluded from any inspections and, secondly,
because this incident comes at a time in which Iraq has
repeatedly underlined its commitment to cooperate fully
with UNSCOM.

Iraq's claims that its sovereignty and independence
are infringed upon by UNSCOM. inspections are
obviously not valid. Iraq has accepted Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), including the role UNSCOM. is
given by that resolution. UNSCOM. can only fulfil its task
if its inspection rights are fully respected by Iraq and if
it is allowed to work without obstruction. In that respect,
we would like once again to express our full confidence
in Ambassador Ekeus and his staff. The current events are
yet another example of the difficulties and even risks
UNSCOM. members are facing in carrying out the duties
placed upon them by this Council. The Security Council
owes them its fullest support.

The draft resolution we are to adopt today is the
appropriate answer to the unacceptable actions taken by
the Iraqi Government to prevent UNSCOM. from carrying
out no-notice inspections. It sends a clear signal that the
Security Council will not tolerate attempts to undermine
UN SCOM's inspection rights.

My Government hopes that the Iraqi Government

will take this draft resolution very seriously and draw the
right conclusions from it. We hope that Iraq will

 

understand that any obstruction to UNSCOM. will only
prolong the time the Special Commission needs to complete
its work. We therefore appeal to the Iraqi Government to
re-establish immediately its cooperation with the Special
Commission, particularly by removing any obstacle to
inspections required and requested.

It is in this hope that Germany will vote in favour of
the draft resolution.

