Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to express my deepest
appreciation to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his
comprehensive and clear briefing on developments in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning the prosecution of crimes committed in
Libya since 15 February 2011.

The Libyan Transitional National Council has
repeatedly expressed its commitment to establishing a
democratic State that responds to the aspirations of all

segments of the brotherly Libyan people, enforces the
rule of law and justice, and guarantees the rights of all.
The Transition National Council has also expressed its
commitment to investigating without discrimination all
violations that have affected all Libyan citizens.

In this respect, from the outset the Transitional
National Council contacted the ICC and has since
cooperated with it. This cooperation was extended to
the United Nations Commission of Inquiry sent to
Libya and to the Prosecutor of the ICC during his visit
in April, when he also met with high-level officials in
Libya. The Libyan authorities have also repeatedly
confirmed their support for the ICC and their readiness
to continue their cooperation with it in order to
guarantee justice for the victims. This is correctly
reflected in the most recent report of the Prosecutor.

The Libyan authorities have also reaffirmed that
the national justice system in Libya is capable of
providing fair trials for all the accused. These trials
would respect all international standards and allow the
accused the right to self-defence, while at the same
time allowing the Libyan people the right to know the
truth and overcome the tensions of the past. Based on
the principle of complementarity as established in the
Rome Statute, in this case the priority of the Libyan
national judicial system is established over the
jurisdiction of the ICC.

The Libyan authorities have, as reaffirmed in the
report of the Prosecutor, repeatedly stated that they will
not protect or allow impunity for individuals who are
shown to have committed crimes against humanity, and
that they are in the process of carrying out effective
and real investigations and of preparing for fair trials.

Therefore, the announcement of the Libyan
authorities that they have fulfilled the requirements for
admissibility, pursuant to the Rome Statute, and their
willingness and desire to carry out fair and just
national investigations and prosecutions fulfil
international standards for preventing impunity. These
requirements include respect for Libyan sovereignty
and the achievement of justice by the Libyan national
judicial authorities in respect for international
standards; the holding of fair trials of those accused of
widespread violations of human rights and providing
remedies for the victims and their families; addressing
the accumulated suffering of the past, including
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, and establishing a comprehensive

strategy to deal with all crimes and to end impunity;
and encouraging transitional justice to achieve national
reconciliation to overcome the suffering of the past and
build a better future.

In this context, we appreciate and commend the
recent adoption of a transitional justice law in Libya
and the formation of a fact-finding and reconciliation
commission. We express our readiness to share with
our brothers in Libya the experience of the fact-finding
and reconciliation commission in Morocco and to help
them avoid the recurrence of human rights violations.

The brotherly Libyan people have suffered for
many decades from the suppression of their basic
rights to a decent life and the exploitation of their
national resources. Over these decades they have
shown great patience and courage, as well as hope in a
new dawn of liberty and dignity and rights. We are
certain that the new Libya will be able to meet the
aspirations of all segments of the Libyan nation and
contribute thereby to the security and stability of the
entire Maghreb region.

