Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2010/630)
and Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
informative briefing and his dedicated and very able
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to join my
good friend, Mr. de Mistura, in paying tribute to the
memory of the late Ambassador Holbrooke, whose
tireless efforts for peace and security in Afghanistan
will be remembered for many years to come.

We have arrived at the end of an eventful and
historic year in Afghanistan. The year began with the
London Conference, which was followed by the Peace
Jirga, the Kabul Conference, the second parliamentary
elections and the NATO Summit in Lisbon. This year,
we made momentous strides towards defining and
strengthening our relationship with international
partners, and sought to re-engage the Afghan people in
all efforts to bring peace and security to our country,
enhance collaboration with regional partners and reach
out to the armed opposition.

The Lisbon Conference was a milestone on the
road towards reassuring an enduring partnership
between Afghanistan and NATO. Among the key
outcomes of the meeting was the framework that we
adopted for the transition to increased Afghan
leadership over the next four years through a province-
by-province approach. High-level mechanisms, which
include key national and international stakeholders,
have been established to oversee the transition.

In 2011 we will see the launch of the transition
process. Practical preparations are under way to that
end. The commitment of our international partners to
sustained and expedited recruitment, training and
resourcing of the Afghan national army and police will
constitute a key component of their redefined mission.

The Lisbon NATO Summit sent three key
messages: first, a message to the Afghan people that
the international community will not abandon
Afghanistan and will remain engaged with the Afghan
people for the long haul; secondly, a message to
terrorists and extremists that they will fail in their
efforts to take Afghanistan back to the days of tyranny
and oppression; and thirdly, a message for the region
that cooperation is vital and that our neighbours have a
role to play and a stake in the security and stability of
Afghanistan.

Improving security, which remains a top priority
of the Afghan Government, has been a key focus of the
Afghan and International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) forces. Despite isolated incidents of attacks and
suicide bombings by the Taliban and other extremists,
overall security has improved. The latest assessments
show that ISAF and Afghan forces have for the first
time in the past two years begun to regain the military
initiative. That is particularly the case in the southern
provinces, which once saw high levels of insecurity.
The zone of security has expanded, with Afghan
security forces exerting greater presence and control in
areas previously held by enemy combatants.

Such success has a direct effect on public
perception. In Afghan villages, specifically in the
south, people acknowledge the progress being made
and have begun to engage with local authorities and the
Afghan and international forces. Consolidating the
support of the local populace is vital for successful
international engagement in Afghanistan. In that
context, emphasis must continue to be placed on
ensuring basic services for Afghans, as well as on
avoiding civilian casualties during military operations.
We welcome strengthened measures to foster
coordination among international forces and the review
of tactics, so that harm to local communities may be
prevented.

It is now clear to all that an end to the sanctuaries
in the region is crucial to the success of the
international campaign to stabilize the region and
eliminate the threat of terrorism. We cannot
underestimate the importance of addressing the
sanctuaries and safe havens in the region, which
operate as command and control headquarters for
terrorists and extremists. Without progress on that
front, all our efforts will have been in vain.

Our recent parliamentary elections, the second
since the fall of the Taliban in 2001, reaffirmed the
commitment of the Afghan people to the democratic
process. Millions of Afghans braved security threats to
cast their votes to elect members of the National
Assembly. Nobody expected a perfect election process.
Indeed, the circumstances under which the elections
took place gave rise to certain irregularities, including
the closing of polling stations and the discounting of
6
many votes by election bodies. As has been announced,
the new Parliament will be inaugurated in late January.

The Afghan Government continues to focus on
enhancing the country's relationships with its
neighbours in the region. Effective regional
cooperation is indispensable for solving the many
challenges that Afghanistan and countries in the region
face. We maintain high-level communications with the
Government of Pakistan with a view to broadening
cooperation in the fight against terrorism and order to
promote peace, stability and economic development in
both our countries.

We continue to strengthen cooperation with all
our neighbours in the region. Afghanistan holds a
unique position in the region, in which it is
increasingly able to serve as an economic hub or an
Asian crossroads in the greater region.

An historic event occurred on 11 December in
Ashgabat at the Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan
and India (TAPI) summit meeting, where important
agreements for the implementation of the gas pipeline
project were signed. The summit was a key step
forward in the realization of a regional framework for
cooperation in providing energy and energy security.

Once the transition process begins, reintegration
and reconciliation will be pursued as a matter of high
priority in Afghanistan. In fact, reconciliation is
becoming an essential political dimension of the
transition strategy. For reconciliation to work, the
Taliban must be ready to engage sincerely in peace
talks; but for reconciliation to succeed, the Taliban
must put down their arms, renounce violence and
choose the path of peace. Success lies in maintaining
our key asset: Afghan leadership and ownership of the
reconciliation process. There is also a role for others -
the international community, the region and the United
Nations - to support the Afghan Government to
succeed in its reconciliation efforts.

The Afghan Government has worked diligently
toward implementing our goals in security,
development and governance. Recent progress in all
three of those areas is outlined in the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board's Progress Report
on the Afghanistan National Development Strategy,
released in November. The results overall were highly
encouraging, particularly in the areas of governance,
national transparency and accountability. In the first
100 days since the Kabul Conference, 95 per cent of
planned activities for creating an efficient and effective
government were completed, including recruitment of
24 new district governors and the drafting of new
anti-corruption laws.

The Afghan Government will continue to pursue
effective and timely implementation of all national
priority strategies. In that regard, we are monitoring
progress and challenges in relation to all programmes
through the recently established monitoring
mechanism.

The most important assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan comes from Afghans themselves. Public
opinion in Afghanistan, according to recent surveys,
reflects that the majority of Afghans continue to
positively assess their Government and support
national reconciliation efforts, and most importantly,
they share the perspective that the country is heading
in the right direction.

As transition begins, there are clear roles for both
the Afghan Government and the international
community. In the four years ahead, the measure of
success will be determined by the strength of the
partnership of the international community and
Afghanistan. The focus of this partnership must be on
building the Afghan Government's capacity to take
responsibility. The transition process goes far beyond
the training of Afghan security forces; our partnership
must actively address not only security, but
development and governance.

A stable and prosperous Afghanistan requires
unity of understanding, unity of efforts and unity of
action. And I assure the Council that we will spare no
effort to do our part.

