Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We wish you every success. We also commend the Belgian presidency during the month of February. We would like as well to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for her valuable briefing. I also welcome the presence here today of His Excellency the Ambassador of Iraq. Tunisia is closely monitoring the situation in brotherly Iraq and has taken note of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/133). We hope that Iraq's institutions and the various components of the Iraqi political scene will be able to move beyond this sensitive phase to reach consensus on forming a Government and achieving calm and stability in the security situation, through the collective efforts of all actors, peaceful dialogue and prioritized general interests above all else. Iraq is facing many challenges, including the effects of a tense regional situation. With the support of the international community, Iraq has been able to defeat the Da'esh terrorist organization and protect its internal security, sovereignty and territorial integrity. All of that has contributed to regional and international peace and security. Today Iraq needs continued international support in order to consolidate stability and bolster the efforts to bring about reconstruction, economic development, reform, anti-corruption, strengthening of democracy and holding elections. That would lead to achieving the aspirations of the brotherly Iraqi people to security, stability and prosperity. In that context, we support the call made by the Secretary-General to the various regional and international parties to maintain theircommitments in terms of supporting Iraq. We also reaffirm the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and to not interfere in its internal affairs. Despite a relative improvement in the Iraq's economic situation, the Secretary-General's report refers to the continued need for delivering humanitarian assistance to those who need it in the country during this year. For that reason, we call on the various parties involved in the humanitarian efforts to continue their support to address the needs of the Iraqi people. Given the importance of the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and others from third countries, as well as missing Kuwaiti property, especially the Kuwaiti national archives, we express our satisfaction at the constructive cooperation that is noted in the twenty-fifth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2020/133). That cooperation among the Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities, the International Committee of the Red Cross and other international partners will make it possible to achieve further progress on this issue and to resolve various other issues related to it. In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the positive role that the Mission is playing in supporting Iraq during this important phase of its history. Notwithstanding current difficulties and complexities, there are indicators in terms of Iraqis' determination to completing the reform process, entrenching democratic practices and achieving economic and social recovery, as well as strengthening the role of Iraqi women in managing public affairs.
