Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We appreciate the initiative
by your presidency, Sir, to organize this debate on
peace and security in Africa. It is certainly encouraging
that a permanent member of the Security Council has
convened an open debate on a region that remains
underrepresented in the Council, despite the fact that
its peace and security continues to be the Council's
main preoccupation.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and insightful remarks at the beginning of
today's debate.

The Charter of the United Nations provides that, in
matters pertaining to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council acts on behalf
of the General Assembly. It is therefore not just useful
but also imperative for the Security Council to take
into account the views of the general membership on
those issues. Similarly, on regional peace and security,
it only makes sense for the Council to listen closely to
the opinions of Member States of the region concerned.
After all, who can better understand the challenges
faced by a region than the countries of that region
themselves? Chapter VIII of the Charter therefore
lays emphasis on a cooperative, interdependent and
mutually reinforcing relationship between the United
Nations and the relevant regional organizations. As
the Secretary-General underlined this morning, that
relationship should encompass prevention, mediation
and the resolution of conflicts, as well as addressing
the root causes of conflicts.

The growing dialogue between the Security Council
and the African Union (AU) aimed at developing better
and more effective responses to peace and security
issues in Africa is welcome. Resolution 2320 (2016),
as well as regular consultative dialogues between
members of the Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council - the most recent one having taken place in
May 2017 - are manifestations of that trend. Pakistan
believes that the African Union is a critical link between
the Council and the challenges being faced in Africa,
especially on issues ofpeace and security. That linkage
can be utilized through a strategic partnership between
the two organizations.

The partnership should be based on, inter alia,
respective comparative advantage, burden-sharing
and consultative decision-making, as identified in
resolution 2320 (2016). If pursued with an objective
approach, such a partnership can not only augment the
ability of the Council to effectively meet its challenges,
but also help enhance the capacity of the AU Peace and
Security Council to shoulder more responsibilities for
peace and security in Africa. We urge the Council to
consider investing more financial and capacity-building
resources in the enhancement of the AU's capabilities,
especially in peacekeeping missions mandated by
the Security Council itself. That support needs to be
flexible, sustainable and predictable.

Pakistan also welcomed the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed in April, between the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the AU
Commission. We hope that the themes identified
for cooperation, as well as the mechanisms set out
for operationalizing those themes, will provide a
good basis for further collaboration between the two
organizations.

As one of the top troop-contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping, Pakistan and its security
personnel have contributed to many of the success
stories in Africa, from Liberia to Sierra Leone. Our
well-trained and professional peacekeepers have
protected civilians, provided much-needed medical
care and rebuilt lives and countries. They have worked
in difficult and, at times, dangerous circumstances, but
have never shied away from fulfilling their mandate.
I must say, however, that our voice has remained
either unsolicited or unheard when major decisions
were made with regard to new deployments, crafting
mandates, devising strategies pertaining to regional
and trilateral cooperation and many of the other issues
directly affecting our troops. That silo culture must
change, if we want to make peacekeeping work at its
optimum capacity. We also believe that the flawed
notion of doing more with less should be seriously
revisited, because erratic budget cuts will undermine
and not advance peacekeeping in Africa.

The Security Council's consultative dialogues with
regional organizations are a useful tool for the Council
in its efforts to develop regional partnerships so as to
address relevant issues of peace and security, just as
we have seen in the case of the Council's dialogue with
the AU Peace and Security Council. Those tools are of

pivotal importance if unburdened from issues that go
beyond the purview of regional problems. Therefore,
in order to be of optimal use, those dialogues must
continue to focus on practical approaches to the
resolution of issues that are exclusively regional in
nature. It is important to ensure that valuable time and
effort are dedicated to finding pragmatic and durable
solutions.

