Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
for his final briefing on the situation in the area. I
would like to commend him for a job well done since
he assumed his duties as Special Representative.

It is with satisfaction that one can say that the
situation in the Great Lakes region has improved to a
great extent when compared with that of just a few
years ago, when the international community tended to
regard the area as a byword for spiralling violence,
humanitarian chaos and social tragedy.

Indeed, before our very eyes, almost all of the
countries in the region have successfully emerged from
conflict and are on a steady and sound path towards
economic and social development. Over the past few
years there has been steady progress in the areas of
peace, security and democratization. That is a
remarkable achievement, and Indonesia is pleased to
commend all of the nations and peoples of the Great
Lakes region for their efforts and their determination to
create the foundation for lasting peace and progress.

My delegation is of the View that the convening
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region last December, followed by the signing of the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, is the culmination of efforts to
establish durable peace, security, stability and
sustainable development in the area. It is now time to
translate those aspirations into a concrete programme
of projects and plans.

In that regard, it should be noted that there are
still some outstanding issues to be addressed by the
countries of the region. These include combating the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, addressing
humanitarian and human rights issues, supporting
institution-building, strengthening the rule of law and
advancing good governance.

The signing of the Pact, as well as the creation of
the Conference secretariat, will also bring the countries
7

in the region to the level of the new regional ownership
concept. This approach is in line with Security Council
resolution 1653 (2006), which, inter alia, urged
countries in the region to develop a subregional
approach for promoting good relations, peaceful
coexistence and the peaceful resolution of disputes.

Finally, my delegation would also like to appeal
to donor countries, as well as to United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, to consider providing
necessary assistance to the Conference secretariat and
the Special Fund for Reconstruction and Development
in support of the implementation of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.

We have travelled very far with the Governments
and the peoples of what was once a very difficult
region. With the finish line in sight, we must do
everything necessary to help the people to complete
this remarkable and irreversible journey.

