Mr. Griffiths: Let me first express my sympathies
to you, Madam President, your Government and your
people on this tragic day that we have all mourned for
so long.

When I called for the intra-Yemeni consultations
in Geneva, I never expected it to be an easy mission.
The parties have not met for more than two years, the
war has been escalating Virtually on all fronts, the level
of confidence is at its lowest, I believe, and the human
and humanitarian cost is ever-rising. The parties have
been locked into a cycle of violence. In contrast, the
main victims of this war, the Yemeni people, naturally
enough, have been yearning for a peaceful political
solution that can end their misery, put an end to the war
and deliver a Government that is in a position to address
their basic needs. I have also learned that this is no
longer a race between political and military institutions
and solutions. It is, instead, a race to salvage what is
left of State institutions as quickly as possible. It is
with that sense of urgency that I was encouraged - as
you know, Madam President - to move forward with
the parties so as to inject a prospect of hope into this
conflict and to develop an alternative narrative to the
narrative of war.

Following six or seven months of intensive
discussions with the parties, and based on my strong
conviction, supported by the Security Council, in the
need for a political solution to the conflict, I decided
to call for formal consultations that would lead to
a resumption of the political process. Indeed, I had
the honour of being with the Council on 2 August to
announce that call (see S/PV.8323). I am glad to report to
the Council that, despite the absence of one of the sides
to the consultations in Geneva last week, and although
it certainly did not go as planned, we still managed to
relaunch the political process with solid support from
the Yemeni people and the international community.

Of course, I was as disappointed as anyone that
we were unable to bring the delegation from Sana'a to
Geneva. That is not what I had planned for last week,
and I certainly would not want to see that happen again,
and neither would any of us. But I will continue not to
be drawn into going into the details of the many issues
that we had to overcome together, even if we ultimately
failed to bring the delegation to Geneva. I stress that
everybody - in Geneva, in Amman, in the Coalition,
in the Government of Yemen - tried to overcome the
issues that were presented to us, but it simply did not
work out on this occasion. I promise to make absolutely
sure that does not happen again.

The Yemeni political process, like so many others
of its kind, will see ups and downs. The challenges
we faced last week - and I suppose this is my main
messagge - remain temporary hurdles to be overcome.
That is not a sign, in my View, that the political and
military situation, as dire as it is - and perhaps because
it is dire - is not conducive to formal consultations.
We need to stay focused on nurturing the political
process, particularly in these fragile early stages, and
build the needed momentum so that it can deliver
tangible benefits to Yemenis throughout Yemen. Such
a process is not simply about holding and moving from
one big and, indeed, short event to the next. Instead,
it needs political will, determination and commitment
from all the actors, including the members of the
Council, as well as putting the interests of the Yemeni
people above all else. I see my role, therefore, as
working with the parties to understand their concerns,
hopes and expectations, so that I can provide them
with the needed help and support to move the process
forward. My role, therefore, and perhaps somewhat
controversially, is to encourage but not expose them,
and to work with but not undermine them, all the while
reminding them of the need to respect their obligations
and responsibilities towards the Yemeni people and the
international community.

As the parties resume the formal efforts to make
compromises and build trust, it is important that we do
not allow ourselves to become embroiled once again
in large-scale military confrontations. As I said, the
fighting is escalating on all sides, but we have still not
seen an attack on the city or the port of Al-Hudaydah,
although there are operations on the outskirts of the
city. I hope that will continue to be the case. We are
concerned about the launching of attacks by Ansar
Allah forces towards Saudi Arabia, as the Council has
frequently made mention, and the attacks on the Red
Sea shows the ongoing threat the conflict poses for
regional security.

In addition, the continued decline in the Yemeni
rial and broader economic decay are pushing people
further into vulnerable situations and poverty. The
frustration is rising, and with it is the threat of the
conflict, particularly in the south - during the past
10 days there have been widespread demonstrations
in the southern governorates. The protesters give
voice to their concerns over the economic situation
and basic-service delivery, and they remind us of the
importance of listening to southern voices and ensuring
their meaningful participation in arrangements that
will put an end to the conflict. I have met with several
southern groups in recent months and I will be meeting
with them again. They have been strongly in favour
of resolving their concerns through dialogue and
are keen to participate - I am glad to say - in the
political process.

I will continue my discussions by holding a set of
visits in the coming days, including tomorrow to Muscat
and then to Sana'a, to engage with the political leadership
in those two cities. I have two objectives for the visit.
First, I intend to make tangible progress while building
on discussions in Geneva on key confidence-building
measures, including on an exchange of prisoners and
the opening of Sana'a airport. I am greatly encouraged
by the very positive, open and constructive approach to
the issues that I have encountered by the Government
of Yemen and from the coalition in their support. I am
keen to outline public commitments to progressing on
those issues in the coming days.

My second objective, unsurprisingly, is to secure
a firm commitment from the parties to convening
for continued positive consultations. I hope to meet
with the Government of Yemen in Riyadh and look
forward to seeing President Hadi Mansour. I must say
that I am very grateful to him and his Government
for their support of all the efforts that the United
Nations is making to provide a political solution to
the conflict. I am grateful to him and his Government
as well for their delegation's presence in Geneva and
for their constructive participation in rather unusual
circumstances there.

I am also planning to consult soon, as I have said,
with a number of southern stakeholders to agree on their
meaningful participation in the process. I would like to
add, not least, that we were able to enjoy the presence
of a group of women from Yemen with strong specific
strengths on various issues. Given that fact that there
was more time available than anticipated, I believe
we will have a very positive trajectory going forward
as to how they will advise me and have a meaningful
input into the process. The inclusivity of the process is
crucial for its success, and while there are two principal
parties, it would behoove me continue to seek broader
consultations with people whom I think can advise me
to better perform my duties.

Finally, the reason that I am so grateful to you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting today,
so soon after Geneva and, indeed, before I am able to
outline a positive path back to peace, I would like to say
this - the road to peace is never straight; it will always
be difficult, particularly at a time when the process is
restarting after two years of enmity, opposition, doubt,
confusion and a lack of confidence. It is not surprising
that there will be those who, in this case, find it difficult
to attend and that there are those who did not find some
element of interest. This is not the last time that we will
have difficulties, but I am sure that it will be the last
time that we have that particular difficulty.

But it does not mean for one minute - and this is
why I am glad to be here - that the process towards
peace is made more difficult. It is made more urgent. I
think we learned some lessons in Geneva and, ifI may,
I would like to ask for the Council's continued support
for the efforts of the international community and my
Office, under the Secretary-General, to move back to
the table with all speed.

