Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Nickolay
Mladenov very much for his briefing. As he explained,
peace for many people in the Middle East remains a
remote prospect and a distant memory.

Two weeks ago, we saw a horrific chemical-weapons
attack on Khan Shaykhun in Syria. Environmental
samples from the sites have tested positive for sarin. We
are now almost certain that the Syrian regime carried out
the attack using sarin. Yesterday, the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) confirmed that the organization's
incontrovertible evidence indicates the exposure of
victims to sarin or a sarin-like substance. The United
Kingdom Government supported the United States
action in response, and we hope that it will deter any
further barbaric chemical-weapons attacks. But when
the moment came for the Security Council to show
leadership after the attack, it failed. We were stopped
by one Council member who would rather prop up
Al-Assad than seekjustice for the victims.

We will not be deterred by Russia's use of the
veto. We will continue to press for accountability in
the Chamber. The international community owes it
to the people of Syria. Any attempt to tie the hands
of investigators will be defeated, just as the Iranian-
Russian proposal in the OPCW was defeated today.

As you said, Madam President, we must remember
the interplay among the various conflicts in the Middle
East region. For a start, we must not let up in our
efforts to defeat Da'esh in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.
The United Kingdom supports Iraqi Prime Minister
Al Abadi and his Government in their fight against
Da'esh and in their efforts to build a stable, secure and
unified Iraq.

Iran continues to play a destabilizing role in
the region. That is most clearly seen in Syria. Iran
has violated its obligations under international
humanitarian law in Syria by failing to allow the
delivery of humanitarian aid into eastern Aleppo while
it was besieged. Iran continues to provide substantial
military and financial support to Hizbullah and the
Syrian regime. As the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2017/244) makes clear, the leader of Hizbullah
has stated that Iran supplies all of their weapons
and missiles.

Senior Iranian individuals listed under resolution
2231 (2015) continue to flout the travel ban imposed
by the Council. For instance, Major General Soleimani
was photographed in Aleppo in September in a show of
support for the Syrian regime. Such actions demonstrate
that Iran chooses to complicate, not extinguish a
conflict that has continued for far too long.

This year marks 50 years since the Six-Day War.
This year, either we move towards peace with the
support of the region and the international community,
or we face an uncertain and dangerous future. Unless
the parties show leadership, including the willingness to

make compromises, the risk of terrorism and instability
will increase. Israelis and Palestinians cannot afford
another 50 years of that.

The United Kingdom's long-standing position on
the Middle East peace process is clear: we support
a negotiated two-State solution leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States, and a just, agreed and realistic settlement for
refugees. However, that vision grows distant. As the
British Foreign Secretary said last month, the United
Kingdom strongly condemns Israel's decision to found
new settlements deep in the West Bank - the first such
decision in more than 25 years.

Such announcements run counter to international
law and have seriously undermined the prospect of two
States for two peoples. As a strong friend of Israel and
one prepared to stand up for Israel when it faces bias
and unreasonable criticism, the United Kingdom urges
Israel not to take steps that move us away from our
shared goal of peace and security.

It was because of our support for the two-State
solution and commitment to Israel as the Jewish
homeland that we voted in favour of resolution 2334
(2016), but we recognize that the conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians is deeply complex. Settlements
are not the only obstacle to peace. The people ofIsrael
deserve to live free from the scourge of terrorism and
anti-Semitic incitement, which, as the Quartet report
outlined, has undermined the prospects for a two-State
solution. It is critical that the Palestinian leadership
implement the recommendations of the Quartet's
report and continue their efforts to tackle terror and
incitement, strengthen institutions and develop a
sustainable economy.

We must continue to press Israelis and Palestinians
to refrain from actions that make peace more difficult.
It is because the conflict between Israel and Palestine
is one of the central issues in the Middle East that the
United Kingdom supports a regional approach to peace.
The changing regional context, the Arab Peace Initiative
and converging Arab and Israeli interests present
an opening. We recognize that additional impetus is
needed, and we welcome President Trump's interest in
working towards a deal that meets the requirements of
both parties. The United Kingdom's View remains that
the two-State solution is the best way to achieve that

goal and is ready to do all that it can to support that. We
do not underestimate the challenges, but, if both parties
show leadership, peace is possible.

