Mr. Urbizo Panting (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Permit me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Italy's assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. It is a fitting
occasion as we commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations.

The United Nations symbolizes the constant
aspiration of men who, with a vision of the future,
enshrined in the Preamble of the Charter the purpose of
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war;
reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights and in
the dignity and worth of the human being, and embodied
among its purposes the maintenance of international peace
and security.

In the time that has lapsed since its establishment,
the United Nations has, in our view, achieved important
results; among them the avoidance of many military
conflicts, which in other circumstances would have
resulted in a worse regional or international conflagration
and which would have threatened the very existence of

 

mankind. At the same time it has contributed to the
economic, social and democratic development of several
Member States. Let us add to these achievements the fact
that some countries, once considered enemies, are today
part of the United Nations, have declared themselves to be
peace-loving, and have accepted the obligations set forth in
the Charter.

The Security Council of the United Nations was
entrusted with a serious responsibility - that of maintaining
international peace and security. While in the early years of
its existence, this organ which is such an important part of
the international system, was paralysed by a world divided
in ideologies, and by the so-called cold war. Today it plays
an important role in the area of international peace and
security. At present, there are more than 16 peace-keeping
operations, covering a vast gamut of conflicts which could
endanger international stability.

For Honduras, the maintenance of international peace
and security is not an end in itself. Its significance lies
rather in laying the foundations for a just and well-balanced
system which fosters human development and encourages
international cooperation and the development of North-
South and South-South economic relations.

Furthermore, the United Nations has successfully
carried out activities relating to human development. The
recent world summits on population and development, on
social development, and on women, held in Egypt,
Denmark and China, respectively, are eloquent testimony to
the dynamism of the United Nations. We must consolidate
these achievements for the benefit of the great masses of
people struggling in abject poverty throughout the world,
with little hope of overcoming that lamentable state.

That is where the United Nations and the developed
world should put forth their best efforts, in order to
improve the lot of those who are marginalized and who
today constitute the majority of the world's population.

As regards the future of the United Nations, we
believe that after fifty years of its existence it requires a
thorough overhauling of its operation in order to enable it
to better meet the challenges of the coming millennium.

In this context, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations was far-sighted when, in his "An Agenda for
Peace", he pointed out that the United Nations

"must never again be crippled as it was in the era that
has now passed."
and that in order to prevent conflict and war we must do
our utmost

"to enhance respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, to promote sustainable and
economic and social development for wider
prosperity, to alleviate distress and to curtail the
existence and use of weapons of mass destruction."

With reference to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Secretary-General has also
updated the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations by incorporating in his "An Agenda for
Peace" the concepts of preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peace-keeping and post-conflict peace-
building. In this activities, Honduras makes a modest and
significant contribution with contingents in Western
Sahara and Haiti. We are also favourably disposed to
making contributions in this field in other geographical
areas of the world where our cooperation may be
required.

The fifty years of our Organization are now part of
history. The challenge of change which we will face in
the coming years is by nature complex and fraught with
serious difficulties, but there is no other way. We must
assume the historic commitment to accept the challenge
and to devote ourselves with enthusiasm to the shaping of
a new world, which will do away with political, religious
and racial intolerance, which will eliminate inequality and
social backwardness, which will establish human
fraternity and solidarity, a new world in which the beacon
of freedom and democracy will light its path.

