Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council again on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Mr. President, the mural on the wall behind you,
by the Norwegian artist Per Krogh, serves as a
compelling reminder of the past -the world rising
from the ashes of the Second World War into a period
bearing the promise of peace, prosperity and equality.

But it serves also as a vivid reminder of the
present - that millions of ordinary people are still
trapped in the horror of war and conflict, hoping
desperately to rise from the chaos that surrounds them
into more peaceful times. It is also a reminder to the
Council, to Member States and to the United Nations
itself, of our collective responsibility to prevent war, to
secure peace and, in its absence, to ensure the
protection of civilians.

We see varying degrees of progress on all these
fronts. In Kenya, mediation in the wake of post-
election unrest reduced the prospects of intensified
violence. The consolidation of peace and relative
stability continues in Cote d'Ivoire, Nepal, Timor-
Leste and, in a more fragile way, Uganda, allowing for
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
At the same time, recent upsurges in violence in
recovering areas like Burundi and Southern Sudan are
of great concern.

The full deployment of peacekeepers in Chad, the
Central African Republic and Darfur has the potential
to augment significantly efforts to protect and assist
those caught in the turmoil of violence in the region.
08-3528]
But the risks of deterioration are currently very great.
It is essential that these missions be given the requisite
support and resources to fulfil their mandates.

Last but not least, we see the potential for notable
progress towards improved protection for civilians
from the devastating impact of cluster munitions. Over
100 States are currently gathered in Dublin to negotiate
a treaty banning them. I urge States to seize this
historic opportunity and conclude a treaty that has the
protection of civilians at its core and that contributes to
reducing the dangers they face from these weapons
during and after conflict.

Important though this progress is, the stark reality
remains that in conflicts throughout the world,
countless civilians continue to see their hopes shattered
by violence and displacement and their lives blown
apart by suicide bombers or ground down by physical
and sexual violence, deprivation and neglect.

In just the first five months of this year, more
than half a million people have been displaced by
conflict, both within and across borders. In Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Chad, Somalia and
Sudan, over 337,000 civilians have been forced to flee
violence this year, some of them not for the first time.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the benefits
of January's conference on peace, security and
development are yet to be felt by those being sheltered
in camps and public buildings in the east, including the
175,000 people newly displaced this year.

In Iraq, sectarian violence, as well as armed
confrontations around Basra and Sadr City, have forced
more thousands from their homes. In Afghanistan,
conflict-induced displacement continues to undermine
the gains made in the return or resettlement of those
previously displaced. In Colombia and Sri Lanka, the
threat of further displacement is ever present in some
areas, as violence continues.

Of course, displacement is not the only indicator
of conflict or of its impact on civilians. Each of the
contexts that I have mentioned raises very different
concerns for the protection of civilians. Allow me to
elaborate today on three that remain particularly acute
in many of today's conflicts: the conduct of hostilities,
sexual violence and humanitarian access.

First of all, on the conduct of hostilities, civilians
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
armed conflict, often in flagrant violation of the rules
08-3528]
of international humanitarian law governing conduct of
hostilities.

In Darfur, for example, civilians remain the
principal victims of attacks by Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Janjaweed militia. In January and February,
aerial bombardments and ground attacks on villages in
west Darfur left 115 civilians dead, including elderly
and disabled persons, women and children. Earlier this
month, attacks on villages in north Darfur, including
the bombing of a school, water installations and a
market, resulted in further civilian deaths and injuries.
Rebel attacks, often mounted from areas of significant
civilian population, have also been heavy in civilian
casualties.

Last month in Somalia, hundreds of civilians
were killed or injured and thousands more were forced
to flee their homes due to fighting in Mogadishu
between the Government, supported by Ethiopian
forces, and non-State armed groups. The number of
casualties was no doubt exacerbated through the use of
heavy weapons in civilian areas.

Israeli civilians remain subject to physical and
psychological suffering caused by indiscriminate
rocket and mortar attacks launched from the occupied
Palestinian territory. In Gaza, Israeli air attacks and
ground incursions continue to result in unacceptable
Palestinian civilian casualties.

Non-State armed groups in Colombia continue to
perpetrate killings, mass displacements, hostage-
taking, sexual violence and forced recruitment of
civilians. In Sri Lanka, hundreds of civilians have been
killed or injured this year, including in attacks on
civilian buses, railway stations and other public places.
Only last month, over 40 civilians, including the
Government's Highways Minister, were killed in
separate suicide attacks. Yesterday, nine people died
and 73 were injured when a bomb exploded on a busy
commuter train in Dehiwela, a suburb of Colombo.
Last Friday, a roadside bomb in Kilinochchi killed 17
civilians, on a main road used to reach families
displaced by the conflict.

In Afghanistan, 300 civilians were killed in the
first four months of this year in attacks by so-called
anti-Government elements, the majority in suicide
attacks. Though often aimed at military targets, the
manner in which these suicide attacks are carried out
almost inevitably leads to civilian casualties. Similarly,
in Iraq, suicide attacks continue to be used with
chilling effect, while members of professional and
religious groups, the media, and Government officials
are targeted for assassination and abduction.

In both these contexts, I remain concerned also
by civilian casualties resulting from air strikes and
search operations conducted by national and
multinational forces, as well as the number of so-called
force protection incidents in which civilians are shot at
after being considered a threat to military convoys or
for not obeying instructions at checkpoints.

I do not for one second underestimate the
challenge, in Afghanistan, Iraq and other contexts, of
engaging an enemy whose members are difficult, if not
impossible, to identify, and who see the surrounding
civilian population as a shield from attack. This is an
enemy for whom the principles of distinction and
proportionality appear to have no practical meaning or
application. Nevertheless, any military response must
itself comply with international humanitarian law and
demonstrate respect for the dignity of those already
exposed to insurgent attacks.

Against this background, I welcome the inclusion
in relevant Council resolutions of provisions calling for
all parties to conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law, including in resolutions authorizing
multinational forces in Afghanistan and Iraq. I would
encourage the continued and systematic inclusion of
provisions to this effect in all relevant Council
resolutions.

I also welcome efforts made by the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and other
international forces in Afghanistan to minimize the risk
of civilian casualties. Nonetheless, I would reiterate the
Secretary-General's recommendation, from October's
protection of civilians report, that ISAF and the
multinational force in Iraq provide information in their
quarterly reports to the Council on steps taken to
ensure the protection of civilians in the conduct of
hostilities.

Turning to sexual violence, we need further
robust action to prevent and respond to such violence
during armed conflict. Anything less risks condemning
current and future generations of women and girls, and
boys and men, to indescribable humiliation and cruelty
followed by, for those who survive or who are born
from such violence, a life defined by pain, stigma and
rejection.
Following October's presidential statement on
women, peace and security, Under-Secretaries-General
Arbour, Guehenno and I asked peacekeeping missions
to provide improved reporting on sexual violence. This
will help build a better picture of the problem in
different contexts and allow for more targeted
prevention and response activities by the missions and
other actors. A conference begins today in the United
Kingdom, bringing together military commanders,
United Nations actors and some Member States to
discuss practical actions that could be taken by
peacekeepers in this area. We still have problems
ourselves in this area and we also recognize that we
have much more to do.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has long
been at the centre of our discussions on sexual
violence, given the pervasiveness of the problem there
and the sheer brutality with which those crimes are
often perpetrated. We have long urged the Government
and other actors on the ground to seek to address the
issue. In March, the Ministry of Gender, Family and
Children, in partnership with United Nations and civil
society actors, launched a national campaign to raise
awareness of sexual violence and the need for
accountability. This is a welcome step, as was
President Kabila's reaffirmation of his zero-tolerance
policy on sexual violence during the Conference on
Peace, Security and Development in January.

But we need to intensify our efforts to make this
zero-tolerance a reality. This includes reversing, in
places like the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
continued failure of the police and judiciary to take
sexual violence seriously. Ineffective investigations,
minimal prosecutions, interference by military and
other officials in the administration of justice: these are
all practices which have to stop. They are an affront to
the rights of victims and serve only to reinforce the
culture of impunity on which sexual violence has
thrived for so long.

They also reaffirm the importance of the
Secretary-General's recommendation in the protection
of civilians report that consideration be given to
establishing ad hoc judicial arrangements to support
the national authorities in addressing sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example,
consideration could be given to creating a special,
possibly internationalized, chamber within the
Congolese criminal courts to prosecute sexual violence
cases.

08-3528]
The Secretary-General also recommended using
targeted sanctions in response to sexual violence. I
welcome provisions in Council resolution 1807 on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that foresee the
possibility of imposing such measures against the
perpetrators of sexual violence. It is essential that the
Group of Experts and the Committee of the Council
have the necessary capacity to ensure implementation
of these provisions and that Member States apply the
required measures.

This problem must be approached with the same
degree of concerted action wherever it occurs. I
welcome provisions in Council resolution 1794
regarding the need to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of sexual violence and requesting the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
pursue a mission-wide strategy on sexual violence and
to report regularly to the Council on actions taken. But
I would like to have seen similar requirements in
subsequent Council resolutions 1795 and 1812 on Cote
d'Ivoire and the Sudan respectively.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo may
stand apart in terms of the intensity of sexual violence.
But it is no less essential that we take action to prevent
the same horrific crimes against the displaced persons
returning home to southern Sudan; or that we seek
accountability for those who raped their way across
Cote d'Ivoire and ensure support to their victims. It is
precisely this need for consistency in approach that
stands behind the proposed expert group of the
Council, to which I shall return.

The third issue on which I would like to focus is
humanitarian access. Safe, timely and unhindered
access is fundamental to our efforts to protect civilians
and assist those in need. Yet, throughout the world,
including in countries on the Council's agenda, the
harsh reality is that millions of people in need of
protection and assistance remain beyond our reach
owing to a variety of constraints.

Overall, improving access in concrete and
practical terms remains a key priority for me. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) is continuing to develop a mechanism to
enhance its capacity for reporting and analysis on
access constraints in conflict settings. This analysis
will be annexed to future reports of the Secretary-
08-3528]
General on the protection of civilians and included in
my briefings to the Council.

The intention is not to establish a league table of
situations, ranked according to the severity of access
constraints. Rather, it is intended to provide a
disaggregated and qualitative picture of access
constraints and their humanitarian impact.

It should provide a clearer understanding of how
constraints impact different humanitarian actors, that is
how insecurity impacts differently on United Nations
agencies, international and national non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). It will help to identify
programmes that are seen by parties to a given conflict
as more acceptable and which may constitute possible
entry points from which operations can be expanded.
In Afghanistan, for example, insurgent groups tend to
be more disposed towards health programmes and
those that provide employment opportunities for local
populations.

The analysis will also help to identify emerging
trends and patterns, such as the increased presence of
commercial enterprises that are prepared to "pay for
access". Such practices will, inevitably, have
unwelcome implications for free and unhindered access
by humanitarian actors working in the same area.
Ultimately, the analysis should provide the basis for
more nuanced, targeted and practical measures to
mitigate access constraints.

One known key factor in all this is the degree of
acceptance of humanitarian actors by local populations
and parties to the conflict. This is critical for reducing
security risks and enhancing access. This means good
local knowledge and contacts, as well as constant
reassertion to all concerned of the need for full respect
for humanitarian principles. It also requires sustained
and consistent dialogue about principles and needs
with all actors who can facilitate our access to people
in need. And that may, in some situations, include
those seen by many as terrorists.

Not all constraints on access constitute violations
of international humanitarian law. For example, some
result from the absence, or poor state, of roads or other
infrastructure, such as in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. Climatic conditions make areas inaccessible
during rainy seasons when rivers cannot be crossed, or
in winter, in periods of heavy snowfall, a particular
problem in parts of Afghanistan. Sometimes, our
access is temporarily constrained by active fighting.
Other constraints clearly are violations of
international humanitarian law. One of the most
alarming and direct threats to humanitarian operations
today stems from deliberate attacks against
humanitarian workers in addition to other security-
related incidents. Often it is difficult to determine the
motivation of the perpetrators and their affiliation. Are
they connected with a party to the conflict? Are they
targeting humanitarian staff, whom they do not
perceive as neutral? Are they armed or criminal
elements taking advantage of the climate of insecurity
and preying on a soft target? Or is there some personal
or revenge motive?

Less than four weeks ago, Save the Children's
Country Director in Chad was killed when his convoy
was attacked by unidentified gunmen, underlining the
increasingly dangerous operating environment for
humanitarian workers in that country.

Across the border in Darfur, seven humanitarian
workers were killed and 109 abducted in the first four
months of this year. 131 agency vehicles were hijacked
and humanitarian premises broken into by armed actors
on 52 occasions. Humanitarian workers have been
forced to relocate from areas of operation on eight
occasions, disrupting the provision of vital assistance
to populations in several locations.

In Somalia, 12 humanitarian staff were killed in
the first five months of this year. The threat of violence
is exacerbated by public threats and accusations of
partisan behaviour levied against the humanitarian
community by the Government and armed groups. In
Afghanistan, a significant proportion of attacks against
NGO staff by anti-Government elements are said to be
motivated by perceived support for the Government on
the part of NGOs.

Another major constraint on our operations stems
from restrictions on the movement of staff and goods
owing to checkpoints and spontaneous roadblocks. In
Somalia, the proliferation of such obstacles has led to
severe delays, diversion and looting of relief items and
additional costs incurred through charges levied at
checkpoints, which can run into hundreds of dollars.
Between October 2007 and March 2008, the number of
checkpoints on routes used by the World Food
Programme increased from 224 to 311.

In a different and less dangerous but no less
frustrating context, in the West Bank, there are still
over 600 checkpoints and roadblocks, though I hope

recent promised reductions will improve this situation.
Between November 2007 and April 2008, United
Nations vehicles experienced delays or were turned
back at checkpoints on 516 occasions. Over 4,000 staff
hours were lost due to delays or denials of access at
checkpoints in March 2008.

Interference in humanitarian activities or the
overt diversion of aid is another significant constraint
on our operations in some contexts. In Somalia, for
example, we face an acute phenomenon of so-called
gatekeepers who try to control access to communities
in need, often in return for a portion of the aid being
provided.

Another major constraint stems from bureaucratic
requirements for the entry and movement of staff and
goods. For example, requirements governing the entry
into Sri Lanka of humanitarian personnel and relief
items continue to impede our operations. The entry of
international staff designated for work in conflict areas
requires the authorization of three ministries and many
staff hours to process the necessary documents.

Operations in Sri Lanka are further constrained
by restrictions on the amount, type and mode of
transportation of relief goods and other items. For
example, restrictions on the movement of construction
materials and fuel from Government to Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam-controlled areas is affecting
shelter and sanitation activities.

Ad hoc demands and requirements by officials at
the local level also reduce, or paralyse, the passage of
assistance. In North Darfur, for example, the Wali
issued a decree earlier this month directing the
cessation of flights to and from E1 Fasher by the United
Nations and other organizations and the suspension of
road travel outside El Fasher for the United Nations
and NGOs. While United Nations flights resumed the
following day, the ban on road travel has effectively
curtailed access throughout the State except for in, and
around, the major humanitarian hubs.

While clearly outside the scope of this report and
debate, I note in passing that access can, of course, be
an issue not only in situations of conflict but also in the
aftermath of natural disasters, as we have seen most
recently following Cyclone Nargis. I hope this issue is
now resolved, but implementation will be key.
Meanwhile, this example demonstrates that we must
find a satisfactory way of dealing with access issues
for natural disasters as well.

08-3528]
As I hope you will see from this, the issue of
constraints on access is complex. But the issue is
crucial. We are continuing our analysis so that the first
fruits will be available to the Council in the autumn.

Vital progress has been made in the nine years
since the Council first considered the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. There is increased
awareness among Member States of the issues involved
and their relevance to the Council's work. Four
thematic resolutions on the protection of civilians, in
particular resolution 1674 (2006), have established a
comprehensive - and ambitious - framework for
action. The challenge now is to realize that ambition
and ensure the systematic consideration of protection
of civilians issues in the Council's work.

To this end, I would emphasize the importance
that we and, I believe, a number of Council members,
attach to the Secretary-General's recommendation for
the creation of a Security Council expert group on the
protection of civilians.

For those who harbour reservations, let me be
clear that we are not proposing a subsidiary body of the
Council with the bureaucratic and resource issues that
that implies.

Rather, we envisage an informal forum that
would bring together all of the Council Member States
at the expert level for transparent, systematic and
timely consultation on protection of civilians concerns,
particularly, but not only, in the context of the
establishment or renewal of peacekeeping mandates.

The Security Council has come far in addressing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. But I
believe the Council could go further. A more consistent
approach to integrating the protection of civilians into
all relevant aspects of the Council's work could make a
very real difference to the lives of millions of people
trapped in the chaos and horror of war.

An expert group of the kind I have described
would, I believe, be a useful vehicle to help take you
there.

