Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Turkey for
convening this important debate. Under-Secretary-
General Holmes gave us a particularly cogent briefing
at the outset, for which Canada is very appreciative.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the first
groundbreaking thematic resolution on the protection
of civilians. Resolution 1265 (1999) and its sister
resolution 1296 (2000) articulated clearly and
specifically the linkage between the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict and the
Council's responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Collectively, the
international community has built a solid international
legal and normative framework. But the question
remains: has that led to positive results for civilian
populations? Since the last open debate on this issue, in
January, a number of situations have demonstrated that
critical gaps remain between words and actions.

In the Sudan, the expulsion in March of 13
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
from the northern parts of the country, including
Darfur, and the closure of three national NGOs have
forced the scaling back of assistance and weakened
humanitarian response capacity. In the meantime,
peacekeepers are unable to fulfil their protection
mandate.

In Sri Lanka, the intensification of fighting
during the final months of the conflict led to significant
numbers of civilian casualties. Hundreds of thousands
of civilians were trapped in a shrinking area without
shelter or basic services, under repeated shelling and
used as human shields.

In Afghanistan, indiscriminate acts of violence
remind us why the support for the international
Mission and the Afghan people is so important.

Sharp increases in the numbers of displaced
persons in Pakistan underscores that the international
community's collective support for international
humanitarian action is a critical component of
protection efforts.

Canada welcomes the Secretary-General's most
recent report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2009/277). It outlines key challenges and
offers a practical road map for Council attention and
action. This afternoon I would like to focus on three
key elements in the report: the need for practical
efforts, access and accountability.

First, 10 years of experience tells us that the
language on the protection of civilians in Security
Council resolutions does not automatically translate
into clear mandates and operations on the ground. T0
bridge this gap, Council language must be translated
into practical, field-based guidance for military and
civilian actors, including civilian police, as John
Holmes proposed in his briefing earlier. Those
entrusted with protection must have the knowledge and
training required to effectively fulfil this role, with
particular sensitivity to vulnerable groups, such as
women and children.

Canada was pleased to recently co-sponsor a
conference at Wilton Park, in the United Kingdom, to
examine the role for military peacekeepers in
addressing sexual violence. The conference resulted in
an inventory of good practices for peacekeepers to use
in protecting civilians from sexual violence.

We also need to work together to assign
appropriate accountabilities in order to ensure that
mandated tasks are implemented. Canada applauds the
commitment of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to more effectively
operationalize the protection of civilians within
peacekeeping mandates. We welcome the recent DPKO
high-level seminar on robust peacekeeping, and we
recognize the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, which included a reference
to the protection of civilians in its 2009 report. My
delegation also looks forward to the upcoming
OCHA/DPKO lessons-learned study based on 10 years
of implementing protection of civilians mandates in
peacekeeping operations. The potential significance of
this study should not be underestimated. Canada urges
the Council to consider this study seriously and to act
on its key recommendations.
It is also important to prevent gaps in
coordination between peacekeeping operations and
civilian agencies, which have a critical role to play in
protecting civilians. Effective coordination between
peace and security, development and humanitarian
actors remains key to ensuring that gaps are addressed
and protection needs are met.

Secondly, Canada welcomes the Secretary-
General's focus on humanitarian action. The question
of access cuts to the heart of our ability to assist
populations at risk, yet access is too often hindered or
denied outright. Full, safe and unhindered access to
populations in need must be provided. We welcome
OCHA's efforts to monitor access constraints more
effectively and report to the Council on this issue.
Timely, credible information and analysis on access
challenges are crucial in the development of effective
responses.

However, when issues such as access are brought
to the Council's attention, follow-up is vital. In its
response, the Council must be willing consistently to
draw upon key tools at its disposal, including
deploying fact-finding missions, good offices, special
envoys, monitoring missions and preventive
deployments when civilians are at risk, and support for
humanitarian and human rights agencies to promote
compliance with international law. In addition, the
Council must monitor its own resolutions and provide
back-up to missions as necessary.

The Secretariat also has a role. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, field visits by the
Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians, perhaps in conjunction with the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict, could provide the Council with key
information about humanitarian and protection needs
and the conduct of the mandate.

The third issue remains front and centre, and that
is the issue of accountability. Despite the existence of
numerous provisions under international law, attacks
against civilians, including humanitarian workers,
often continue unabated. Such attacks must be seen as
the crimes that they are. Accountability is critical.
National authorities are responsible for exercising
jurisdiction over those responsible for committing such
crimes. When there is an unwillingness or inability to
do so, the Council and the broader United Nations
membership have a role to play in ensuring that those
who commit serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law are brought to justice.

(spoke in French)

Finally, the Government of Canada is pleased to
see a reference to the Montreux Document
(S/2008/636, annex) on pertinent international legal
obligations and good practices for States related to
operations of private military and security companies
during armed conflict. Canada is pleased to have
participated in the debate that led to the adoption of
this non-binding document intended to clarify
international law as it pertains to private military and
security companies. This compendium of good
practices is a good guide for Member States, in
particular in their relations with private security
providers. We ask Member States to support this
document and to advocate on its behalf.

Over the past 10 years, we have put in place an
exceptional framework to guide our collective action.
We have sought thereby to ensure that the Council and
its mandated missions will never be at a loss for
strategies to deal with the most serious situations in
which civilians are at risk. In terms of the future, we
have undertaken new initiatives to respond to emerging
problems. Canada urges the Council to ensure that its
actions are appropriate, to remain vigilant in its
monitoring, and to exercise the necessary political will
to deploy the full range of measures at its disposal to
protect civilians.

