Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The conclusions
of the comprehensive report produced by the Secretary-
General in response to resolution 1044 (1996) are clear:
first, Sudan has not complied with the demand in that
resolution to extradite the three suspects wanted in
connection with the assassination attempt on President
Mubarak, and, secondly, many of Sudan's neighbours
remain concerned about its support for terrorist activities
within their territories.

That is why the Council has had to take further action.
It has nothing to do with the orientation of the current
Government in Sudan: it is purely and simply a necessary
response to Sudan's failure to respond adequately to the
demands of this Council and of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

We therefore welcome the initiative of the
non-aligned members of the Council in bringing forward
the resolution which has just been adopted. We fully
support the measures it contains and hope that they will
contribute to an early change of heart in Khartoum. The
solution to the problem is simple: the Government of
Sudan must recognize international concern about its
behaviour and comply with the demands of the Security
Council and the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

One of the principal demands of the resolution is the
requirement for Sudan to ensure that the three suspects
wanted in connection with the assassination attempt are
brought to justice in Ethiopia. We are convinced that the
Government of Sudan knows where they are. If they are
still in Sudan, the answer is straightforward: the
Government must extradite them to Ethiopia under the
terms of the Bilateral Extradition Treaty. If, as may be
the case, Sudan has helped at least one of the three leave
the country, this resolution clearly requires that the
Government of Sudan must take immediate action,
including, for example, by providing the necessary
evidence, to bring about extradition to Ethiopia. We will
not be satisfied until Sudan has secured this objective, and
has also ceased its support for international terrorism.

We draw the Government of Sudan's attention to the
last paragraph of the resolution: it is a clear message that
the Security Council will remain engaged in this matter.

