Mr. Zuzul (Croatia): I would like to thank the
President of the Tribunal, as well as the Chief
Prosecutor, for their very noble work and for their
annual reports on the work that the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has
accomplished in the past year. I would also like, on
behalf of my Government, to express our satisfaction
and to congratulate President Meron on his re-election.

Allow me to now outline Croatia's position on
this issue and explain what we have achieved thus far
in our cooperation with the Tribunal.

I wish to stress the point that Croatia was one of
the leading proponents for establishing the ICTY. We
have held from the very beginning that the prosecution
of war crimes is fundamental to establishing lasting
peace in our part of Europe. Croatia also believes that
bringing the perpetrators of war crimes to justice is a
precondition for confidence-building in the region. I
think there is full agreement on these points. I do,
however, wish to make a few brief remarks on the
general political circumstances that surrounded the key
events in the 1990s. These remarks are directly
relevant to the outstanding issues that still exist today.

First of all, I must reiterate that Croatia was
attacked and subsequently partly occupied by the
invading Yugoslav army, which was firmly under the
control of Slobodan Milosevic. The fact that this
aggression was conducted within internationally
recognized borders and on the territory of the Republic
of Croatia has been reflected in a large number of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including Council resolutions 815 (1993), 871 (1993),
947 (1994), 981 (1995) and 1023 (1995). Allow me to
quote from the second and third preambular paragraphs
of just one resolution, General Assembly resolution
49/43 of 9 December 1994, at the time when Croatia
was still trying to find a peaceful and negotiated
solution:

"The General Assembly

"Stressing the importance of efforts to
restore peace in the entire territory of the
Republic of Croatia as well as to preserve its
territorial integrity within the internationally
recognized borders, and emphasizing in this
regard that the territories comprising the United
Nations Protected Areas are integral parts of the
territory of the Republic of Croatia,

"Alarmed and concerned by the fact that the
ongoing situation in the Serbian-controlled parts
of Croatia is de facto allowing and promoting a
state of occupation of parts of the sovereign
Croatian territory, and thus seriously jeopardizing
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia".

Our people did not want a bloody conflict on
Croatian territory, but were confronted with armed
aggression, which had to be resisted. Our Government
had the solemn duty to protect its citizens.

Secondly, the Croatian Government invested
great efforts in reaching a peaceful solution with the
local Serb authorities. I know this firsthand, as I
personally participated in negotiations during this
period. In hindsight, I feel more than confident stating
that Croatia exerted great restraint and demonstrated
true patience in searching for a negotiated settlement.
In the end, we had no choice but to liberate our
occupied territory by military force. The former United
States Ambassador to Croatia, Peter Galbraith, in his
testimony during the Milosevic trial, openly blamed
the local Serb authorities for rejecting a negotiated
settlement.

In order to fully understand Croatia's decision to
take military action, one must take into account the
situation in neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which was, in fact, quickly deteriorating at the time. I
will remind you that in the summer of 1995, the Serbs
had occupied the United Nations-protected enclaves of
Zepa and Srebrenica and were attacking Gorazde.
Following the brutal massacre at Srebrenica, it was
clear that decisive military action was the only way to
counter the Serb onslaught, and the world simply could
not allow Biha to fall into the hands of Ratko Mladic'.

I am making these points in order to emphasize
once again the legitimacy of Croatia's decisions at the
time. I think it is of central importance that not only we
today, but also future generations, have a clear
understanding of the events I have briefly described.
The past must not be forgotten, and, more important, it
must be properly assessed and understood.

However, the fact remains that crimes were
committed, and justice demands that the perpetrators
be properly punished. My Government insists on the
individualization of responsibility for the criminal acts
that have been committed. We understand that the
ICTY has a central role in prosecuting those crimes,
and that is precisely why we strongly supported the
establishment of the Tribunal from the very beginning.
Croatia views cooperation generally as a matter of
enforcing the rule of law and, more specifically, as a
matter of implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Statute of the ICTY and our own
constitutional law, which mandates compliance with all
Tribunal requests.

Now I would like to address the current state of
affairs in our cooperation with the ICTY. The facts
clearly indicate that the Croatian Government has been
fulfilling its commitment to comply with the requests
of the Tribunal. In March of this year, two of Croatia's
generals - Generals Markac and Cermak -
surrendered to stand trial in The Hague. We also
secured the handover of six indicted Bosnian Croats,
who subsequently appeared before the Tribunal and are
now waiting for their trials to begin. Most recently, the
Bosnian Croat indictee Miroslav Bralo surrendered to
the ICTY authorities.

Croatia's position has been clear and
unequivocal: all of our citizens are obliged to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal. That includes
General Gotovina, who remains at large. On this point,
I want to stress that my Government is in no way
evading its own responsibility and that we have, in
fact, repeatedly appealed to General Gotovina to
appear before the court.

Prime Minister Sanader recently stated once
again that The Hague is the only location where one's
guilt or innocence can be established. I want to re-
emphasize the point that this is the only outstanding
issue that exists between Croatia and the ICTY.

Both President Meron and the Chief Prosecutor
Del Ponte stated that Croatia's cooperation with the
Tribunal is good and that the case of General Gotovina
remains the only obstacle to our full cooperation with
it. Allow me once again to express, on behalf of the
Croatian Government, our commitment to cooperate
fully with the ICTY authorities and with the
international community in resolving this remaining
issue. We are determined to fulfil our responsibilities
as a mature democracy and will continue to insist that
every citizen, without exception, comply with the
country's laws. In the end, those who are found guilty
must be punished, regardless of their ethnic
background.

Croatia is investing great efforts in preparing its
national courts to assume cases involving war crimes. 1
am especially pleased that President Meron has
recognized the efforts we have made in that regard.
This process has been developing in close cooperation
with the ICTY and is designed to prepare judiciary
officials to prosecute war-crimes cases in a
professional and unbiased manner. It is not widely
known that since 1992 the Croatian judiciary has
independently conducted nearly 1,500 war-crime
cases - 1,491, to be exact. The case involving
Croatian General Mirko Norac - who was sentenced
to 12 years in prison - demonstrated that our courts
are able to act both professionally and in an unbiased
manner.

Croatia fully supports the Tribunal's completion
strategy as outlined in Security Council resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). We understand that that
is a priority of the Security Council, and we are
prepared to help expedite the work of the ICTY. The
referral of cases to competent national jurisdictions is
one of the pillars of the completion strategy. The
Croatian Ministry of Justice, Administration and Local
Self-Government is conducting a programme, with the
generous support of the Royal Dutch Government, that
is designed to train legal experts in prosecuting war-
crimes cases. Most recently, a working session was
held on 29 and 30 October in cooperation with the
ICTY Registry.

Croatia now believes it is prepared to assume part
of the Tribunal's work. We will continue to pursue a
dialogue with the ICTY on that issue and cooperate in
the field of training and technical assistance. In cases
that have already been conducted, evidentiary material
obtained by the ICTY has been used by Croatian
national courts. We are pleased with the cooperation
we have established with the Office of the Prosecutor,
and we intend to intensify our regular communication
with the authorities in The Hague.

It has been stated on many occasions that the
Tribunal must perform the role of enforcer of justice
and protector of memory. We must ensure that future
generations will be able to distinguish between victim
and aggressor, but also between a nation's right to self
defence and the individual crimes that may have been
committed. As I stated earlier, those found guilty must
be punished, regardless of their ethnic background.

We also have an obligation to resolve the most
difficult issues from our past. No nation can expect to
build a better future if it is not capable of assuming
responsibility for its own actions. I assure the Council
that Croatia is ready to do its part, and that is why we
are a credible candidate for European Union
membership.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Croatia is fully
aware of the importance of cooperation with the ICTY.
We will continue to fulfil our obligations to the best of
our ability.

