Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Along
with other speakers, I too would like to thank Mr. Tom
Koenigs, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his very clear briefing.

The London Conference and the adoption of the
Afghanistan Compact are without doubt very positive
developments, as they organize the concerted efforts of
Afghanistan and the international community on the
basis of benchmarks and time frames in four areas,
namely, security, the rule of law, development and -
as an issue cutting across all those others - combating
drug trafficking.

With regard to the security challenges, the most
important goals of the Compact are to create Afghan
armed forces numbering 74,000 troops by 2006, to
disarm all illegal armed groups by 2007 and to almost
fully eradicate opium cultivation by 2010.

With regard to the Compact's economic and
social development goals - which, along with the
security objectives, are perhaps the most important
goals of the Compact - there is, among the other
objectives, the desire to build national road and
electricity networks by 2008. Above all, the Compact
includes the goal of establishing irrigation systems
between 2006 to 2010, so as to deal with the six-year
drought from which Afghanistan has suffered, as well
as to make it possible to find alternative crops to
opium.

As I have said, all that is very positive. However,
the Compact and the Government of Afghanistan face a
paradoxical situation today, given the two fundamental
challenges: insecurity and the trafficking in narcotic
drugs. Each of those is capable of distorting every
effort made by Afghans and their partners through the
Compact to build a democratic and stable country.

Indeed, the Compact comes at a time of
disturbing trends, such as a rise in terrorism, including
more frequent suicide attacks on the Kabul authorities
and more violence directed against the international
forces and the educational system. Behind such attacks
are insurgents and other anti-Government elements
linked to terrorist groups, drug trafficking and
organized crime.

However, the increase in violence by illegal
armed groups or terrorists is not our sole concern. Drug
trafficking continues to be a reality linked to those
phenomena and its scale overshadows the political
progress achieved to date. Despite efforts to establish a
viable rule of law, many international analysts are
venturing to assert that Afghanistan is today the best-
organized drug State in the world. The Secretary-
General's report states that 87 per cent of the world's
opium is produced in Afghanistan and that 50 per cent
of that country's gross domestic revenues are derived
from drugs. Two million people are employed in that
sector, transforming rural life in Afghanistan, forging
alliances with terrorism, the Taliban and other
warlords, and making their presence felt in the nascent
Afghan political institutions.

It is vital for the opium growers to find
alternative crops. Rural agriculture must be addressed
as a priority and efforts to counteract six years of
drought in Afghanistan must be undertaken, but drastic
measures must also be taken to punish drug traffickers.
If we do not wage a resolute battle to ensure that
opium-growing is essentially eradicated by 2010, our
ongoing concerns will be justified. The international
media are increasingly describing Afghanistan as a
major exporter of heroin, in spite of the presence of
international forces and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Unfortunately, that is all true and it tends to
undermine national and international efforts to stabilize
Afghanistan. I say this because Afghanistan's
accommodation with heroin is beginning to affect the
legitimacy of efforts to combat drug trafficking in the
Andean region and Latin America, and may do so
throughout the world in the future. As in other cases
before the Security Council, we must bear in mind the
fact that democracy, the rule of law and citizenship
cannot be established without a viable national
economy that is not sustained by drug trafficking.

That is why, if the Afghanistan Compact is to
achieve democracy and security for that country's
citizens, a viable Afghan national economy must be
established free of connections to the export of heroin
and opium. If Afghanistan's economy remains addicted
to heroin exports, the Compact will not work and
Afghanistan will again be threatened with collapse as
an ungovernable entity in the future. That would
besmirch the name of democracy around the world,
because democracy and heroin are incompatible.

As regards the proposed mandate for UNAMA,
my delegation notes that the issue of drug trafficking is
barely addressed. There may be reasons for that, but
my delegation should like to suggest that it would be
desirable for UNAMA to adopt the approach taken in
the London Compact to prioritize support for
combating drug trafficking as a cross-cutting issue in
the various areas covered by its mandate.

