Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of
this meeting. I am grateful to Ambassador Jones Parry
for his briefing, and to other countries for their
statements.

The West African subregion is endowed with rich
natural resources and a large population; it has a great
potential for economic development and prosperity.
And yet, for different reasons, many countries in the
region have, to varying degrees, been afflicted by
armed conflicts. Although the situation in most of the
region has improved markedly in the past year, the
countries of the region continue to face the arduous
task of post-conflict peace-building.

The proliferation of small arms and the use of
mercenaries and child soldiers continue to plague the
region, negatively affecting the development of the
entire region. How to help the countries of the region
to extricate themselves once and for all from the
vicious circle of conflict and poverty and to embark on
the road to peace and development is a long-term
challenge facing the region, as well as the international
community.

Experience in recent years has shown that the
dispatch of a visiting mission is an effective means for
the Council to gain further first-hand understanding of
the situation in West Africa, as well as to seek possible
solutions. Through the joint effort of all parties
concerned, this year's mission to the region has
achieved its expected goals. The report of the mission
(S/2004/525) contains many good recommendations
that may help promote the solution of problems in West
Africa. Those recommendations therefore deserve to be
studied seriously and implemented soon by the
Security Council. The useful ideas just proposed by
countries that were visited, as well as by other
interested countries and organizations, also deserve to
be studied by the Council.

The problems in West Africa transcend national
borders. Their solution calls for a regional, integrated
and comprehensive approach. China appreciates the
positive role played by the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union and other regional
and subregional organizations in that regard. China
supports the ECOWAS idea of establishing a stand-by
force. China also welcomes the holding in May of a
Mano River Union summit meeting, which we hope
will lead to the Union's revitalization. It is necessary
that the international community support, and work in
coordination with, those organizations in their efforts,
as well as to help the countries of the region to engage
in economic development and realize sustainable
development in order to tackle the causes of conflict at
their roots.

