Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): 1, too, want to
congratulate Venezuela for a very productive and busy
month. I will come back to that in a minute.

I want to talk a little about working methods and a
little bit about some of the key issues that we have dealt
with this month.

On working methods specifically, I want to thank
Venezuela for its initiative in convening the discussion
on the working methods of the subsidary bodies of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7620). We found that to be
one of the more interesting discussions we have had in
this Chamber. 1 am sure - in fact, I know from the
feedback I have received from other members of the
General Assembly - that they also found that exercise
to be very useful. What is clear from the debate and
the note we have now agreed on (S/2016/170) is that
there is room for improvement. We need to work
smarter and focus our efforts on discharging our
core responsibilities. For our part, New Zealand will
continue to strive for a behavioural change in the way
subsidiary bodies operate. Focusing on outcomes over
adherence to formalistic process would give our work
greater meaning.
There are two initiatives in particular that we
will look to take forward. The first is to establish a
transparent and inclusive process for the appointment
of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies. The second one,
which I find is particularly relevant to the work to
the two Committees that I chair, is to achieve greater
coordination between the subsidiary bodies and the
wider Council agenda. On that point, I would note that
the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) is one of the most dangerous situations
we deal with in this organ. It is very important that the
Council's consideration of that issue be informed by the
work of the Security Council Committee concerning
ISIL and Al-Qaida.

Therefore, I would encourage everybody who
takes part in our subsidiary bodies, whether they be
experts or the Ambassadors who chair them - and I
would encourage other Ambassadors to participate in
the proceedings occasionally, especially the Permanent
Members who do not have the privilege of chairing
those bodies - to carry forward the spirit of the note
we agreed upon in our day-to-day work. We do not need
a large overhaul of the system to ensure that our work is
effective, but we need to display some common sense.

Turning to the programme of work for
February - which, as others have noted, has been a
very busy month, one best exemplified by yesterday's
marathon effort under "Any other business" - we are
a strong supporter of the use of that item as a means
of addressing important questions. However, I believe
there comes a point when we need to pause and
contemplate as how many isues we can cope with in
the course of a single meeting. With regard to working
methods more generally, I want to pay tribute to what
Matthew Rycroft said in his statement. I agreed with all
he said about the way we need to structure our work and
how we can do better in working together.

As others have also said, one of the most important
questions we have touched on this month was yesterday's
discussion on sanctions against the Democratic People
Republic of Korea. We have been waiting for a product
on that for two months. It is to be acknowledged that
the working methods through which that product has
emerged does not square with our normal preference,
but we recognize that it is an unusual situation. We
want to pay tribute to the United States of America and
China for the very important work they have done. It is
a very important draft resolution. It is different. It sends
the important signal that we want to be sending, and so
we too are among those who would like it adopted as
soon as possible.

On Syria, we can be pleased - perhaps the better
word is "relieved" - that some positive progress has
been made at long last. The adoption of the cessation of
hostilities now provides some hope that a proper peace
process can be put in place and that finally peace can
be achieved in that country. In the meantime, we are
relieved that humanitarian access now seems to be on a
sounder footing, and we would hope that the populations
in the besieged towns will no longer feel that they are
being held to ransom as part of the political struggle
that is going on in that country.

We also want to thank the Council members for the
strong support given to our suggestion that the Council
consider a product on the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. We think that is an issue that needs looking
into next month, and we look forward to working with
other Council members on that idea.

Lastly, I welcome the fact that we have been able
to agree on the trip to West Africa, in particular to
visit Guinea-Bissau. Over a number of months, we
have been among others that have suggested that it is
important that the Council show its close engagement
with that country.

Let me conclude by commending, you, Rafael,
and your team. Not only have you been very busy,
but extremely gracious in the way you have cajoled us
along the course of the difficult work we have all been
engaged in. I think you have shown great dignity and
professionalism, so I thank you for that. And I wish
Angola all the best for next month.

