Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): The
delegation of the Republic of Korea welcomes the
convening of this open debate as a valuable
opportunity for non-members to contribute to the
deliberations of the Security Council on the
revitalization of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC).

Much progress has been made in the fight against
international terrorism since the adoption of the
landmark Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and
the subsequent establishment of the CTC. Undeniably,
the CTC continues to play a pivotal role in drawing the
attention of the international community to the threats
posed by international terrorism and in building
capacity at all levels to counter that scourge.
Notwithstanding the accomplishments of the CTC thus
far, the challenges ahead remain daunting, particularly
given the increasing opportunities for terrorist groups
to exploit the new technologies and networks of
globalization for their nefarious activities. In our View,
it is imperative to act now, to strengthen international
cooperation in this field on the basis of a unified,
multilateral and multifaceted strategy.

Against that backdrop, I would like to share
briefly some of the Republic of Korea's observations
on the report regarding the revitalization of the CTC
(S/2004/124).

First, we fully concur with the need to revitalize
the CTC with a view to strengthening the international
legal framework and establishing uniform benchmarks
for all States. In that context, the Republic of Korea
recently ratified two terrorism-related international
conventions, namely, the International Convention for
the Suppression of Terrorist Bombing and the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. That makes the Republic of
Korea a party to all 12 terrorism-related conventions
and protocols.

Secondly, recognizing the potential for regional
efforts to supplement and reinforce international efforts
in the fight against terrorism, we believe that the CTC
should be revitalized in a way that will enhance
cooperation and coordination at the international,
regional and sub-regional levels. In the absence of
regional conventions on terrorism in the Asian-Pacific
region, the Republic of Korea has worked to strengthen
mutual cooperation under the existing bilateral
framework.

Thirdly, we value the proposed new structure for
the CTC, which includes a plenary and a bureau as well
as a CTC Executive Directorate to be led by an
Executive Director. We believe that through the
implementation of this proposal, the CTC will be better
positioned to achieve its mandate.

Fourthly, we believe that the facilitation of
technical assistance should remain one of the key
objectives of a revitalized CTC. Acknowledging the
need to strengthen cooperation at the working level, my
Government has provided several capacity-building
programmes to support those countries that need
assistance in combating terrorism. Moreover, we will
continue to work in partnership with regional
organizations, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation and ASEAN Regional Forum, to broaden
capacity-building and promote closer regional
cooperation in this field.

In closing, my delegation wishes to extend its
unswerving support to the fight against international
terrorism and looks forward to working in close
cooperation with a revitalized Counter-Terrorism
Committee to that end.

