Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's open
debate on the situation of girls and boys in armed
conflict, in which more than 80 countries have
shown interest by asking to speak. We believe that
this is very important debate. We are grateful for the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui;
Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF; Ms. Julie Bodin; and Mr. Junior Nzita for
their testimony and their participation in this debate.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has acceded
to all United Nations conventions and protocols aimed
at effectively protecting boys and girls. In that regard,
our country condemns any violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
ibn the context of children in armed conflict, and
we call on all parties to meet their obligations under
the applicable provisions of international law. The
recruitment of girls and boys, whatever its form or
motivation, runs contrary to the better interests of those
young people and compromises their guaranteed right
to life and to development.

My country rejects all uses of children in armed
conflict and other abuses and violations committed
against the children thus affected. We deplore the
impunity that prevails in many areas of armed conflict,
where the parties persist in violating the relevant
provisions of applicable international law. We firmly
support the adoption of effective measures to ensure
the demobilization, rehabilitation, physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of child
soldiers.

Venezuela considers it tragic and ethically
questionable that a significant number of girls and boys
in situations of armed conflict live and grow up in a
culture of horror and violence. That situation affects
those children's ability to build their country's future
in a spirit of peace and sustainable development and
compromises their future. In various reports of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, it can be
seen that the situation of children affected by armed
conflict throughout the world remains a source of major
concern. We regret that 2014 has been the worst year for
children in situations of armed conflict.

My country repudiates as robustly as possible the
atrocities and abuses against and large-scale abductions
of children in conflict areas perpetrated by extremist
and terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida, among others.
The situation is unacceptable and threatens our very
humanity. The persistence of cases of forced recruitment
or mass abductions by non-State actors, with a view
to compelling children to participate in fighting or
support work for armed conflict, is an ongoing reality.
Nevertheless, in a significant number of cases, children
join in the armed conflict because they are forced to
do so as the only option, given their socioeconomically
vulnerable situation and the abuse, discrimination and
exclusion they face as a consequence of war.

We believe it imperative to move beyond the
exclusively punitive approach in order to address the
problem comprehensively by dealing with the root
causes of conflict. Preventing the use of children in
armed conflict and guaranteeing their protection and
rights in such situations with a view to reintegration
will be achieved only through adequate social, political
and economic conditions.

When we privilege the military option and invoke
national interests to carry out military interventions
or deal with conflict situations, thereby promoting the
proliferation of non-State armed groups, extremists and
terrorists, we create conditions conducive to the abuse
and violation of the human rights of girls and boys. The
funding and permanent flow of arms to such groups
must cease. The use of double standards in dealing with
those issues undermines international efforts to protect
children in armed conflict.

My country supports accountability for violations
against children in armed conflicts. No one can, whether
non-State armed groups or State military forces, is
exempt. In that regard, we cannot fail to mention the
situation in the Palestinian occupied territory, where
more than 300 children remain detained without being
accorded minor status, and are subjected to cruel,
inhumane or degrading treatment by Israel.

We consider it appropriate that in all peace
processes, ceasefires and implementing mechanisms,
the parties and mediators include the issue of child
protection as a required condition and principle. Child
protection must be an integral element of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, with the
necessary resources and appropriate training prior to
deployment.

Measures to encourage non-State actors to
undertake commitments to protecting children in
armed conflict should be adapted on a case-by-case
basis. We should remember that national Governments
are primarily responsible for protecting children
within their territory. That is why the United Nations
and regional organizations must work with the States
concerned and in close cooperation with the respective
authorities.

Finally, Venezuela calls upon those States that
have not yet ratified the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict to accede to those legal
instruments.

