The President (Spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Atran
for his briefing.

I would like to express my deepest thanks and
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon for
his efforts to realize the goals of the United Nations.

It is an honour to be with other Council members
today while my country, the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, assumes the presidency of the Security Council
for the second time during our current term. I am
particularly pleased to be attending this debate on youth
in conflict zones and the role ofyouth in peace-making.
The world is facing a formidable challenge, namely,
terrorism and extremism, which may be the greatest
challenge to world peace and security - with youth
being their prime victims.

Today, we are facing a scourge that threatens the
entire world. No country is immune from the threat
of terrorism, whose enemy is humanity, regardless of
religion, gender, age or nationality. The war on terror
concerns us all. In the past few decades, the world has
witnessed events and conflicts and their consequences
that have made an increasing number of young people
more susceptible to fall into the darkness of extremism
and the traps set by deceitful people. Young people
are the most susceptible to voluntary or involuntary
recruitment by military, terrorist and extremist groups.
Accordingly, urgent measures must be taken to put an
end to that bloodshed.

More than half of the world's population is below
the age of 30, the majority of whom live in developing

countries. Studies show that poverty, unemployment,
ignorance and weak familial ties create fertile ground
for extremist thought and dismal ideas. If we examine
the relevant data, we will find that youth are facing a
decisive challenge: across our globe, there are nearly
73 millionjobless young men and women and more than
14 million young refugees and displaced persons. In
addition, the majority of the victims of armed conflicts
are young people.

While youth represent the most vulnerable group in
the present situation with its attending consequences,
they can also have the strongest impact on the present
and the future. That has been evident in the recent
events in my region - the Arab region. As a young
man who is part of that generation, I take part in
debates about the challenges facing my generation and
the need to empower youth. There is much talk about
youth being a marginalized segment of society. Allow
me to say that they are not a marginalized group, but
rather a targeted group. They are targeted for their
huge self-confidence and potential ability to change the
world. With that drive, they look for opportunities to
invest their potential, but when they face a dead-end,
their ambition is transformed into frustration, which
other groups use to fuel their own agendas. We have
to fill that vacuum that is being exploited by enemies
of humanity, by building on the potential of youth and
empowering them to achieve their ambitions. That
can be accomplished by equipping young people with
quality education, proper job opportunities and a
decent living.

We are in a race to invest in the hearts and minds
as well as the capabilities of youth. The ideologies of
darkness can reach where armies cannot, as modern
communications have provided all voices with an
opportunity to reach every ear willing to listen. Young
people comprise the largest group of Internet users,
and extremist groups spread their poisonous ideology
across social media platforms - luring victims into
their dark world under religious pretexts and promises
of heavenly rewards. To that end, they use appealing
high-tech videos that fascinate and mislead young
people by glorifying the crimes of terrorist as great
achievements. We have to stand up to that threat, which
takes advantage of our youth's potential to create an
inhumane world. We have to direct our energies away
from answering the question "What should we do?"
toward the question of "How should we do it?" We must
empower young people to fight for their own future
by giving them the tools to address their generation
through electronic communication platforms. They
need to form intellectual networks and alliances that
can reach their peers and lead the youth to adopt
the values of co-existence, respect for diversity and
rejection of violence.

Allow me to declare the readiness of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan to host the first international
conference on the role of youth in building sustainable
peace, in partnership with the United Nations, in August.
The goal ofthe event is to enhance the capacity ofyoung
people to build peace, and confront extremism and
terrorism. The youth of today need all ofthose gathered
around this table, who are the policymakers who can
impact world peace and security, the decision makers
who can partner with young people in peacebuilding
efforts. We must not allow them to become the targets
of Violence and destruction.

The generation represented here is also in Charge
of developing education, development and economic
policies. We have before us the largest generation of
young people in history, and the greatest opportunity
to build and empower communities where reason
is law and ethics are the constitution, where peace,
equality, respect, dialogue, coexistence and acceptance
of differences are all core values. Those are the
foundations of our common humanity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the members of the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Cities, Youth and
Sports of France.

