Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning, as well as General Toure of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and Mrs. Ukonga of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission. The United Kingdom welcomes this
discussion of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, and I am
grateful to you, Madam President, for the leadership
you have shown in bringing this issue to the Council.

The threat that piracy and maritime robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea poses to the lives of crews and the
ongoing threat it poses to safe trade within the region
deserve our attention. The United Kingdom is
concerned by the increasing number of attacks and the
level of violence linked to piracy and maritime armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. While attacks are
currently focused on the waters of Nigeria and Benin,
the geographical scope of the attacks is expanding,
posing a greater threat to the region as a whole. Recent
reporting suggests that there have been approximately
27 reported piracy attacks this year, although many
analysts think that as few as one in 10 attacks is
actually reported.

The severity of the issue clearly calls for a
coordinated response. We therefore welcome the
initiatives of regional States, especially the joint
patrolling recently agreed by Nigeria and Benin. Strong
and robust action by military and law-enforcement
agencies is necessary to counter the threat of piracy.

This is a valuable opportunity to hear how
countries in the region are taking steps to tackle the
problem and to consider how best we can support their
efforts. Attacks by pirates not only endanger lives but,
additionally, are beginning to jeopardize oil and gas
exports, as well as dramatically increasing insurance
premiums, which is raising the cost of doing business
across the region.

It is therefore in the interests of all regional
partners to work closely with regional bodies such as
Economic Community of Central African States and
ECOWAS to ensure that action is taken now. We would
encourage more States to follow the examples of
Nigeria and Benin and undertake joint maritime patrols
with their neighbours and regional partners to
collectively suppress all illicit maritime activity.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a different model
to the one used by Somali pirates. Attacks in the Gulf
of Guinea have often been more violent, with the main
focus on offloading and selling their cargo. However,
drawing on lessons learned from the international
community's experience in countering piracy off East
Africa will be very valuable. Good examples from that
experience include the role of information stations and
coastal law-enforcement agencies, which have together
warned and steered ships away from potential attacks.

Regional action requires international support,
and the United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts
of the International Maritime Organization and the
Maritime Organization of West and Central Africa
(MOWCA) to increase the integration of regional coast
guard functions through closer coordination and
information-sharing.

In an effort to boost regional capability and
develop robust and coordinated maritime security, the
United Kingdom will continue to provide ongoing
regional maritime support. As General Toure pointed
out, in the past year the United Kingdom, in support of
the African Partnership Station, has provided maritime
security, support and training to Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, and has
made a commitment to participate in future regional
capacity initiatives.

The United Kingdom is also supporting the
European Union's work with Cape Verde, Ghana and
Senegal on a project called SEACOP, which develops
national capacity to set up specialist intelligence and
investigation units located in seaports or sensitive
coastal areas to reinforce seaport capacities, develop
regional maritime intelligence and organize regional
training. We will also be supporting Ghana, with the
assistance of the shipping industry, in hosting a
maritime trade information-sharing centre that will
provide information and warnings to commercial
shipping travelling in the Gulf of Guinea. The United
Kingdom's Maritime Trade Organization helped fight
piracy off the coast of Somalia by carrying out a
similar function.
In conclusion, the first step to stopping piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea must come from the regional
countries working more closely together. The recent
conference in Germany, which brought together
representatives of the African Union, the International
Maritime Organization, MOWCA and the maritime
representatives of countries in the economic
communities of West and Central African States to
discuss this issue, was a useful way of bringing
together all those who must work collectively to
address this problem. It is now essential that an active
regional approach be pursued. For our part, we are
ready to engage on a Security Council resolution which
supports this regional approach.

