Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, which should be a source of pride four your
friendly country. I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support, for their briefings to the Council on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

These deliberations of the Council come towards
the end of 2008, as we are preparing to receive a new
year and the Sudan is looking forward with
determination to put an end to the conflict in Darfur as
soon as possible, especially as we have a
comprehensive and integrated national plan based on
the decisions and recommendations of the Sudan
People's Forum. This, as I have assured the Council
before, is not an isolated effort nor is it parallel to the
regional or international efforts. It is indeed a
translation of a common national Sudanese position,
shared by all the opposition political parties and the
Government in the Sudan. It also forms a basis for the
promising regional efforts presented in the Arab-
African initiative led by the brotherly State of Qatar, as
well as the mandate of the Joint Chief Mediator
Mr. Djibril Bassole, namely, to arrive at an early peace
next year, if all these initiatives can be heeded by those
armed groups that reject the option of peace.

I would like to inform this Council that the
normalization of relations with the neighbouring State
of Chad is moving forward smoothly, and it will have
its positive impacts regarding lasting peace and
stability in Darfur. Needless to say, the Security
Council is expected to support these efforts and to
provide prompt movement and serious action with
regard to the leaders of the armed groups. It is our hope
that the Council will invite Mr. Bassole to New York in
the near future to review his work during the past
month and what he intends to do in the future. It is our
hope that Mr. Bassole will come and brief this Council
on efforts towards the peaceful settlement of the crisis
in Darfur.

The third section of the report before us, which
deals with UNAMID deployment in Darfur, clearly and
decisively shows that the Government of Sudan has
fulfilled all of its obligations regarding cooperation and
facilitation of UNAMID deployment in Darfur. During
its previous deliberations on the issue and at this
meeting the Council has been briefed on the great
efforts that are being made to facilitate the deployment
of the operation, whereby we have agreed to establish a
UNAMID liaison office in Al-Fashir headed by a high-
level official and including all Government institutions
and agencies to ensure the flow, speed of all
procedures and the implementation of what was agreed
upon. That was decided by the tripartite mechanism
that Ms. Malcorra talked about and where we have on
all the necessary arrangements to follow up and
implement the decisions of the previous meeting,
including preparations to deploy light tactical
helicopters. This leaves no room for any allegations
that the Government of the Sudan is complicating the
deployment of the operation. I would like to assure you
that my Government is fully committed to continued
cooperation with the United Nations in order to
implement 60 per cent of the development by the end
of this year and 80 per cent by March 2009.

We would like to assure this Council that our
country is fully committed to the ceasefire declared by
the President of the Republic and to pushing it forward;
we reiterate our country's commitment to that ceasefire
declaration here today. Some movements, gangs and
thieves have carried out a series of bandit attacks on
police units since the ceasefire was announced. That
was an attempt to provoke the Government.

It is our hope that the Security Council will play
its role by putting pressure on armed groups to accept
the ceasefire and that they will thus respect Security
Council statements and resolutions.

As for the humanitarian aspect, we thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
08-66225

John Holmes, for his direct and clear briefing the
Council on 3 December. He stated that the armed
groups in Darfur have started targeting humanitarian
convoys and have, on a regular basis, been hijacking
cars and stealing other items and taking them across
the border to sell them. Thus any talk about obstacles
impeding humanitarian activities must take into
consideration these practices, which have become a
lucrative business for armed groups.

We appreciate the fact that the report of the
Secretary-General before you welcomes, in paragraph
42, the 18 November declaration of the Government of
the Sudan allowing for the extension of the provision
of humanitarian assistance until 31 January 2010.

I refer to the progress report presented by the
Government of the Sudan on the workshop, which
included the United Nations and the donor community,
last November, a report that we deposited with the
Council and which reflects the effort of the Sudan
regarding the humanitarian aspect.

The several positive developments on all tracks
and the full cooperation of the Government of the
Sudan in recent months must be supported and
appreciated by this Council. This Council should
protect the peace process from any threats or
irresponsible adventures like those of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. This Council must
recognize that this matter has also been raised by the
African Union, the principal partner of the United
Nations in Darfur. Other regional and international
organizations have also declared that the peace process
should be spared such adventures.

While we, once again, call your attention to our
cooperation with the Security Council, we hope that
the Council will record for history that it will side with
peace and stability in the Sudan and that it is possible
to make 2009 a year for peace and stability in the
Sudan and the entire region.

