Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for organizing today's open debate
and, in particular His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein for chairing the meeting and for his inspiring
words.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the Head of Delegation of the European Union.
I wish to make the following remarks in my national
capacity.

Today's open debate enables us to think more
strategically about the role of youth in countering
violent extremism. According to the latest statistics, the
current youth population - people between the ages
of 10 and 24 - is the largest ever, comprising some
1.8 billion people, 600 million of whom are girls. Most
ofthese 1.8 billion live in developing countries. They are
the world's best hope for addressing our most pressing
challenges in the long term, particularly the question
of how to counter violent extremism and promote
peace. As the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Mr. Paolo Gentiloni, has
stated repeatedly, the fight against violent extremism
has to be waged at different levels - in terms of
narrative, values and financing.

This brings me to the second underlying theme of
today's debate: the importance of prevention. In the
past decade, extremist ideologies have increased their
appeal to youth through communication campaigns
that target this specific demographic. It is both a moral
obligation and a strategic investment for us to turn the
tide. By countering the appeal of Violent and extremist
groups among young people, we will deny these groups
access to their most valuable resource, pulling the rug
out from under their feet. We should therefore not be
asking ourselves what role young people can play in
countering violent extremism and promoting peace. We
should be asking how young people themselves can be
the heart ofthe solution. To this end, we have identified
areas that we should be targeting.

Our first area of focus should be education. The
abduction of students and the targeting of schools and
universities by Violent and extremist groups are a clear
sign of their weakness. Culture and education are their
worst enemy. At the same time, however, they are our
best allies in promoting tolerance, inclusiveness and
open-mindedness. In the wake of the horrific attack on
the Garissa campus in Kenya, Minister Gentiloni paid
an official Visit to Nairobi to renew our full support for
Kenya in that hour of tragedy, pay respect to the victims
and signal that the fight against terrorism and the
protection of the right to education are a shared value.
As tangible proof of our friendship, we have offered
scholarships to Garissa campus students in order to
send the message that guaranteeing access to quality
education, no matter what circumstances, is our best
counter-attack to violent extremism.

Secondly, we need to focus on human rights and
justice. To promote peaceful, inclusive andjust societies,
we must defend and support the shared values under
attack. Human rights must be returned to the centre of
the agenda. In this respect, we must not underestimate
the preventive power of justice by upholding the rule of
law and accountability.

Thirdly, socioeconomic development is essential.
Unfulfilledexpectations,unemployment,underemployment
and inequality are all factors that have the potential
to drive idle and dissatisfied young people down
the path to embracing radical, violent ideologies. In
defining the post-2015 agenda, we must be mindful of
the positive impact that a universal, innovative, easily
communicated agenda could have on youth living in
developing countries.

Fourthly, we must focus on private/public partnerships,
including media. The proactive involvement of civil
society is essential for us to succeed. Governments
and the international community have to provide an
enabling environment and lead with projects. But a
joint effort is needed to fill in the framework. Social
media has a special role to play in countering the
narrative proposed by violent extremist groups, which
makes it vital that this issue be addressed through the
Framework of Analysis for the Prevention of Atrocity
Crimes, which Italy supports. Social media can have
both a negative and a positive effect. It can aggravate
the risk of atrocity crimes, by spreading hate speech and
inciting people to commit such crimes, but it can also
curb messages of intolerance, hatred and Violence. The
new Framework provides analytical tools for detecting
early warning signs through the examination of the
socioeconomic conditions affecting young people.

Lastly, we need to focus on empowerment.
Sometimes the problem is not the message but the
messenger. Empowerment of youth and youth-oriented
organizations is essential to promoting positive role
models, responding to violence, and delegitimizing
extremist messages. Priority should be given to
empowering those 600 million young women.

It is in this light that Italy proudly supports the
Change the World Model United Nations. Every year,
our Mission organizes a public event that brings together
young people from all over the world to discuss the
three main pillars of the United Nations: international
peace and security, human rights and development.
Just a month ago, more than 1,500 young people from
over 90 countries met at the General Assembly to
discuss how to make the world a safer, better place.
By promoting this event, we are planting a seed for the
future. It is up to us to assure that this seed has the
proper international environment in which to grow and
develop.

