The President (spoke in Spanish): Following
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Coordinator of the United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to support the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto,
collectively the Peace Agreement
(S/1995/999/annex), as well as the relevant
decisions of the Peace Implementation Council.

"The Security Council takes this
opportunity to express its deep appreciation for
the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and the
the

personnel of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which
includes the International Police Task Force, for
the contributions to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. The Council highly appreciates
the achievements of cooperative efforts in
bringing about the successful conclusion of
UNMIBH's mandate, which will expire on 31
December 2002, and expresses its thanks to all of
the countries which took part in and contributed
to the accomplishments of this Mission.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision of the European Union (EU) to send a
Police Mission (EUPM) to Bosnia and
Herzegovina from 1 January 2003, as part of a
broader rule of law approach, as well as the close
coordination between all those concerned to
ensure a seamless transition of responsibilities
from the IPTF to the EUPM, with the
participation of the interested States which are
not members of the EU.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
primary responsibility for the further successful
implementation of the Peace Agreement lies with
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
themselves and that the continued willingness of
the international community and major donors to
assume the political, military and economic
burden of implementation and reconstruction
efforts will be determined by the compliance and
active participation by all the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing the
Peace Agreement and all the reforms needed to
rebuild a civil society.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the principles of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity and inviolability of the
borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council
encourages a continued commitment by Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the promotion of peace and
stability in the region, including through
enhanced political and economic cooperation.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to keep the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina under review. The Council invites
the EU to keep it regularly informed as
appropriate on the activities of EUPM."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2002/33.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
