The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
recent developments in Cambodia, including violence,
which have the effect of jeopardizing continued
progress of the Cambodian peace process, and calls
for an immediate end to the fighting.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need to
respect the principles of national unity, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Kingdom of
Cambodia.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties to
respect fully their commitments under the Paris
Agreements on Cambodia. It urges them to resolve
their differences through peaceful means and political
dialogue and in accordance with the spirit of national
reconciliation.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
again to ensure the effective and smooth operation
of constitutional institutions.

"The Security Council condemns all acts of
violence and calls on all parties to ensure the safety
and security of persons, and to respect the principles
and rules of humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reminds the Cambodian
Government of its public undertaking that free and
fair legislative elections would be held in May 1998.
It stresses the importance of this electoral process.

"The Security Council welcomes and supports
all efforts to promote dialogue among the parties,
including those undertaken by the countries of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and other Signatory States of the Paris Agreements
on Cambodia.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l997/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.35 p.m.
