Mr. Singh (India): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on this initiative to hold
this open meeting of the Security Council on an issue of
concern to all troop-contributing countries.

All of us today seem to be in agreement that the land-
mine crisis is a tragedy of mammoth proportions. As
several other speakers have pointed out, conservative
estimates indicate that there are 110 million land-mines
littered in five continents, claiming 500 victims a week. The
expanding dimensions of the crisis are graphically evident
from the fact that while the international community is able
to clear about 100,000 mines annually, 2 million to
5 million new mines are laid during the same period.

Land-mines are, of course, a legacy of conflicts and
wars, but their impact lingers on long after the guns have
been silenced. Not only do land-mines maim about 20,000
people and kill 10,000 civilians annually, but they have
been seen to have a devastating and serious negative effect
on socio-economic development. They have disrupted social
services, made agriculture risky, crippled essential
infrastructure, prevented people from returning home, and
intensified the problems of hunger and poverty. The
physical, psychological, social and economic consequences
of land-mines all therefore need to be addressed by any
mine clearance or demining programme.

Viewed from this perspective, demining in the context
of United Nations peace-keeping operations represents one
limited facet of the campaign against the indiscriminate use
of land-mines. As the Secretary-General noted in his report
to the fiftieth session of the General Assembly (A/50/408),
peace-keeping forces have engaged in demining for two
purposes: first, to provide for a secure environment to
engage in peace-keeping and, secondly, when demining is
necessary to carry out other parts of their mandates.

Indian troops involved in United Nations-mandated
peace-keeping operations have been associated with
demining activities since the Congo operations of 1961 to
1963. More recently, in operations in Cambodia and
Somalia, Indian peace-keeping contingents have included
specialists in demining who have been involved in mine
breaching and tactical mine clearance. In Cambodia, Indian
experts helped in the training of civilians and worked
closely with non-governmental organizations in developing
a data base, undertaking area fencing and sensitizing the
local population. In the largest current United Nations
peace-keeping operation, in Angola, the Indian
engineering contingent has been involved in the opening
of the main arteries so as to facilitate the movement of
the peace-keepers.

Indian infantry battalions involved in peace-keeping
operations include demining experts as integral elements.
This is in keeping with India's long-standing commitment
to support United Nations demining efforts. It is also in
the spirit of that commitment that India made a voluntary
contribution of $50,000 in kind to United Nations
demining operations, in the form of a broad range of
services to be rendered by Indian experts. These would
include establishing mine control centres and fielding
mine survey teams, mine clearance supervisory teams and
advisory teams, which will be fully equipped.

Demining is a hazardous business. In the service of
the international community, Indian troops have suffered
casualties, as have troops from other countries. However,
given the fact that in some peace-keeping operations the
"Blue Helmets" represent the only available organized
group with the capacity to undertake demining, they are
saddled with these tasks as intrinsic to their broader goals.

None the less, while defining the parameters of
demining in peace-keeping operations it also needs to be
remembered that mine clearance by the military is by its
very nature constrained, on various counts. These include,
for example, the fact that the availability of time is
limited, as demining is a means to achieve other goals
rather than a goal in itself; secondly, the requirements for
the acceptability of a military demining operation do not
include the identification of all mines and their
destruction, but the task is more in the nature of mine
breaching; thirdly, the limitations proposed by the
financial implications of major involvement of the
military in demining activities in United Nations peace-
keeping operations in an era of financial stringency and
mounting United Nations debt to major troop contributors;
fourthly, the probability of duplication of the efforts of
specialized agencies which are already addressing the
problem in a multifaceted manner as part of a long-term
development activity to improve the living conditions of
people and bring about rehabilitation, whereas peace-
keeping operations by the very nature of their mandate
are of a finite, limited duration and can hardly be
expected to take a long-term view; fifthly, the inherent
limitations and difficulties referred to by the Secretary-
General in his report (A/50/408) regarding transfer of
capacities based on a primarily military culture to civilian

 

and national control; and finally, the needs of major
initiatives in the realm of demining by the United Nations
need not always coalesce with the requirements of
mounting a peace-keeping operation.

In effect, demining is not conducive to a merely
military solution; nor can it be restricted to peace-keeping
operations. In fact, one of the first United Nations demining
initiatives was launched in 1989 in Afghanistan, where no
peace-keeping mandate existed. Demining activities in
Cambodia and Mozambique have continued to be a major
focus of United Nations involvement, long after the peace-
keeping operations in those Member States had ended.

The impact of land-mines on the economic and social
activities of an affected area makes demining, as the
Secretary-General has stated, an integral part of the post-
conflict peace-building of a nation. To be successful and
sustainable, demining operations need to address the totality
of the problem in an integrated manner, and address all
dimensions simultaneously. They therefore need to be
viewed in the light of economic and social development
activities to rehabilitate and improve living conditions of
people in countries debilitated by the scourge of land-
mines.

It bears to re-emphasizing in this context that there are
intrinsic and structural differences between peace-keeping
operations and peace-building activities. A continuum is no
doubt possible in some instances. However, in so far as the
United Nations system is concerned, the responsibility for
post-conflict peace-building activities has necessarily to
pass to the General Assembly, given its overall mandate
and responsibilities under the Charter.

Tackling the land-mine problem, while on one level
requiring the pooling of our resources to launch demining
in a comprehensive manner, also requires, on other levels,
the strengthening of the norms against land-mines through
specific steps such as the prohibition of transfers and the
prohibition of use in internal conflicts. Such collective and
broad-ranging steps will cumulatively make it feasible to
move towards our shared goal of confronting the challenges
of this massive problem.

