I would like to thank Special Representative Fall for today's briefing to the Council on the invaluable work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in the Central African region. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/463) highlights a number of concerns for the Central African region and a number of threats to regional peace and security. The arrival of the pandemic has only made matters worse. A pattern of terrorism and violent extremism persists in the area, with Boko Haram increasing its attacks in Chad and northern Cameroon. Targeting civilians and taking advantage of the pandemic by intensifying attacks is especially deplorable. Furthermore, I would like to condemn the attacks against humanitarian and medical services workers - people who are trying to alleviate the growing humanitarian crisis and save lives by curbing the spread of diseases, including measles, cholera and now, also the coronavirus disease. I would like to express my condolences to the people of Cameroon and Chad for those attacks. Speaking of Cameroon, it is good to hear of the steps taken by the Government to implement the recommendations from the Major National Dialogue. However, it remains very worrying to hear of the deteriorating humanitarian and human rights situation, in particular the human rights violations and abuses committed against women and children. In the light of that and the pandemic, it is more important than ever to remove impediments to humanitarian access and to ensure that human rights organizations can work in the country without hindrance. Furthermore, there must be accountability for violations and abuses if we are to avoid the establishment of a culture of impunity, which would only breed more violence. Estonia continues to support UNOCA's efforts in Cameroon to build political momentum towards reconciliation and peace. We hope that improvements in Cameroon's political situation will quickly pave the way for enhanced security and human rights in the country. The complex and fragile situation in Central Africa is exacerbated by the effects of climate change, as is evident in the record floods that have affected hundreds of thousands of people in the region. There is no denying that climate change will continue to undermine international peace and security and that this threat will only increase without targeted action. We commend UNOCA for addressing this issue in the report. TAT
