The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of October, I should
like to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Sir Emyr Jones Parry,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of September 2003. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Sir Emyr Jones Parry
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 5 October 2003 from the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2003/939)

Letter dated 5 October 2003 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations

addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2003/943)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Israel in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 5 October
2003 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to the United Nations, which reads as
follows:

"On behalf of the members of the League of

Arab States, I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to address the Council under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure in the
course of the Council's consideration of the item
entitled 'Letter dated 5 October 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council'."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/94l.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to the request contained
in a letter dated 5 October from the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.


