The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of China. China thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General David Shearer for his briefing. I also listened carefully to the briefing made by Ms. Sunday. The political process in South Sudan has recently made positive headway. China welcomes the establishment, on schedule, of a transitional coalition Government and congratulates South Sudan on that achievement. We commend the leadership and courage demonstrated by the leaders of South Sudan. That marks an important step forward in the country's peace process with the active mediation by the international community, especially by the African countries and regional organizations concerned. In that regard, I would like to highlight the following three points. First, it is important to fully respect the leadership of the Government of South Sudan. The parties in South Sudan are primarily responsible for implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. International partners should strengthen engagement and communication with South Sudanese parties, especially the Government, listen to and heed their input and suggestions and provide financial, material and technical support to ensure stability and security, as needed by South Sudan. Secondly, it is vital to continue supporting the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in its role as the main player in the area of mediation. The international community should intensify coordination with IGAD and the African Union, support their mediation efforts and help all parties in South Sudan build greater mutual trust and show more responsibility and goodwill so that consensus can be reached as soon as possible on all outstanding issues. Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance to South Sudan must be maintained. At present, the focus should be on helping South Sudan address its development problems, assisting the return and resettlement of persons in camps for internally displaced people and expanding investment in areas such as agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education and medical services to help the people of South Sudan rebuild their homes and resume development efforts. China applauds the important contributions made by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to the maintenance of peace and stability in the country, supports the renewal of the Mission's mandate and continues to provide assistance to facilitate the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and the peace process so that the people of South Sudan can reap peace dividends as soon as possible. As in the past, China will support the peace process in South Sudan and provide assistance as required. We stand ready to work with the international community constructively to help South Sudan maintain peace and stability and achieve socioeconomic development. I resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
