Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): I wish to thank Ambassador
Oh Joon, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), for his briefing today.

Nigeria knows that not all countries have the
capacity to meet their obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). International cooperation will therefore be vital
to filling the capacity gaps. It is for that reason that
we welcome the importance the Committee attaches
to matching requests for assistance with offers. We
believe that greater effectiveness in making this match
will significantly enhance the capacity of Member
States to comply with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004). We share the view that the Committee
must begin work on the comprehensive review of
implementation in line with resolution 1977 (2011). We
look forward to seeing the Committee's plan for the
conduct of the review when its fourteenth programme
of work is submitted to the Council in January 2015.

Our deep appreciation goes to all contributors to
the United Nations Trust Fund that supports the work
of the Committee. We note the importance of those
contributions to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

We should also be reminded of the vital link between
resolution 1540 (2004) and the total elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction. The continued existence
of these weapons, particularly nuclear weapons,
should lead to discussion on their non-proliferation.
In that context, my delegation wishes to encourage all
States that possess those weapons - and we reiterate,
particularly nuclear weapons - should commit
themselves to disarming and to the total elimination
of such weapons. The Council should not have two
standards - one for those possessing nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction, and another for
others. It is very important for us to have a uniform
approach to the elimination of weapons and to stopping
their proliferation.

As this is the last briefing of Ambassador Oh to
the Council in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Nigerian delegation would like to commend him for his
adroit leadership and for his contribution to moving the
non-proliferation agenda forward.

