Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Madam President, on convening
this important and timely debate. We also extend our
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson; the Director-General of Reporters Without
Borders, Mr. Christophe Deloire; and Ms. Mariane
Pearl, for their insightful briefings.

This debate is particularly significant considering
the increasing risks and threats to both journalists and
media workers. In 2014 alone, reports indicate that
61 journalists were killed and 221 were imprisoned.
Those are concerning trends, considering the
obligations of all parties to an armed conflict to adhere
to international humanitarian and human rights law,
as provided in the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
Additional Protocols of 1977 and other international
instruments.

South Africa calls on all parties to an armed conflict
to restrain from killing civilians, including journalists,
in conflict situations and to ensure full respect and
protection. We therefore would like to commend the
presidency's initiative, as well as various efforts of the
Secretary-General, to raise particular attention to the
plight of j ournalists through underlining the importance
of putting in place mechanisms that will further ensure
their safety during periods of armed conflict.

My delegation would like to reiterate its view
that the protection of civilians, including journalists,
from the scourge of armed conflict is at the core of the
maintenance of international peace and security. South
Africa is fully committed to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and continues to support a normative
and legal framework for enhancing such protection.

My delegation is also mindful that attacks against
journalists and the growing number of casualties
among journalists could deter them from accepting
assignments and exercising their right to seek and
disseminate information, to the detriment of citizens
to be informed of various conflict situations around
the world. The dissemination of information is also
critical to the work of important decision-making
bodies, such as the Security Council, that are tasked
with the primary responsibility of the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as the wider
international community.

It is important to note that the Security Council has
called for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
and specifically addressed the protection ofjournalists.
In resolution 1738 (2006), all attacks againstjournalists,
media professionals and associated personnel in armed
conflicts are condemned, and the resolution calls upon
all parties to put an end to such practices. In that regard,
we fully support the idea of reinforcing accountability
measures, such as the strengthening of national judicial
institutions, as well as ensuring that the Rome Statute
addresses the challenges of today.

As much as this issue has drawn international
attention, more remains to be done by the judicial
systems within States to combat the culture of impunity
and holding perpetrators of attacks against journalists
accountable for their actions. In South Africa,
freedom of expression is very important because
South Africans fought tirelessly and relentlessly to
obtain such freedoms. With the advent of democracy
in South Africa, we were able to develop a remarkable
constitution that enshrines the freedom of the media
and freedom of expression. The rights of journalists are
fully protected by the law and that is displayed by the
vibrancy of the media and the many media outlets that
disseminate information to the general public on a daily
basis without fear or favour.

