Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): When the Security Council, in resolutions 918
(1994), 997 (1995) and 1011 (1995), imposed an embargo
on the sale or delivery of weapons and related materiel to
Rwanda, under Chapter VII of the Charter, it was for the
purpose, inter alia, of putting an end to the conflict that had
caused incalculable human suffering in that African
country.

However, despite those important measures taken by
the Council, Rwanda continues to provide fertile ground for
armed incursions and war, which are the logical
consequence of lack of respect for those measures and, in
particular, lack of the will to cooperate on the part of
certain parties concerned. Guinea-Bissau is therefore
extremely concerned over the allegations of sales or supply
of weapons and related materiel to former Rwandan
government forces, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
letter dated 13 March 1996 addressed to the President of
the Security Council, as well as in the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry annexed to that letter
and in the interim report of the Commission of Inquiry
dated 17 January 1996.

Guinea-Bissau is also concerned over the statement by
the Commission of Inquiry that certain Rwandan elements
are receiving military training for the purpose of conducting
destabilizing incursions into Rwanda.

Despite the fact that the Commission of Inquiry has
not yet been able to investigate thoroughly those allegations
of violations of the arms embargo, it continues to deserve
our full confidence. We thank it, congratulate it on the good
work done and encourage it to continue to work along the
same lines.

The radio broadcasts that disseminate hatred and fear
in the region are also a continuing cause of concern. We
therefore appeal once again to all States to cooperate with
the countries in the region in order to halt those
broadcasts without delay, in keeping with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the Declaration of
Heads of State of the Great Lakes region, adopted on 29
November 1995.

In this connection, it is our view that the States of
the Great Lakes region have a very important role to play
in the Rwandan conflict and in the region in general. We
thus hope that the decisions they have taken at regional
conferences, and in particular that taken in Tunis on 18
March 1996, will be implemented effectively and that
each will ensure that its country is not used by militias or
by former Rwandan government forces for military
training or the sale or delivery of weapons.

Bearing these considerations in mind, we will vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us.

