Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I would also like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Chairpersons
of the counter-terrorism committees for their
informative briefings.

Today's meeting is an opportunity to put out a
call for effective and collective action in the fight
against terrorism around the world. That is an
imperative for the international community. Divided,
we cannot address the core challenges of terrorism;
united, we can; and for the sake of our children and our
common security, we also must do so.

Last September, the Security Council adopted an
outcome document to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
It highlighted the close links between terrorists and
criminal networks, illustrating the clear connection
among terrorist activity, money-laundering and illegal
arms and narcotics trafficking. Time and again, we see
that terrorists will take advantage of any weakness in
governance and international cooperation to advance
their aims.

A gap in any State's counter-terrorism capacity is
a weak link that can be exploited, with potentially
devastating consequences for the rest of the world. We
must face that challenge together. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides an
important framework for collective action. Each and
every Member State must recognize its role in
advancing the full implementation of that Strategy,
along with all other relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The recent global survey by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) of the
implementation of the resolution (see S/2011/463, annex) illustrates the great challenges that still lie
ahead. Large areas of the globe remain vulnerable.
Many States have failed to enact national counter-
terrorism legislation that meets international standards.
Issues such as border control, incitement and the
financing of terrorism remain pressing concerns.
Like the illicit trade in arms, drugs and persons,
terrorism and radicalization take place in areas where
the rule of law is dormant. We must pay greater
attention, at both the legislative and the law
enforcement levels, to the increasing links between
terrorist organizations, such as Hezbollah, and
international criminal networks. Those dangers are
tightly woven together and the criminal-terrorist fabric
must be addressed as a whole.

Technical assistance is another area where there
are significant opportunities for improvement. I would
like to reiterate my country's call to conduct a new
assessment of technical assistance for counter-
terrorism. The need for such a study is clear. The
international community needs to develop a knowledge
base so that it can tailor technical assistance
programmes more effectively, efficiently and
constructively. We must understand the extent of
participation in existing programmes and how they
improve States' long-term ability to fight terrorism. In
cases where the benefits of technical assistance have
not materialized, we should ask difficult questions.
Successful models should be shared as best practices.

Israel continues to share its unique expertise with
others in that global fight. We are closely engaged in
capacity-building initiatives with a number of States
and regional organizations in Africa, South and Central
America, East and Central Asia and other regions
around the world. Such collaborative efforts span a
range of issues from terrorist financing to aviation
security and from money-laundering to border
protection.

The Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities has
made several important changes in its procedures since
the Council's last briefing. In June, the Council
empowered the Ombudsperson to offer
recommendations for de-listing. That is an important
step forward. Israel supports the ongoing efforts to
increase fairness, transparency and due process in the
Committee's work.

We must develop more effective international
standards to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and dual-use items. The international
community has a clear duty to do whatever it takes to
keep the world's most dangerous weapons out of the
hands of its most dangerous terrorists and regimes. In
that regard, I wish to reiterate Israel's support for
resolution 1540 (2004).

We also cannot turn a blind eye to those States
that continue to actively sponsor terrorism, such as Iran
and Syria. Today, Iran serves as the world's central
banker, primary sponsor and chief trainer of terrorists.

The flow of advanced weapons to terrorists in our
region is growing in scope and scale. Those weapons
contribute to instability and fuel violent attacks on
civilians. As we sit here today, rockets fired by
terrorists in the Gaza Strip continue to rain down on
the people of southern Israel. Yet, the Security Council
has not uttered a single word of condemnation against
those continuous and brutal acts of terrorism. This
silence speaks volumes. The victims of terror are part
and parcel of any debate on counter-terrorism. Their
voices must be heard. Elie Wiesel once wrote,

"Even when faced with the murderous madness
of criminals, and in the presence of the silent
agony of their victims, it is incumbent upon us to
choose between escape and solidarity, shame and
honour."

There is no grey area. Turning a blind eye to
terrorists is to choose terrorism. Promoting or
overlooking incitement is to choose to educate the next
generation of terrorists. No declarations or statements
to the contrary can deny these simple truths. The time
has come for all responsible members of the
international community to speak the complete,
unvarnished and sometimes difficult truths about those
who support terrorism. It is time for all States to join
together and take effective action. The challenges
before us are clear. The opportunities to work together
are apparent.

We urge all Member States to set aside their
differences in this fight, to renounce short-term and
short-sighted policies in favour of international
cooperation, and to realize that complacency is not an
option in this struggle. If we truly join forces, the
international community can decisively stem the rising
tide of terrorism and build a brighter future for our
children.

