Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to express our sincere gratitude
to the team led by Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his clear and
detailed briefing and, above all, for his unceasing effort
to overcome the political impasse that the conflict has
endured for many years.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
meeting again today to address that conflict. Twenty-
eight years after the Madrid Conference, peace is ever
more distant. The path mapped out by the Madrid
Conference and the Oslo Accords 25 years ago is almost
in danger of becoming obsolete. We are faced with a
very worrying dynamic of the exhaustion of hope in the
negotiating process and ofa gradual loss of confidence
in the viability of the two-State solution. Furthermore,
the reports that we have received from the region from
the beginning of the conflict to the present day have
continuously highlighted violence as a predominant
and growing element.

History has demonstrated that the conflict does
not have a military solution. The parties are fated to
seek a solution through negotiations, which is why it is
important that they abstain from taking action that can
aggravate the already complicated situation.

Over the past six months, we have witnessed
violence unleashed on the border between Israel and
the Gaza Strip in clashes between Palestinian marchers
and Israeli forces, including rocket attacks launched by
insurgents from Gaza, which have been answered by
strong attacks by the Israeli army. All those hostilities
have resulted in more than 100 Palestinian deaths, many
injuries and great material damage. Added to that, the
total blockade imposed on Gaza has aggravated the
existing humanitarian crisis. It is important for Israel to
understand that it must end its policy of the demolition
of Palestinian homes and use proportional force. There
is urgent need for sustainable solution to the situation of
the nearly 2 million people in that Palestinian enclave
that guarantees a dignified life and greater protection
for people on both sides.

The insurgency of certain sectors that are
threatening the security of Israel from Gaza is a
direct consequence of the absence of the Palestinian
National Authority in the area. In that regard, my
delegation wishes to express its concern over the
failure to comply with the reconciliation pact signed by
Hamas and Fatah of 12 October 2017 in Egypt, which
provided - among other things - for the return last
December of the Palestinian National Authority and
its total control of that enclave. In that regard, we
recommend more support for the initiative of Egypt
and other actors to actively and definitively promote
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is indispensable
for the reorganization and security of Gaza. We wish to
acknowledge the efforts of the Egyptian Government
in that regard.

Of great concern to us is the current financial
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Middle East (UNRWA),
which must remain able to carry out its role and provide
important services to the millions of Palestinians
who depend on it. In that connection, we commend
the recent pronouncements of the countries that have
increased their support for UNRWA, and we urge the
other members of the international community to join
in that gesture of support for the displaced Palestinians.

Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the submission
of written reports, which has been a practice of the
Council. We hope that in this case, in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016) and in line with established
practice, the next quarterly report will be provided
in writing.
Finally, Equatorial Guinea agress with the
international community that greater efforts are needed
to resume meaningful negotiations aimed at achieving
a two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, which
would meet Israeli and Palestinian needs for security
and Palestinian aspirations to enjoy the status of a
sovereign State, put an end to the occupation and
resolve all final-status issues, putting an end to the
conflict. Both parties have the same right to live with
the guarantees of peace and security and must respect
the various Security Council resolutions in that regard.

