Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supports the
activities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees as the lead international
agency providing international protection to refugees.

We believe that this meeting of the Security
Council, initiated by the Tanzanian presidency, is
extremely important. That is borne out by the
comments of Mr. Guterres, to whom we are grateful for
his comprehensive briefing. The information that he
gave us and the figures that he cited were truly
enlightening.

The High Commissioner gave us a far-from-
exhaustive list of countries in which hundreds of
thousands - indeed, millions - of people have been
compelled to flee their homes, seeking asylum and
protection in areas of their own country that are not
always safe, or in neighbouring States. That massive
displacement of people is, of course, having a very
negative impact on the economies of the recipient
countries, and often becomes a dangerous element of
destabilization in the domestic political life of such
countries.

Banditry, looting, murder and rape are
characteristic of virtually all conflict areas, particularly
those where illegal armed groups are active. We are all
well aware of the criminal activities of such groups of
thugs. In those situations, it is becoming increasingly
important, especially in Africa, to coordinate the
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
within the context of their mandates as endorsed by the
Security Council, with the country presence of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. UNHCR can identify the most vulnerable
segments of the population, including refugees, and
give them the assistance and protection that they need.
We believe that a good example of such coordinated
work is that of the African Union mission in the Sudan,
where, despite all of the complexities and problems,
with which we are all familiar, it has been possible to
reduce the level of violence against refugees and
internally displaced persons in the areas in which they
are concentrated in Darfur.

The Russian Federation supports the initiatives of
the top management of UNHCR, which is seeking to
enhance the effectiveness of the organization, and we
favour the retention of the existing principles for the
voluntary funding of its programmes. In 2005, Russia
made a further voluntary contribution to the budget of
UNHCR, and we hope in the future to continue that
practice. If possible, we will try to expand our
participation in international humanitarian activities.

