Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for the excellent
introduction to the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2005/525). We thank
him for bringing us up to date on the latest
developments in the country. The in-depth analysis of
the situation in the report of the Secretary-General is
particularly instructive concerning progress made by
Afghanistan in the past three years and the stages that
remain before the transitional process can be
completed.

My delegation has noted three central points for
action that we believe deserve special attention by the
Security Council: legislative elections, security
problems and the importance of post-transition
peacebuilding.

The overview presented to us on the preparations
for the elections shows how Afghanistan is building on
the achievements of the transition to make progress,
drawing upon the effective partnership established with
the international community. The achievements of that
partnership are considerable in light of the difficulties
described in the report.

The question of securing the funding for the
elections is a concern for the international community.
Given the notable progress that has been made, it
would be incomprehensible if the process were held up
because of inadequate funding. We therefore urge the
generous donors that are supporting the Afghan people
to provide the additional support needed for a happy
outcome to the transition process.

Vote counting requires that we learn the lessons
from the October 2004 presidential election. It is
important to reinforce security when transporting the
ballot boxes from the voting stations to the vote-
counting stations. That will ensure that all the votes
cast by the people carry their full weight in the choice
of their representatives.

Dealing with security problems is a crucial
matter. We note that extremists and illegal armed
groups continue to pose a major challenge to peace and
stability in Afghanistan. We support the commitment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to work alongside the Afghan
forces to demobilize the illegal armed groups. The
modalities for that demobilization must be tailored to
the goals being pursued.

The projections for the increase in strength of the
Afghan army and police force give rise to optimism, as
does the progress of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. We pay tribute to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and to countries that
have contributed to measures to provide lasting
security in the country. We urge them to continue their
unceasing efforts to provide Afghanistan the means and
human resources needed to consolidate the new order
that is being established in the country.

The rising power of the insurrection is a major
challenge for all involved. The Secretary-General
rightly draws our attention to the need to eliminate the
sources of financing and external support of the
insurrection.

The negative impact of the insurrection on the
humanitarian assistance activities is of concern. We
call for a strengthening of the military forces to protect
humanitarian workers in order to speed up the process
of rebuilding the country. In that regard, we share the
concerns of the Secretary-General, who has highlighted
the risks of a premature disengagement by the
international community in the post-election phase.
The irreversibility of progress depends on ongoing
support for the implementation of the strategies and
approaches adopted in the various sectors of activity to
generate beneficial synergies for the recovery of the
country.

The international community must remain
mobilized at the side of the Afghan people in order to
maintain the momentum of reconstruction and to
strengthen the ongoing reforms. It is essential to
continue the partnership between donor countries and
the Afghan authorities. In particular, integrated,
multisectoral assistance is needed to eliminate
narcotics structures and provide attractive and
profitable alternatives.

It is positive that the Afghan Government and the
United Nations have clearly identified the fundamental
principles that will contribute to strengthening
international cooperation for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

