Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this meeting. The Security
Council is at an important point in its consideration of
this issue. It is right for us to hear the views of other
Members of the United Nations before we take
decisions.

There are two principles which have guided us
and must continue to guide us in the Council in
handling Iraq. They are clearly enshrined in resolution
1352 (2001). First, it is our responsibility in the
Council to prevent Iraq from posing a threat to its
region and, as part of this, to ensure that Iraq is fully
and verifiably disarmed of its weapons of mass
destruction. Until this is the case, it is the responsibility
of the Council to ensure that Iraq cannot rearm and
cannot once again pose a threat to its neighbours. The
second principle is as important and even more
immediate: to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people
and take whatever steps we can from outside to ensure
that their needs are met. To this extent, we agree with
the Russian Federation that the status quo is not
acceptable.

These two principles are embodied in resolution
1284 (1999), which remains the comprehensive
framework for the Council's approach to Iraq. This
resolution instituted various steps to relieve the human
suffering in Iraq. It also sets out a route forward for
Iraq to the suspension and lifting of sanctions if Iraq
chooses to cooperate with the United Nations in
meeting its disarmament obligations. That route map
remains the Council's policy and the only credible way
forward; and the implementation of resolution 1284
(1999) is supported by all Council members because it
will mean the end of sanctions. There is no good reason
to back away from or to alter that framework, nor does
the United Kingdom have any wish to do so.

If Iraq decided to cooperate with resolution 1284
(1999), we are all willing to work with them without
any further delay. Let us be clear, resolution 1284
(1999) has not been implemented because Iraq has
refused to implement it. That cannot be the basis for
any kind of renegotiation of its terms. But if Iraq
indicates a willingness to move forward, the Council
will undoubtedly wish to reciprocate by fleshing out in
detail the precise steps that need to be taken. To move
while Iraq continues to reject the Council's position
will only serve Iraq's wish to divide the Council and to
avoid its international obligations. I repeat: the only
route to the ending of sanctions lies through the
confidence of the Security Council, living up to its
responsibilities, that Iraq has disarmed in accordance
with the resolutions.

We now have before us a series of proposals, set
out by the United Kingdom in our draft resolution, to
allow Iraq to import the full range of civilian goods
without restriction. Three weeks ago, in resolution
1352 (2001), the Council agreed to spend a month
examining and refining those proposals and, at the end
of that month, to agree on a new set of arrangements. I
emphasize that the aim was not to replace the Council's
comprehensive approach in resolution 1284 (1999), but
to do two things: to set in place measures to liberalize
the flow of goods to Iraq and, at the same time, to
examine ways to make sure that military-related items
are not exported to Iraq.

These are two goals supported by the whole
Council and, I am sure, by the entire United Nations
membership. Resolution 1352 (2001) represented an
unusual agreement in the Council on these two aims
and gave hope to the wider world that we had gathered
some momentum and a sense of responsibility. In
agreeing on that resolution, all Council members
accepted that the measures should be instituted quickly,
and that a month was a reasonable target within which
to agree on the new proposals in detail.

That month is nearly up. There have been
intensive discussions at the expert level covering every
aspect of our proposals. Differences remain. It would
be naive to expect agreement on every point, but
compromises have been worked out on many issues
and there is now no good reason why a decision should
not be taken to institute a set of arrangements to fulfil
the dual purpose set out in resolution 1352 (2001). My
delegation will continue to work as hard as it takes to
meet that deadline.

Clearly, others are less optimistic, or less
determined. We should examine their reasoning
carefully. The Council now has the chance to agree
upon and implement changes that will make an
immediate and positive difference to the flow of
civilian goods to ordinary Iraqis. Iraq is opposing these
changes because it wishes to freeze the work of the
Council and escape from its obligations. It has
calculated that time and international inertia will be on
its side. In that respect, the Council is being
challenged.

Let me say in all frankness that none of us, on
this issue in particular, can allow national economic
self-interest to hold up positive measures for the Iraqi
people. Having successfully negotiated the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1352 (2001), we must
collectively ensure that the two principles of that
resolution are the principles which guide us now.

The new proposals contained in the British draft
resolution will make an important and significant
difference to the flow of goods to Iraq. From a
situation where no export is allowed unless approved
by the Security Council Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990), we will move to a situation
where every export is allowed except for a very limited
range of items which must be reviewed by the 661
Committee on the basis of criteria related to their
potential military use. Even for those items, there is no
presumption of denial. We believe this change will
bring a dramatic improvement in the flow of goods and
a dramatic reduction in the level of holds. Even within
that limited category of items reviewed by the
Committee, we intend to allow the export of a good
number if there is proper monitoring.

The current discussion of the Goods Review List,
contrary to the Russian Federation's contention, is a
search for clarity and therefore for ease of procedure,
and not a search for broadening or tightening. We are
even now constructively negotiating on the Goods
Review List.

We are fully aware that in many cases sensitive
items can form a key component of larger civilian
projects which must be allowed to go forward if the
economic infrastructure of Iraq is to be rebuilt. We
want to see the ordinary civilian infrastructure
reconstructed in Iraq, and our attitude to individual
items reviewed by the Committee will be guided by
that philosophy.

At the same time, we all have to continue to
exercise our responsibility to ensure that items are not
exported to Iraq that, unless closely supervised, will
allow Iraq to rebuild its military capability.
Accompanying these changes, there should be a
slimming down in the bureaucracy facing those who
wish to export goods to Iraq or operate projects there.
Procedures will be simplified. There will be no reason
why Iraq cannot import the civilian goods it needs. The
funds are there, and with these proposals Iraq will have
the freedom to purchase all necessary civilian items.
There is no intention in this draft resolution to harm the
economic interests of neighbouring States or others
doing legitimate business with Iraq. We expect to see
an expansion of civilian trade, which will benefit all.
There will be no reason why Iraq cannot import a full
range of civilian goods, and Iraq will have no pretext to
blame the United Nations for the suffering of the Iraqi
people. The new proposals will nail that false charge
once and for all.

The capacity to rebuild military potential, against
the rulings of the Security Council, is related to the
flow of money, as well as to the flow of goods. Do not
make the mistake, as some do, of confusing the Iraqi
civilian economy with the economic activities of the
Iraqi Government. We are all aware that Iraq continues
to export oil outside the United Nations system to build
up illegal revenue with which it can purchase weapons
and other proscribed items. There is worrying evidence
that such items continue to find their way into Iraq.
This traffic has to be controlled if the resolutions of the
Council are to have their intended effect.

Our draft resolution would ask the Secretary-
General to consult and cooperate with the neighbouring
States to address these problems. There are also
obligations on supplier countries. We are not laying
blame, but each one of us must be vigilant to ensure
that illegal flows are prevented.

The logic of those who argue that our proposed
measures will damage or set aside the policies set out
in resolution 1284 (1999) is precisely wrong. The aim
of all of us is the ending of sanctions. The period
December 1999 to June 2001 has seen no progress
towards that objective because Iraq has preferred the
continuation of sanctions, whatever the effect on the
Iraqi people, to acceptance of the disarmament process
set out in resolution 687 (1991) and resolution 1284
(1999). Doing nothing now will not change that. Nor
will any proposal to alter the conditions of resolution
1284 (1999) change that. Adoption of our draft
resolution will change the situation. There will be an
immediate improvement in the lives of ordinary Iraqis,
the longest-suffering victims of the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait. And the course mapped out by
resolution 1284 (1999) is more likely to be seen as the
right one if we take steps to refocus the sanctions
policy of the Council, as resolution 687 (1991)
originally intended it. That is our primary
consideration in advocating these proposals: calculate
the quickest route, in the light of the realities, to the
ending of sanctions.

There are other steps in our draft resolution which
will move the present situation forward. Iraq will be
allowed to pay its United Nations dues from the escrow
account. Aircraft frozen and held in other States will be
allowed to return to Iraq. Steps will be taken to begin,
on an independent and objective basis, to address the
problem of the illegal oil surcharge levied by Iraq on
purchasers of Iraqi oil. In other areas, practical work
can proceed to implement decisions of the Council. For
example, we have agreed, in resolution 1330 (2000),
that Iraq should utilize funds from the escrow account
for a so-called cash component in the oil sector. We are
ready to agree to this proposal, but note with regret that
Iraq continues to block the implementation of the cash
component elsewhere in the Iraqi economy. This is an
insupportable obstruction of a step that has been
recommended by every United Nations agency and
humanitarian non-governmental organization in the
field, a step which these bodies believe would make a
considerable difference to improving the situation of
ordinary Iraqis. Yet again we question the true
priorities of the Iraqi Government in blocking this
improvement. Nevertheless, the oil cash component
should go forward, on a basis whereby funds cannot be
diverted for illegal use.

The United Kingdom has put forward these
proposals in good faith within the overall framework of
resolution 1284 (1999), in response to calls made by
many in the international community to alleviate the
plight of the Iraqi people. The principles of the
approach were unanimously endorsed by the Security
Council through resolution 1352 (2001). We would
find it unaccountable for the Council, or any member
of the Council, not to move forward on the basis of
those principles. The risk is that if we do not act now,
the Security Council may never be in a position to act.
There is therefore every reason for the Council to put
into practice now the approach we set out in resolution
1352 (2001).

