Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Sir, and the Security Council for
allowing me to participate in today's open debate on
Timor-Leste under your presidency.

I wish to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste.

Like the Council members and other
representatives who spoke before me, I wish to express
our deep condolences to the Government of
Bangladesh for the tragic loss of its peacekeeping
officers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for presenting the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET).
Thailand welcomes the continual progress that
has been made in Timor-Leste and commends the
contributions of UNMISET, the United Nations
programmes and agencies, the Bretton Woods
institutions, non-governmental organizations and
international donors, and the efforts made, with the
strong determination of the Government of Timor-
Leste, in the nation-building process of that country.
Such a positive development would not have been
possible without the crucial roles of all parties
concerned, and especially that of the United Nations,
which has been internationally acknowledged as a
success story for the Organization in peacekeeping.

The journey in the advancement of Timor-Leste
is still at the beginning stage. To be realistic, although
many achievements have been made, the country's path
to progress will continue to meet with a mixture of
successes and challenges alike. In order to help Timor-
Leste to grow and prosper alongside the community of
nations, the international community must remain
active and engaged in rendering assistance to Timor-
Leste.

UNMISET has played a significant role in
restoring peace and maintaining stability, as well as in
developing democracy, development and administration
processes in Timor-Leste. Nevertheless, as the report
has pointed out, much remains to be done to make sure
that the gains achieved up to now are protected and put
to better use in the future. It is thus imperative that the
accomplishments of UNMISET be maintained in a
sustainable manner for the benefit of the long-term
development of the country and its people.

Therefore, Thailand concurs with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that
UNMISET should maintain its presence in the country,
with a scaled-down composition and size. That can be
seen as a step-by-step approach which will help to
ensure the steady and effective functioning of the
administrative institutions in Timor-Leste after the
eventual withdrawal of UNMISET, and, more
importantly, to ensure greater Timorese involvement in
and ownership of the nation-building process.

With respect to Timor-Leste, my delegation
would like to point out that the development of the
country needs to be approached in a holistic manner.
For Timor-Leste to progress towards a sustainable
future, the country's economic and social dimensions,
or the "human face" of Timor-Leste, will also require
continued assistance from the international community.
As much as the Government of the country needs
international assistance, the people of Timor-Leste also
need it.

In order for Timor-Leste to move forward in a
sustainable manner, its people's standard of living and
quality of life will also have to move upward gradually.
The capacity-building tasks that the United Nations
programmes and agencies, the Bretton Woods
institutions, non-governmental organizations and
international donors have undertaken in Timor-Leste

have thus far resulted in remarkable progress in various
areas.

However, uninterrupted international support in
those economic and social dimensions remains crucial.
Among other ills, poverty, illiteracy and unemployment
still plague Timor-Leste and will continue to hamper
its nation-building process and national development
for some time in the future. The support of the
international community to combat those problems will
be needed even after the conclusion of UNMISET's
mandate.

Timor-Leste is a country with a promising future.
If nurtured, and with all the help provided by the
international community, its potential can be increased
considerably. The forthcoming development partners
conference will provide us with a venue to reaffirm our
support for Timor-Leste.

For its part, Thailand is pleased to have rendered
support to Timor-Leste in its national development
process, with a focus on human-resource development,
in the fields agreed in the memorandum of
understanding on economic and technical cooperation,
which was signed in 2003, namely, agriculture, public
health, fisheries, trade and investment, banking and
insurance, tourism, energy, capacity-building on
internal security issues and negotiations on a maritime
zone, geo-information and a sustainable economy.

Sixteen activities have already been implemented
in 2003 and 2004. The remaining 16 activities will be
implemented by the end of 2005. Thailand is willing to
continue its technical cooperation support to Timor-
Leste after the completion of the current plan, in 2005.
In addition, Thailand plans to cooperate with other
donors, such as Japan's International Cooperation
Agency, to supplement the bilateral cooperation
between Thailand and Timor-Leste.

