Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2468 (2019),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
and supports the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara. My delegation thanks the
American penholder for its in-depth consultations and
its high-level engagement.

First, I wish to reiterate France's full support for
the efforts of the Personal Envoy. This new resolution
reaffirms the Security Council's support for the political
process it launched in Geneva, bringing together
Morocco, the Frente Popular para la Liberacion de
Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro (Frente POLISARIO),
Algeria and Mauritania for the first time in six years,
in December. Personal Envoy Horst Kohler has all
our support in moving forward and organizing a third
meeting in Geneva in that format when he deems the
conditions to be appropriate.

It is important for the four delegations to continue
their discussions in a constructive spirit of compromise
with a view to achieving a realistic, pragmatic, just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, in
accordance with the Council's resolutions. The two
previous round tables allowed Morocco, the Frente
POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania to agree on the
special responsibility of the region and the need to
develop trust. It is now necessary to build on those
achievements. I take this opportunity to reiterate that
France considers the 2007 Moroccan autonomy plan to
be a serious and credible basis for discussions.

Secondly, I would like to recall France's full
support for the work of MINURSO and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara. The latest consultations with Special
Representative Colin Stewart on 10 April have
served as a reminder of the essential role played by
that peacekeeping operation in ensuring respect for
the ceasefire and thereby contributing to regional
stability. The return to normalcy in Guerguerat, to
which the Secretary-General refers in his latest report
(S/2019/282), is proof of this and will remain the
subject of vigilant attention. In that regard, I commend
the outstanding work of the MINURSO teams, whose
presence helps to ensure calm, reduce the risk of
escalation by effectively preventing tensions on the
ground and thus create the conditions necessary for
the continuation of the dialogue among Morocco, the
Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania.

It is in the light of that essential role of MINURSO
that I recall France's commitment to the return to
a l2-month mandate, which must remain the norm,
while six-month mandates should be the exception.
A one-year mandate ensures continuity and greater
predictability in the management of this mission,
while reducing uncertainties about its future. The
existence and mandate of that peacekeeping operation
should not be conditional on the progress of the
political discussions or the good performance whereby
MINURSO contributes by creating the right conditions
on the ground. In that regard, we regret that the Council
has not been able to commit itself to the fact that it will
consider returning to a one-year term in due time, and
we express the wish that it be renewed for one year
in October.

