Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his detailed briefing on the most recent developments in
Libya and, more broadly, for his exemplary commitment
and that of his team. I also wish to thank Ambassador
Juergen Schulz for his first briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya since Germany took over its
chairmanship from our Swedish partners.

As the Special Representative explained to us,
preparations for the national conference are ongoing.
I would like to reiterate France's full support to the
Special Representative in the implementation of his
revised action plan, which was collectively endorsed
at the Palermo conference. The goal set in Palermo to
convene the national conference as soon as possible so
as to organize national elections by the spring must be
met. We share the Special Representative's position
with regard to the importance of the early commitment
of the key Libyan actors. To that end, as that deadline
approaches, we must increase the pressure on those
actors so that they commit to respecting the results and
to implementing the recommendations. A broad political
consensus is vital to making the long-awaited elections
a driver of peace and not a new source of tension.

We remain concerned about the security situation
on the ground and the continuing terrorist threat,
as reflected in the attack by Da'esh on the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs in Tripoli, which we strongly
condemned. Struggles for influence among militias
also continue on the ground and the situation between
the Ministry of the Interior and the militias in Tripoli
is tense. The new escalation of violence seen in Tripoli
in recent days makes the genuine implementation of
security arrangements more urgent and more necessary
than ever.

Like my British counterpart and several other
colleagues, we once again commend the efforts and
the commitment of the Special Representative and
his strong engagement on the security track. The
security arrangements for Tripoli must be effectively
implemented with our support. In that regard, the
unification of the Libyan armed forces under the
control of civilian authorities remains an urgent and
top priority.

In that context, it is also essential that the economic
reforms continue. They should focus as a matter of
priority on the devaluation of the Libyan dinar, reform
of the subsidy system, streamling public employment,
the collegial functioning of the Central Bank of Libya
and its reunification and the transparent management
of Libya's resources to the benefit of all Libyans. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/ 19) reflects that
some improvement in the economic situation has been
noted by the Libyans, which is clearly very encouraging.

In that context, I would like to reiterate once again
that all those who threaten peace, security and stability
in Libya or obstruct the political process are liable to
international sanctions. That also holds true for those
responsible for smuggling migrants and trafficking in
human beings, as well as economic predation and the
misappropriation of public funds, against which the
Security Council must continue its action.

Finally, as has been said, the humanitarian
situation also remains very dire, in particular the plight
of migrants and refugees, who are subject to human
rights violations, as is also very clearly described in the
Secretary-General's report. France reiterates its calls
on the Libyan authorities to do their utmost to ensure
that migrants and refugees are treated with dignity.
We encourage them to continue their cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration, to revise the law on refugees and to establish
a refugee registration system in order to protect them.
That is a priority in order to protect human rights and
combat organized crime.

The status quo in Libya is our common enemy,
since it opens the way for all kinds of threats, predatory
behaviour and trafficking. There is therefore an urgent
need to make progress towards a political settlement.
It is crucial to maintain our full support for the efforts
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
the Special Representative to break the institutional
deadlock and to advance the transition in Libya.
In follow-up to the Paris conference, the Palermo
conference reaffirmed the unity of the international
community in support of the directions proposed by the
Special Representative.

Only an integrated strategy that addresses political,
economic and security issues as well as elections, with
a clear and ambitious timetable, can anchor stability.
Upholding the commitments made by the Libyan actors
is therefore essential in order to emerge from the status
quo. It is vital that we support all those efforts. Rest
assured of France's determination to that end.

