Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset I would like to thank High Representative
Mr. Valentin Inzko for his presentation of the fourty-
seventh report (S/2015/300, annex) on the situation
in my country. We appreciate the activities he has
undertaken in his role under the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Positive political developments have taken place
since the last report of the High Representative
(S/2014/3l4, annex). A six-month period of intensive
and sometimes painful post-election negotiations
has come to an end in my country. All government
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina are formed
and ready to address a number of important issues
for the present and future of the country. First of all,
the much needed reforms to establish a framework for
socioeconomic measures aimed at realizing a better
and more prosperous life in Bosnia and Herzegovina
cannot wait any more.

After seven years, the strong European Union
perspective is again occupying a central place in the
political agenda of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The joint
declaration on commitment- adopted by the Presidency
on 29 January, signed by the leaders of the 14 parties
represented in Parliament and fully endorsed by the
Parliamentary Assembly on 23 February - reaffirmed
the membership of the European Union as a strategic
goal of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Following this, on 21 April the Council of the
European Union adopted a decision concluding the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is expected that the Agreement will
enter into force on 1 June. In this historic decision, the
Council of the European Union noted

"that having regard to the commitments thus
undertaken by Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
accordance with its conclusions of 15 December
2014, the Council notes that the necessary
conditions contained therein have been met and
agrees to proceed with the conclusion and entry
into force of the Stabilisation and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina".

It is our deep conviction that this new, modified
approach of the European Union towards Bosnia and
Herzegovina represents a unique opportunity to leave
behind for good a period of stagnation and immobility
thus showing the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that their leaders have understood their message and
call for changes.

Of course, we must be conscious that the task in
front of us is massive, that a number of Vital areas need
serious restructuring and adaptation to the European
Union standards. The relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina
institutions are in the process of drawing the list of
priorities for the forthcoming period. Along with
internal reforms, Bosnia and Herzegovina is closely
focusing on enhanced cooperation within the region,
especially when it comes to infrastructure projects. As
has been proved many times over, the pull of European
Union integration is crucial to provide a positive
incentive for my country to advance its socioeconomic,
judicial and other necessary reforms and to resolve
the remaining obstacles on the path towards European
integration.

We are aware that our socioeconomic situation calls
for urgent reform measures. As many speakers today
have pointed out, youth employment and the creation
of new jobs are of critical importance to keeping
young professionals in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is
one of the most urgent tasks for the newly appointed
authorities at all levels. The Compact for Growth and
Jobs in Bosnia and Herzegovina offers a comprehensive
set of measures to be undertaken in that regard.

We have witnessed lately a new dynamic in regional
cooperation in the Western Balkans region. It is a clear
sign ofthe improved relations among the countries and at
the same time the awareness that a number of issues are
of common interest and can be dealt with successfully
only if all interested countries are involved. It pertains
particularly to the big infrastructure projects related to
the communication, transport and energy sectors. This
course of action was confirmed and fine-tuned at the
meeting of the six Prime Ministers from the Western
Balkans in Brussels on 21 April. The announced
financial support of the European Union in this field
will be of crucial importance.

Our active participation in the activities of a number
of regional organizations, as well as the United Nations,
is by now well known. We are part of the peacekeeping
forces of the United Nations to name just one example.
Also, we are to take over as Chair of the Committee
of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 19 May for a
period of six months. In that regard, the meeting of the
Standing Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe in Sarajevo in May is to be the
first political event of our six month tenure. We see this
as an exceptional opportunity to show that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has all the necessary capacities to chair
the Council of Europe and its 47 countries members.

The attack on the police station in Zvornik, which
took place on 27 April, serves as a reminder that the
threat of terrorism and Violent extremism is of great
concern for our region, as it is for the rest of the
world. Although we believe that this was an isolated
case, it certainly calls for increased vigilance, better
coordination among law enforcement and security
agencies, and regional and international cooperation in
fighting terrorism. My country remains fully committed
and will continue to actively participate in the global
effort to counter terrorism and violent extremism, for
we believe that terrorism can be defeated only through
the international community's coordinated action based
on a sustained and comprehensive approach involving
the active participation and collaboration of all States.

I would like to conclude by stating our conviction
that the glass is half full. In other words, I am optimistic
that today the synergy established between the
country's internal political players and the international

community, especially the European Union, will yield
tangible and positive results. Although it has taken a
long time, we now have a political process based on
dialogue suitable for fulfilling the promises made to the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country whose
landscapes are spectacular and whose cultural diversity
is rich, as Mr. Inzko rightly pointed out in his opening
remarks.

