Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We, too, would like to welcome the convening of this
meeting and the informative briefings provided by the
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whom we thank for
their important work, carried out in close collaboration
with the Council.

As has been noted, while the Islamic State has
become a covert network, particularly in Iraq, it
continues to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security. The fight against that scourge cannot be
considered as having ended. The report ofthe Secretary-
General (S/20l9/103) highlights the fact that the current
goal of ISIS is to continue to undermine Government
activities aimed at stabilization and reconstruction and
in general thwart economic progress.

At the same time, the possibility of a resurgence
cannot be discounted, in particular in the region of
the Levant. We recognize that the return or transfer
of foreign terrorist fighters and their families also
represents a serious threat. We would therefore
underscore the fact that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee adopted, on 27 December last, an
addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles. The
addendum contains very useful guidelines on issues
ranging from enhancing the capacity to detect and
prevent travel by terrorists, to measures to strengthen
protection of critical infrastructure, including ways
of increasing the effectiveness of legal action and
international cooperation.

It is therefore necessary to develop adequate
policies for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
that are based on full respect for human rights.
Another related challenge is the situation of fighters
who have been freed and their necessary and proper
reintegration into society. In that context, we believe
that national criminal justice systems must play a key
role in this process, particularly in preventing prisons
from becoming terrains for greater radicalization and
recruitment, including through the use of suitable
information and communication technologies.

We also underscore the importance of the gender
perspective in the fight against terrorism, as well
as the impact of terrorism on children, particularly
those who are accompanying returning or relocating
fighters. The financing of the Islamic State is also
giving rise to serious concern. While its income has
been reduced substantially, in line with the reduction
of the territory it controls, it has been estimated that it
nevertheless has significant cash reserves in Syria, Iraq
and neighbouring countries, with the strategic goal of
financing attacks when the opportunity arises.

Against that backdrop, we reiterate the importance
of financial intelligence systems, including the
cooperation of financial intelligence units with the
private sector, as well as the need to monitor the flow
of cash, which is the vehicle through which terrorists
mobilize that resources.

Here we would underscore the link between
organized crime and terrorism. The report reflects
this reality not only when referring to the financing of
terrorism and money laundering, but also to the threats
linked to drug trafficking and trafficking in persons
and weapons. We deem it crucial to continue to deepen
our knowledge about the nature of such a link, as set
out in the presidential statement issued by the Council
on 8 May 2018 (S/PRST/2018/9). In this context, we
also underscore the need to prevent the possibility of
terrorist groups, particularly Da'esh, benefiting from
the trafficking of cultural heritage, in keeping with
resolution 2347 (2017).

Finally, we reiterate that particular relevance
of ensuring that there is no impunity for the crimes
committed. We therefore welcome the progress made
by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as
the official launch of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
However, we deplore the fact that to date no member
of Da'esh has been tried for sexual crimes, in spite of
it having been noted that sexual violence was used as a
terrorist tactic.

Finally, we reiterate our categorical rejection
of terrorism and our solidarity with the victims of
such heinous acts. Peru will continue to support
all multilateral efforts, including in the context
of the Council, to provide a comprehensive and
balanced response to this scourge that is in line with
international law.

