Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his presentation
on the item under consideration in this open debate of
the Security Council.

The Government of Colombia would like to
reiterate what it said on 9 December 2003, when the
Security Council last discussed this item. The
democratic security policy of Colombian President
Alvaro Uribe has demonstrated that strengthening the
rule of law and democratic institutions helps to
increase security for the people and thereby shrinks the
area available for illegal actors. Hence, the Colombian
people are strongly supportive of their Government.

The international community has not yet found an

effective way of combating terrorism, drug trafficking,
trafficking in small arms, or trafficking in human
beings - to mention but a few of the ill deeds
perpetrated by organized crime against civilians
throughout the world. We believe that the best way to
stop such transnational crime is to strengthen the States
and their democratic institutions, with robust
cooperation and solidarity on the part of the
international community. The United Nations and its
agencies, whose fundamental goal is to achieve a just
and lasting peace in the world, must play a very
important role in providing solidarity and support to
Member States as they fight against those crimes that
affect primarily the civilian population.

For that reason, the Government of Colombia
regards as essential the Organization's work in
protecting civilians in armed conflict. We acknowledge
the Secretary-General's firm commitment to that goal,
and we take note of the report before us, understanding
that the report was prepared in good faith and with an
awareness of the imperative need to provide
humanitarian assistance to people in need. But there
are some proposals, which theoretically are
appropriate, that could in practice backfire and further
weaken already fragile States as well as seriously
undermine their ability to protect their civilians in
conflict.

Implementation of such proposals could even end
up arming terrorist and drug-trafficking organizations,
as well as networks that are involved in the trafficking
of human beings, particularly children and women. The
democratic institutions of States that have legally
elected Governments could be seriously affected by
such proposals. For that reason, the Security Council
and its member States have the very heavy
responsibility of tackling these matters cautiously and
with prudence, not only concerning this particular
issue, but in all the thematic debates, including actions
that it intends to pursue.

With regard to the report before the Council, I
wish to point out that some of its proposals could give
rise to vicious circles of violence and suffering instead
of helping to protect civilian populations in armed
conflicts. The legitimate concern of ensuring access to
vulnerable populations can be effectively met through
strict compliance with the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols and through strict
implementation of General Assembly resolution
46/182, which provided the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs with its mandate.

Innovations that do not respect the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance - humanity,
neutrality and impartiality - and that, for the sake of
pragmatic negotiation, disregard the non-negotiable
nature of the principles of international humanitarian
law, as well as innovations that politicize humanitarian
assistance, create vicious circles of suffering for the
civilian population, whose problems they are supposed
to alleviate. Negotiating with terrorist, drug-trafficking
or criminal organizations to gain access to a specific
population not only legitimizes such organizations, but
also helps them to shield their operations with the
weight of legality and the rule of law, thus promoting
their dark military, strategic and economic objectives.
The excuse of collaborating with humanitarian
operations to gain political and tactical benefits that
protect their illicit businesses is a vile deception
carried out by these criminal organizations to protect
their activities and to intensify the war that they have
declared on the civilian population.

Therefore, we must be extremely careful that
legitimate concerns about humanitarian access do not
end up threatening legitimate Governments, interfering
in internal affairs or violating fundamental purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
That applies even more in situations where
Governments are working hand in hand with their
societies and enjoy immense popular support, and
where the majority of the people, after a number of
decades, are beginning to receive the benefits of
policies undertaken in the fight against those who
threaten and affect their very existence.

Humanitarian organizations, the United Nations
and all Member States must bear in mind the dangers
involved in acting precipitously on such matters.
Rather, we must intensify our support for and our
cooperation with the legitimate authorities of the States
affected in the difficult task of overcoming violence
and conflict. We must be fully aware that the very
dynamic of illegal armed organizations consists of
violating the law and international humanitarian law.
That is part of their essence and of their nature as
illegal entities.

That is why the Government of Colombia has
expressed its concern about dialogues not authorized
by the Government of the concerned State with illegal
armed groups, even if such dialogues have a
commendable purpose. In my Government's view, that
involves - in addition to what I just pointed out -
jeopardizing the security of humanitarian personnel,
because many of these armed groups repeatedly violate
their agreements, and, just as they do not respect
international humanitarian law, they do not respect the
treaty immunities of United Nations personnel and
assets. Therefore, the position of the people and the
Government of Colombia on such dialogue is clear: the
commitments imposed by international humanitarian
law must be honoured, but never negotiated. The
tranquillity and peace of the world depend to a great
extent on such clarity and rectitude.

Moreover, only Governments can enter into
political negotiations. When humanitarian groups enter
into political negotiations with illegal armed groups,
they are not conforming to the basic principles of
humanitarian work - neutrality, impartiality and
transparency - and are giving such illegal armed
groups an undue status that tends to put them on an
equal footing with legitimate democratic Governments.

We reaffirm our conviction that the only effective
way of protecting the whole population is to put an end
to armed conflicts. That is why the Colombian
Government has requested the Secretary-General to use
his good offices to urge the illegal armed groups
operating in Colombia to immediately cease hostilities,
thus creating room for negotiations to find a peaceful
solution to the country's problems of violence. Then the
United Nations will have the principal duty of demanding
and supporting procedures to carry out that intention.

The best way of ensuring adequate protection for
civilians threatened by illegal armed groups is - as I
said - to restore the democratic State's legitimate
authority, ensuring territorial control on the part of the
institutional armed forces. Colombia is a clear
example. Since the current Government was
established, the numbers of displacements, massacres
and attacks against population centres have dropped
significantly. Thus, between 2002 and 2003, the forced
displacement of persons decreased 48 per cent,
massacres decreased 37 per cent and attacks against
population centres decreased 80 per cent. The threat of
a humanitarian crisis has been contained. That shows
that the Government of Colombia must be the principal
ally and interlocutor of the United Nations in assisting
civilians at risk. To that end, we are fully prepared to
ensure the launching of relevant programmes.

The statements about my country in paragraph 41
of the Secretary-General's report are inaccurate, and
we do not understand the reasons for them. The
President of Colombia has often referred to our
nation's willingness to work with the United Nations in
various scenarios. The Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs recently visited the country, a
visit which was called "fruitful" by the Secretariat
because of agreement on strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the Government of
Colombia to assist victims of the conflict. A
coordinated focus was also established to examine and
resolve items related to humanitarian access to civilian
populations in need. This was done because access to
assist victims of strikes by illegal armed groups is very
different from access to carry out dialogue with such
groups. We must be clear about the fact that
displacement is part of the military strategy of these
illegal armed groups, which they use for multiple
reasons, including to establish contacts with
international bodies and align themselves with them in
order to enhance their political status, without putting
an end to their strategy of forced displacement or
artificial displacement.

It is also important to point out that in the
Colombian situation illegal armed groups maintain a
territorial presence in some areas of the country, but do
not dominate them; this reaffirms the inappropriateness
of establishing dialogue to achieve humanitarian access
under the misleading argument that such groups
exercise territorial control.

Also surprising is the statement in paragraph 41,
according to which there is an adverse impact on
humanitarian efforts when non-State armed actors are
designated as terrorist groups. It is the international
community that so labels them, not a whim of our
Government. Today, terrorism is a clearly defined
phenomenon, whose devastating effects are all too well
known worldwide; hence the global commitment to
decisively fight that scourge, strictly observing
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Appeasing terrorists would run counter to current
history.

Finally, we do not think it is for the United
Nations to certify some sort of "good conduct" on the
part of terrorist, drug trafficking or organized crime
groups for the purpose of engaging in future peace
negotiations. That would reinforce the idea that
violence against the civilian population pays and
contributes benefits so long as certain minimum
requirements are met to allow humanitarian assistance.
What is right and what our Government expects is
decisive United Nations support for the legitimate
efforts of democratic Governments to end terrorism,
resolve their conflicts and restore peace.
