Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Let me begin by joining
others in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for

Political Affairs, Mr. Pascoe, and the Under-Secretary-
General for Field Support, Ms. Malcorra, for providing
us with an update on the political and security situation
in Somalia as well as on the steps taken to strengthen
its security institutions and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). We are also thankful for the
remarks of the Permanent Representative of Somalia,
and we welcome the Permanent Observer of the
African Union, whose statement we are looking
forward to hearing.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. Allow me now to make
some short remarks in my national capacity.

Croatia is encouraged by the progress that has
been made on the political track, particularly the
actions of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG),
towards a more inclusive political process and genuine
national reconciliation. We commend such
determination and firmly believe it warrants the
unrelenting and concrete support of the international
community. We reiterate our full support for the
Transitional Federal Government and President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. Their hard-won political gains
must be preserved and further built upon. That being
said, we add our voice to the calls for all Somali
stakeholders to opt for dialogue and join the Djibouti
peace process, which continues to be the best option
for lasting peace in Somalia.

We strongly condemn all attempts to halt the
current political momentum, destabilize the transitional
federal institutions and undermine the Djibouti peace
process. The armed insurgency by hardliners thus
continues to be of utmost concern. We call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and deplore the toll
that the insurgent attacks have had on both the civilian
population and the already dire humanitarian situation
in the country. In the light of that, we urge all parties
involved in the conflict to adhere to international
humanitarian law and to respect human rights.

Croatia is also alarmed and extremely concerned
about reports of foreign or outside interference with
regard to insurgent attacks and other violence taking
place in Somalia, in particular reports concerning
support to insurgents being provided by neighbouring
countries, namely Eritrea, and the destabilizing
potential of such actions in the whole region.

We would like to recall the obligations that all
States Members of the United Nations have with regard
to respecting the resolutions and decisions adopted by
the Security Council and also to reiterate that the
Council already has at its disposal tools for dealing
with all inside and outside spoilers of the peace
process. In that light, we particularly look forward to
the forthcoming report of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia.

Croatia greatly appreciates the unerring efforts of
AMISOM, whose troops are operating in an extremely
difficult environment. While echoing the calls to
strengthen its capacities, we commend the troop-
contributing countries, in particular Uganda and
Burundi, and we hope that others will follow suit in
fulfilling their pledges.

We welcome the pledges made at the
international conference in support of Somalia's
security institutions and AMISOM. held in Brussels on
23 April. We hope today that the materialization has
already begun and that it will continue at a fast pace.
We also appreciate all other efforts and initiatives
aimed at improving the capacity of Somalia's security
sector, especially as an accountable and capable
security and police force represents the backbone of
efforts to achieve stability in the country. It also
enables the United Nations to further its involvement
and assist Somalia to the best ofits abilities.

That being said, we are pleased to hear about the
possibility of establishing a light United Nations
presence in Mogadishu in the near future, as stated by
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra during her briefing.
We are also pleased to hear about the implementation
of the support package by the United Nations.

Concerning piracy, we support the work that has
thus far been done to tackle the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia, including, in particular but not
exclusively, Operation Atalanta. We are aware of the
need for the continuation of the efforts to ensure the
safety of maritime routes.

My delegation would especially like to express its
full appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for
his relentless efforts and valuable contribution in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia.
Finally, I would also like to express our support
for the draft presidential statement that we are about to
adopt.

