Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too, congratulate China on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March, during which it can count on the French delegation's cooperation. I also thank Belgium for its outstanding leadership of our work last month. I would also like to start by thanking Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for her briefing and particularly for her excellent work, together with her team, in the service of peace in Iraq. Iraq, which has suffered repeated trials in its recent past and which is acountry with which France maintains strong and long-standing ties, is at a crossroads. The country is strongly affected by regional tensions. It must complete the fight against Da'esh. It must also meet the aspirations that the Iraqis have been voicing since last October and continue to make progress on the path to democracy and justice. In order to meet all those challenges, one goal is essential. It is important to ensure that Iraq is fully sovereign and that it rapidly recovers its institutional stability and has the means to address the various challenges. It is crucial that Council members stand by the Iraqi people and their authorities to achieve that. In that spirit, I would like to highlight two key messages today. My first message is one of support - above all, support for the Iraqi people, who must be able to express their legitimate demands without fear for their security, in accordance with the constitutional principles of Iraq. The human toll of the demonstrations is extremely high, with more than 500 dead and thousands injured.As mentioned in Geneva during the forty-third session of the Human Rights Council, Franceis especially concerned about the arbitrary arrests, assassinations, forced disappearances and indiscriminate use of force against people exercising their right to peaceful protests, documented in particular by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). It is the responsibility of the Iraqi authorities to ensure the safety of demonstrators and to guarantee the freedoms of expression and assembly and the right to protest. In that regard, we urge them to heed the recommendations of UNAMI. In that difficult context, Iraq must have a Government that is able to implement the reforms expected by the Iraqis, in particular with regard to combating corruption, providing good services to the population and holding fair and transparent early elections. Women must play their full role. We will work alongside the Iraqi authorities in implementing such reforms. Lastly, I would like to express our full support, as I said, for the United Nations Mission and for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, whose courageous and effective commitment I would like to commend. It is essential for UNAMI to continue its work in support of the Iraqi authorities, particularly in the area of electoral assistance. Its efforts to encourage dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil is also valuable. With regard to the sensitive issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti national archives and property, the progress made following the discoveries at the Samawah site is encouraging and once again underline the importance of resolute progress towards a settlement. We will ensure that UNAMI continues to have adequate resources and the proper mandate. My second message is a call for international mobilization. Iraq needs the active support of the Security Council and its other international partners. We must mobilize first to do everything possible to ensure that Iraq remains free from regional tensions and preserves its sovereignty. A stable Iraq is essential to creating the conditions for lasting de-escalation in the region. We must also ensure mobilization in the fight against Da'esh. We all know that the fight is not over. The international coalition is committed to continuing its support to the Iraqi authorities to prevent any widespread resurgence of terrorism in the country, while taking into account the changing political environment. Lastly, there must be international mobilization to deal with the humanitarian emergency and the challenges of stabilizing and rebuilding the country. That is all the more vital in order to counter the risk of a resurgence of Da'esh and to promote reconciliation among the various sectors of the Iraqi population. Particular attention must therefore be paid to the areas liberated from Da'esh as well as to the conditions necessary to allow the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally displaced persons. In that context, it is important to ensure that non-governmental organizations have access to Iraqi territory so as to facilitate the effectiveness of their work. Given all these challenges, Iraq can count on France's commitment at its side. It can also count on the European Union (EU), whose High Representative has been given a mandate by the Council of the EU to contribute to de-escalation efforts in the region. Iraq must also be able to count on a Security Council that is united and committed to supporting it on the path to reconstruction and peace.
