Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict. We believe
that the focus of today's debate on children victims
of non-State armed groups is timely and important.
We are also appreciative of your efforts to synthesize
the discussion today and of the proposals put forth
in a non-paper, which we hope will provide a useful
reference for our future work on this issue.

I wish to thank Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon
for his remarks, as well as Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their briefings.
My delegation also wishes to express our special
appreciation to Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita
for sharing their valuable and insightful experiences
on the ground in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

There can be no doubt of our shared international
commitment to safeguarding and protecting children
in situations of armed conflict, developed over
the past 15 years in the Security Council. We are
pleased to recognize that this year marks the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), which endorsed
the establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to document grave violations against
children in armed conflict and set up the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, which
Malaysia is privileged to Chair. Successive Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements have
further reinforced our resolve and expanded the range
of instruments that can be used to shield children from
the harms of warfare.

Yet the consequences of warfare remain a grim
reality for millions of children affected by armed
conflict. UNICEF reported that 2014 was the worst year
for children, with up to 15 million suffering the fallout
from armed conflict in the Central African Republic,
Iraq, South Sudan, the occupied Palestinian territories,
Syria and Ukraine. For instance, last year's war in Gaza
led to the deaths of over 500 Palestinian children, some
of whom were deliberately targeted and killed while

playing at the beach or seeking refuge at United Nations
centres. More than 3,000 children were injured or
maimed for life, schools were attacked, 54,000 children
were made homeless and at least 373,000 children in
Gaza are currently in desperate need of psychosocial
support.

Clearly, more needs to be done to end impunity and
prevent grave violations committed against children. In
that regard, Malaysia strongly believes that all parties
should be held accountable for gross violations of
children's rights, be they State or non-State actors. No
one should be allowed to be above the law.

We underline that Governments hold the primary
responsibility for the protection of children within their
territory. In this light, we are heartened by the progress
made in the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, which
galvanizes Government action to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by armed forces in
seven countries. We call for the strong support of the
international community to ensure that the objective of
the campaign is achieved by 2016.

At the same time, we are conscious of the fact that
non-State armed groups make up the majority of the
parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/339). The listings are representative of
a wide array of organizations, with a host of diverse
motives and operating in vastly different circumstances.
With this in mind, it is important to acknowledge that
there can be no one-size-fits-all approach in addressing
non-State armed groups - each must be dealt with
while taking into account the unique contexts in which
they operate. In that regard, we believe that further
analysis on non-State armed groups would be valuable
to ensure a tailored approach, both by operational
actors on the ground as well as by the Security Council.

Our discussion today raises crucial questions
as to how the tools at our disposal can be best used
to influence non-State armed groups to safeguard
the lives of children. We wish to highlight several
non-exhaustive areas where we believe concrete action
can be undertaken in this regard.

We emphasize the importance for the United
Nations and Member States to consult and cooperate
closely with each other in dealing with non-State
armed groups to ensure that sustainable measures to
improve the situation of children in armed conflict can
be undertaken. Malaysia believes that peace processes
provide a critical forum of engagement with non-State
armed groups. We call for child protection provisions
to be integrated into all peace processes, negotiations
and agreements. In that regard, we recognize the great
value of the Guidance for Mediators on Addressing
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in Ceasefire and
Peace Agreements, issued by the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs in 2012.
We believe that a similar guidance note to address
grave Violations against children would provide a
much needed reference to ensure that child protection
concerns are mainstreamed into ceasefire and peace
agreements.

In January this year, the international community
was shocked by the use of a seven-year-old girl by
Boko Haram as a suicide bomber, tragically killing
herself and five others at a marketplace in Nigeria.
We express our strongest condemnation of the gross
violations and abuses committed by terrorist groups,
such as Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, against children, including the recruitment
and use of children as combatants, suicide bombers and
executioners.

We are also deeply concerned about the alarming
trend in the abduction of children by terrorist groups and
militias. Hundreds of children have been abducted in
the past year by armed groups in Africa and the Middle
East, many of whose fates are still unknown, including
the 276 schoolgirls from Chibok, Nigeria, taken in April
2014. Others, such as the 89 boys abducted in South
Sudan in February 2015, have been forcibly recruited
for combat purposes. Just today we read reports that
500 more women and children had been abducted by
Boko Haram. Those violations are deplorable and cause
untold suffering to families and communities.

While the horrific mass abductions have brought
widespread attention to these occurrences at the
international stage, abduction has long been used as
a tactic by non-State armed groups, and is often the
precursor to other grave violations. We continue to
call for the immediate and unconditional release of all
children held captive by armed groups. In that regard,
we believe that it is timely for the Security Council
to underscore its condemnation of child abduction by
recognizing abduction in armed conflict as a trigger for
listing in the annexes ofthe Secretary-General's annual
report.

We must be clear that ending and preventing grave
violations against children is only one side of the coin.
Equally important is ensuring that mechanisms and
programmes are in place to facilitate the reintegration
and rehabilitation of children who have been victimized
by armed groups back into their communities. In that
regard, the Paris Principles remain an instrumental
framework that continues to guide efforts in the release
and reintegration of children associated with armed
groups.

As the Principles themselves detail, the special
needs of girls, who are at greater risk ofrape and sexual
violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, must be taken
into account in reintegration strategies. We also wish
to highlight the plight of second-generation victims of
armed conflict, namely, the children born of war, and
the need to recognize this segment as a victim group in
post-conflict settings.

We emphasize that reintegration is a long-term
effort that requires the collective responsibility of all
stakeholders, including the international community.
In that regard, we also fully support community-based
reintegration programmes that can foster a spirit of
unity and reconciliation among communities that have
been ravaged by war.

In conclusion, the concerted efforts of all actors is
vital in reigning in and ending the grievous violations
and abuses committed against children, whether
by States or non-State actors. I assure you of my
delegation's commitment to play a constructive role
towards that end.

