Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I wish a Ramadan
Mubarak to all who observe and celebrate this month of
Ramadan. Germany brought light, and now Indonesia
has brought beautiful colour, to the Council Chamber,
so it is clear that we can count on the elected members
to innovate. I thank them also for their leadership.

I commend Indonesia for having convened
today's open debate and thank the briefers for their
engaging presentations.

In recent years the Council has expanded the
mandates and tasks to be executed by peacekeeping
operations. Guided by the need to protect vulnerable
populations and secure a more sustainable peace, we
are asking our deployed military, police and civilians to
do more than ever before. At the same time, as today's
briefers have noted, peacekeeping operations have
become more complex, multifaceted and dangerous.
In order to go from strategic intent to practical effect,
we need capabilities that are provided collectively by
troop- and police-contributing countries. Delivering
on these capabilities requires specialized training and
capacity-building, because the tasks and the operational
environment of United Nations peacekeeping are often
unique. It is for this reason that's today's debate is
so timely.

Training needs to be specialized and context-
specific. Where possible it should be scenario-based,
providing concrete examples and practical guidance on
how to respond to realities on the ground, and it should
be carried out predeployment and in-theatre as needed.

We recognize that training and capacity-building is
inherently a work in progress, whether it is to maintain
our edge, prepare successive rotations of peacekeepers
or adapt strategies and tactics to the evolving nature
of conflict. As noted in the report authored by former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled "Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers", training and
capacity-building is also intimately linked to the safety
and security of our peacekeepers.

We should not compromise the safety and security

of even a single United Nations peacekeeper as a

result of a lack of adequate training. That is not a high

bar; it is the only responsible way to deploy, for our

troops and police and for the communities they serve.

Furthermore, training and capacity-building is an

essential component of peacekeeping performance. We

simply cannot enhance performance without investing

in knowledge and skills. In this regard, partnerships are
essential. As troop and police contributors, we do not
need to operate alone. We can work together, drawing
on one another's strengths and areas of expertise, and
eliminating redundancies in our efforts.

In this regard, Canada has provided $20 million
in the past three years in direct support of identified
United Nations training and professional development
needs. Canada has also partnered with institutions
such as the Ecole de maintien de la paix Alioune
Blondin Beye de Bamako to deliver essential training
to peacekeepers. More recently, we have worked in
developing implementation guidance on the Vancouver
Principles to help peacekeepers better deliver on their
child-protection mandates.

Training is required at all levels. Indeed, in
addressing complex challenges, effective leadership
is a prerequisite. That is why for the past three years
we have supported the United Nations Senior Mission
Leaders Course and taken steps to make that course
more accessible to a wider and more diverse range
of personnel.

(spoke in French)

Of course, what counts is not only how we train, but
also whom we train. Experience and studies show that
greater diversity leads to better results for peacekeeping
operations by contributing broader perspectives,
advantages, connections and varied forces. As we say
in Canada, diversity is strength.

Training and capacity-building should seek
to increase diversity, not only by expanding the
representation of all Member States in peacekeeping
operations, but also by ensuring the full and effective
participation of women at all levels of peace operations.
As part of the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace
Operations, we have found that women do not have the
same access to training opportunities that develop the
basic skills for deployment. They face ostracism within
the training cohorts, as well as the perception that they
cannot do their job as well as men. We must ensure
that women's personnel in peacekeeping operations
have equitable access to training and capacity-building,
enabling them to be deployed and contribute to the
success of missions.

Because language skills are essential to
understanding the local context of peacekeeping
operations, our training and capacity-building efforts
must also include a language component. That is
particularly evident in the light of the high number of
large missions deployed in Francophone environments.
We therefore stress the importance of developing
French-language training materials and offering
French-language courses to Blue Helmets. In that
regard, we commend Djibouti's efforts to provide a
French-language training course on strengthening
the peacekeeping capacity of the countries of La
Francophonie. This kind of leadership deserves
our support.

Finally, on the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
protection of civilians mandate, we must remember that
the failure to implement mandates can have catastrophic
effects for regions, Member States, communities and
the lives of those whom the peacekeepers are supposed
to protect. The training of Blue Helmets is therefore
vital in the true sense. We must therefore ensure that
they have the necessary skills, training and equipment
to carry out their protection mandate.

In conclusion, the United Nations can count on
Canada to be a partner in training and capacity-building,
be it as Chair of the Working Group of the Whole of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as the
host of the next Challenges Forum in June in Montreal,
or - as we all know - as a candidate for the Security
Council in 2021-2122.

