I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for the briefing. During our previous video-teleconference on the situation in the Middle East (see S/2020/341), Mr. Mladenov warned the Council against the dangerous prospect of the annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank. He shared his concern with us again today, which is widely echoed by the international community. We have heard the loud and clear voice of Palestinian people. The League of Arab States, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and many other United Nations Member States have also reasserted their objection in that regard. China is also deeply concerned about reports of the plan to annex part of the occupied Palestinian territory. Such a plan, if implemented, would seriously violate international law and relevant United Nations resolutions and imperil the two-State solution. The two-State solution is the only viable way forward to resolve the Palestinian question. We urge the relevant parties to stop any unilateral actions and refrain from escalating conflict and tension. It is also our firm position that no country should back such unilateral actions. China shares the view that the Security Council should discharge its mandate and do its part to prevent such dangerous unilateral actions. The Palestinian question is at the root of the turbulence in the Middle East. The issue is indeed testing human conscience and international justice. Independent statehood is the inalienable national right of the Palestinian people and it is not something to be traded. Concrete efforts must be made to implement resolution 2334 (2016), including ceasing all settlement activities, stopping the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures and preventing violence against civilians. More efforts are also needed to advance the political process and pave the way for the early resumption of peace talks between Palestine and Israel in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions, the land for peace principle and the Arab Peace Initiative. In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we encourage Israel and Palestine to strengthen public health cooperation, and Israel to lift the blockade against Gaza. We commend United Nations agencies, including the World Health Organization and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for helping Palestine address the pandemic. The international community should scale up assistance to the Palestine people, including through increased financial support to UNRWA. China stands with the Palestinian people in their fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. We have provided personal protective equipment and test reagents to Palestine and have held several videoconferences to share know-how and experience. The Palestinian people can also count on China's continued support of their just cause to restore legitimate national rights. We fully support Palestine in building an independent and sovereign State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We will work closely with the international community in the pursuit of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
