I was born during the civil war in Kabul. My family left Afghanistan, and I became a child refugee in Pakistan. I still remember the fear and agony I endured there and the awkward feeling of not belonging. I still remember the day when my family decided to come back to Afghanistan and the joy and hope in my parents' eyes. In 2001, no one would think that a young girl would represent Afghan youth on an international platform. But today, after almost two decades, that child refugee is honoured to be the Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations. For that precious opportunity, I am grateful to the Afghans for Progressive Thinking organization and the German Embassy in Kabul. While it is very difficult to represent a generation born and raised in violence and conflict, I am delighted to speak on behalf of Afghan youth. I represent a generation who have been the main victim of this proxy war. We are being killed, and our dreams are being buried every day. I speak on behalf of Rahed, Suhaila, Hedayat and their friends who were brutally killed during the terror attack on Kabul University. I speak on behalf of students killed in the Kawser and Mowod education centres. I have met their families; their pain is beyond our imagination. I promised them that I will be their voice, and I am fulfilling my promise. I speak on behalf of Elyas Da'ee, Yama Siawash and Malali Maiwand, the prominent young journalists who were killed by terrorists. I speak on behalf of human rights activist Natasha Khalil and the 25-year old mother who was shot dead along with her newborn baby girl in the maternity ward of the Medecins sans Frontieres hospital. I speak on behalf of the young people in the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces who have sacrificed their lives to fight terrorism and protect our motherland and the rest of the world. I speak on behalf of those gems who were supposed to become our future leaders but were killed. Terrorists are afraid of Afghan young people, and that is why they are targeting our educational institutions. They know that the educated and informed generations will never allow terrorism and extremism to grow in their country. As the Afghan Youth Representative, my message is obvious and clear to the terrorists and their supporters: You tried to bury us, you did not know that we were seeds. The daily slaughter of young Afghans - and all Afghans - must end now. That is why an absolute majority of Afghan young people support the end of the war through peace negotiations. I should warn, though, that peace should not only mean the end of violence. Yes, we demand an immediate ceasefire, but for us peace means more than just a ceasefire. Peace should not threaten further development and the gains we have made over the past two decades, such as increasing access to education from several hundred thousand children to several million; improving health-care systems; building a vibrant civil society and creating leadership space for the brave women of Afghanistan. It is important to implement the provisions of resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security. Young people should be part of the peace and security- building process. Unfortunately, we have been excluded since the beginning of the peace negotiations. Afghan young people want transparent peace negotiations, which should pave the way for a dignified and permanent peace. We desire an Afghanistan in which every Afghan lives with dignity and in peace and in which women are respected and receive equal opportunities to be educated and to contribute to all sectors of society. We want Afghan children to spend their childhood with joy and not live with the sounds of bullets and bombs. We want Afghan minorities to be treated with respect so that they can practice their culture and religious beliefs freely. We want a corruption-free Afghanistan in which the rule of law is maintained. We do not want a political settlement that will serve the interests of others. We have already paid a huge price for the proxy wars. If this peace process goes wrong, Afghans will be the victims again. Since the day the peace agreement was signed between the Taliban and the United States, instead of a reduction in violence, tension and conflict have increased. Civilians are being killed; young people are being targeted. We are disappointed, and we cannot trust the peace negotiations this way. If the Taliban really want a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan, why are they destroying schools, bridges, roads and public infrastructure? If they really want peace, why have they not stepped back even an inch on their demands and conditions, while the Afghan Government has released more than 5,000 dangerous prisoners to prove their goodwill for peace? My message to the Taliban is that they must not destroy their motherland for the sake of other's interests. Their children will have a bright and dignified future only in their own country, and not as refugees. It is not just the Taliban who are responsible for a variety of war crimes. The international forces, who have come to Afghanistan with a mandate and aim of maintaining law and order and protecting human rights and democracy, have also committed miserable war crimes. Instead of targeting the safe havens and training centres of terrorists in Pakistan, they have bombarded our villages and homes and have killed innocent civilians. I hope that we all dare to accept our mistakes, apologize to the people of Afghanistan and direct all our efforts to avoiding such inhumane crimes in future. To bring peace and maintain stability and order in Afghanistan, peace negotiations must be held in Afghanistan among the Afghans, and no foreigner should be allowed to interfere. The Taliban must agree to a countrywide immediate ceasefire to gain the trust of the Afghan people in the ongoing peace process. Our achievements must not be compromised. Our demands and red lines should be respected. Afghan young people do not want to go back to the dark era of the 1990s. All parties involved in Afghanistan's war must apologize to the people of Afghanistan for war crimes. To protect the rights of victims of war, individuals involved in war crimes must be prosecuted. The peace process must strengthen unity among Afghans and should not pave the way for hatred and another civil war. The republic and democracy must not be compromised. The international community must keep supporting the brave Afghan security forces in fighting international terrorists, drug dealers and mafias. The peace process should result in an end to corruption, narcotics and unemployment in Afghanistan. It must lead to the disarmament of all political parties and warlords inside Afghanistan. We have built our country by our blood, and throughout that struggle we have learned and achieved a lot. We are eager to serve our motherland. That is the duty of all Afghan young people. I call upon all leaders across the world to trust the Afghan young people. We are resilient and eager to live in peace and harmony. We are the patriotic generation that they will never regret investing in and counting on.
