Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
sincerely thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien for his briefing
and his commitment. He has once again reminded us of
our responsibilities with regard to the Syrian tragedy.

Since our last humanitarian consultations,
one more step has been taken into the horror. The
chemical-weapons attack at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April
killed more than 80 people and injured more than
500. We expect the Secretary-General's next report to
address very precisely the humanitarian consequences
of this tragedy.

Information that France has obtained, which the
French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc
Ayrault, made public yesterday, provides evidence
of the use of sarin gas and the responsibility of the
regime, which will have to answer for these crimes.
Syria undertook in 2013 to never again use chemical
weapons and to destroy all of its chemical-weapons
capabilities. More than ever now, we must remind the
regime of its obligations. More broadly, the prohibition
of the use of chemical weapons must remain an absolute
and universal obligation, as it is one of the pillars of our
collective security.

Ten days after 4 April, a convoy of civilians was
attacked by a vehicle bomb in the Al-Rashidin transit
zone, killing at least 130 people, including 67 children.
Once again the Syrian population has been directly
targeted. The price it is paying is unbearable. This
tragedy took place in a very particular context, namely,
that of the cross-displacement of populations. So far,
more than 11,000 people have been evacuated from
the so-called four towns of Fo'ah, Kafraya, Zabadani
and Madaya. I would like to remind the Security
Council that civilian evacuations must be undertaken
on a voluntary basis. The Secretary-General has clearly
pointed out that the forced displacement of populations
may constitute war crimes, and the populations
concerned must be allowed to choose their destination.

In that context, we appeal again to those who support
the Syrian regime to exert all the pressure needed for it
to comply with its international obligations and allow
for full, secure, unconditional and unhindered access
by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to
people in need throughout Syria. The lives of hundreds
of thousands of people hang in the balance, but United
Nations access to the population is still as hampered as
ever, especially for besieged cities. We recall that the
use of hunger as a weapon of war and obstacles to relief
are war crimes, and we reiterate with force our call for
the immediate lifting of all sieges.

The gap between the aid reaching the zones
controlled by the regime and the aid granted to areas
held by the opposition can only grow. Throughout
March, United Nations agencies submitted new
requests for access, but the Government's refusals
deprived more than 68,000 people of food assistance in
Homs, Dar'a and rural Damascus. We are particularly
concerned about the humanitarian situation in eastern
Ghouta. Humanitarian convoys were planned by the
United Nations in this area. However, the facilitation
letters for the loading of the convoy have not yet been
issued by the regime, whereas the opposition has given
sufficient guarantees in terms of security for the letting
the convoys through. We therefore call on the parties
to take all necessary measures to enable aid workers to
proceed without delay and in complete safety with the
delivery of aid.

Moreover, the Syrian authorities persist in
refusing to authorize medicines and medical supplies
in humanitarian convoys. This is unacceptable. The
World Health Organization's requests for access to
five areas of the country have remained unanswered.
This is simply not acceptable. France recalls the right
of the Syrian population to humanitarian assistance
and protection, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions.
The attacks on the hospitals and schools, in particular,
to which Stephen O'Brien has referred, also calls for
our strongest condemnation.

The situation we are describing no longer has
anything to do with a cessation of hostilities. The
regime has consistently violated its commitments
methodically - systematically - while claiming to
carry out actions against Da'esh. Violence intensifies,
especially in the provinces of Hama, Damascus and
Dar'a. The air strikes of the regime against civilians
continue east of Qalamoun. Indiscriminate attacks
against civilians are taking place incessantly. The
guarantors ofthe truce concluded on 29 December took
responsibility for overseeing its implementation. We
therefore appeal to the States guarantors of the Astana
process, and in particular to Russia and Iran, to impose
on the Syrian regime a complete cessation ofhostilities.

In that context, the establishment of an efficient
international mechanism for monitoring the ceasefire
is a necessity that France has regularly called for
and for which it has made concrete proposals. The
improvement of the situation on the ground is essential
for the resumption of the negotiations in Geneva during
the month of May with a view to a political transition,
and this, of course, under the auspices of the United
Nations. That is the only way to save Syria from the
abyss of violence, that of Da'esh and that of the regime,
which are feeding each other.

We all know that a tangible and lasting improvement
in the situation in Syria is possible only in the context
ofa political settlement of the crisis based on a political
transition in the country, as provided for in resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). To put it bluntly, any credible revival of political
negotiations presupposes much stronger pressure from
Russia on the Damascus regime, as well as on the
continuation of the recent American strikes, which we
have approved, and a real political re-engagement of
the United States in Syria in parallel with the efforts of
Europeans and other stakeholders. Rest assured, Madam
President, of the France's determined commitment in
this direction.

