Mr. Wali (Nigeria): Mr. President, may I join
others in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I should like
also to thank you for having convened this open debate
on this very important subject.

On behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish to
convey our appreciation for the opportunity to
participate in the Security Council's open debate on
small arms. I thank the Secretary-General for his report
contained in document S/2006/109 of 17 February
2006. As is highlighted in the Report, the major
challenge before the Security Council concerns its
contribution towards curbing the illicit small arms
trade, which has fuelled conflicts and hampered the
achievement of peace and security as well as stability
and development in sections of the international
community, including the African region.

As the Council is no doubt aware from the first
and second Biennial Meetings of States which assessed
the implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
there has, regrettably, been little progress on the matter
since the Programme's adoption in July 2001. This is
in spite of the efforts made at various levels. The fact
is that the illicit circulation of small arms has
continued, with their devastating effects on the States
and regions concerned, calling into question the
political will of the international community to take a
decisive step in this area. The international community
seems paralysed, and soldiers of fortune have
unfettered freedom to prey on the weaknesses of crisis-
prone countries, which have turned them into theatres
of insecurity.

It cannot be overemphasized that there is a need
to accord priority to the issue of the easy accessibility
of such arms and weapons to non-State actors and to
prevent such accessibility. Nigeria remains convinced
that the best and most effective strategy for achieving
this goal is through the conclusion of a legally binding
international instrument to control the supply of small
arms and light weapons to non-State actors. We agree
with the prevailing view among the majority of
Member States that such weapons, as, indeed, weapons
of all types, are dangerous in the hands of non-State
actors.

The Council's resolution 1540 (2004) banning
accessibility of weapons of mass destruction to non-
State actors was a recognition, in part, of this nexus.
The international community should complement this
with a separate resolution covering small arms and
light weapons, which are the weapons killing people
worldwide and have become the weapons of choice in
almost all conflicts, including those with which the
Council is currently seized.

We reaffirm our conviction that the illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons could be
controlled, and armed conflicts reduced, if, and only if,
the transfer of such weapons was limited to
Governments and licensed traders. The international
community would thereby ensure the use of such
weapons for legitimate purposes only, namely the
maintenance of law and order, and national or self-
defence.

We reiterate Nigeria's support for the
enforcement of Council resolutions on arms embargoes
and believe that maximum cooperation on the part of
Member States in providing the requisite information
on any violation of those embargoes would strengthen
the common resolve to address that problem. It is not
insignificant in this regard to point out the role of
producers in furnishing accurate data on their trade in
these weapons with Member States. We should not
allow or encourage any situation in which
manufacturers could seek to violate existing import
regimes. An effective monitoring mechanism to
prevent the cross-border movement of arms,
combatants and mercenaries would also be invaluable.
We recall that the Council addressed this issue in
March 2003.

The link between the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and the illicit exploitation of natural
and other resources, such as diamonds and timber, has
long been recognized. Successive resolutions of the
Council have addressed this issue, but the desired
change has been slow in coming. We look forward to
action by the Council on the findings and
recommendations of the various panels of experts and
other bodies established to investigate such links.

Nigeria also wishes to emphasize the importance
of ensuring the effective collection of weapons and
their storage and destruction in post-conflict situations
in the context of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. We believe that the
inclusion of DDR programmes in the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) is
timely, and we are confident that such programmes will
continue to form part of the future mandates of
peacekeeping operations if the international
community wishes to avert a relapse into conflict.

The foregoing challenges facing the Council
should not overshadow the significant strides that have
been made in the area in the past year. The entry into
force on 3 July 2005 of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which sets out
a comprehensive system to control their movement is
indeed noteworthy. As a demonstration of Nigeria's
strong commitment to the fight against illicit small
arms and light weapons, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the Government of Nigeria ratified the
instrument on 29 December 2005, which was deposited
with the Secretary-General on 3 March 2006. Nigeria
reaffirms its commitment to fulfil its obligations under
the Protocol, as it has always done with regard to all
international instruments to which it is a party.

The adoption of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons is indicative of what can be achieved when
political will is backed by action. For the Nigerian
Government, this can only be a stopgap measure. Only
a legally binding international instrument on the
transfer of small arms and light weapons could satisfy
the yearnings and aspirations of victim States and
peoples. Let me also state in this regard that we agree
with the Secretary-General that the time is ripe for
agreement on brokering in small arms and light weapons,
so critical to the success of our efforts in curbing the
proliferation of illicit small arms. The General
Assembly, by its resolution 60/81 of 8 December
2005 - which established a group of governmental
experts to enhance international cooperation on
brokering - has shown that there is support for such
action. The Security Council should complement this
by a clear message of support at the end of this debate.
Nigeria's efforts in these matters are reflected in
her firm commitment to regional cooperation, as well
as in implementation, jointly with other countries in
the West African subregion, of the ECOWAS
moratorium. Together with member States of the
Community, we are determined to transform the
moratorium into a legally binding instrument within
the shortest possible time. We trust that the support of
the international community for these efforts will
remain strong. Ultimately this would constitute for our
countries an endorsement of the path that our leaders
have chosen to tread, as well as a contribution to peace
and security, stability and development in our region.

