Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we reiterate our support for the statements
made by the representative of Germany on behalf of
the penholders at the first meeting this morning (see S/PV.8622), as well as at this meeting.

We regret and express our disappointment that
the Council has failed to shoulder its responsibility.
History will undoubtedly remember this meeting and
the positions of all Security Council members on the
balanced humanitarian draft resolution S/2019/756, put
forward by the State of Kuwait, Germany and Belgium,
which sought to protect civilians in Idlib by calling for
a cessation of hostilities there so as to prevent further
suffering of its population. The people, including the
elderly, children and women of Idlib, will remember the
result of the voting on this draft resolution and will be
harsh in their judgment of the Security Council.

The failure of the Council to adopt a draft
resolution on a merely humanitarian issue is added to a
series of Council failures on the Syrian issue. For many
years, there has been no real and tangible progress
in the Council towards ending the suffering of the
Syrian people. The use of the veto today means that
the lives of millions of Syrians in north-west Syria will
continue to be jeopardized, as the United Nations has
repeatedly warned against the emergence of the worst
humanitarian situation of the twenty-first century if
military operations continue there.

The United Nations figures reflecting the scale
of the humanitarian suffering in Idlib were the main
reason for our action and the submission of the draft
resolution, as penholders, which was negotiated
transparently and inclusively with all members of the
Council for three weeks. A counter draft resolution
was submitted. It was not negotiated. It was put in blue
yesterday. That clearly demonstrates the sharp division
in the Council on the Syrian issue even though our
objective is purely humanitarian.

The military escalation in north-western Syria
since late April has led to the displacement of more than
half a million people and the killing of almost 1,000
civilians, half of whom are women and children. Health
care, educational and civilian facilities have been
heavily damaged. Such developments and violations of
international humanitarian law in Idlib did not prompt
the Council to take a unified and correct position. We
reiterate our condemnation of the targeting of civilians
by any party, as well as attacks on hospitals and
health-care facilities. Those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law should be held accountable.

Terrorism is a serious scourge that threatens
international peace and security. We all agree on and
are decisive in combating terrorism wherever it occurs,
including in Idlib governorate. However, we reiterate
what has already been said by many Council members
and by the Secretary-General himself, namely, that
counter-terrorism operations do not exempt parties
from meeting their commitments under international
humanitarian law, including the commitment to
protecting civilians and civilian facilities, as well as the
principles of distinction, proportionality and caution.

In conclusion, I thank all Member States that
supported the efforts of the penholders and voted in
favour of the draft resolution. We reiterate that the
failure of the Council to adopt the draft resolution will
not deter or discourage us. We will pursue our efforts
to protect civilians and to improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria.

We once again stress that there is no military solution
to the crisis in Syria. The only solution is through a
political settlement that takes into consideration the
legitimate aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people and
upholds the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

