Mr. Owada (Japan): This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened expressly to address the issue
of children in armed conflict. As such, it is unprecedented
in the history of the Security Council. That the Council
has felt it necessary to address this issue is testimony to
a tragic situation, in which so many children are falling
victim to armed conflicts in many parts of the world
today. The members of the Council understand that this
situation has profound implications for the problem of the
maintenance of international peace and security, and thus
demands the urgent attention of the Council. I should like
to commend you, Mr. President, for your initiative on this
important matter.

With the shift in recent years in the nature of armed
conflicts from inter-State to intra-State fighting, the
number of children involved in and falling victim to
armed conflicts has increased dramatically. With the
proliferation of small arms in the hands of groups
engaged in intra-State fighting, the character of such
armed conflicts has also drastically changed, inflicting
devastating harm upon innocent civilians, and especially
children. It is now incumbent upon the international
community to make serious efforts to cope with this
problem. In addition to addressing this intolerable
humanitarian situation, we have to pay special attention to
its long-term negative implications for the future
generations of our society, as well as to its immediate
impact upon the process of post-conflict peace-building.
In addressing the issue of children in armed conflict, the
Council should demonstrate its determination to place the
issue at the centre of its strategy in conflict prevention
and post-conflict peace-building, to be tackled in a
comprehensive manner.

The Government of Japan has long stressed that
children, who are our society's hope for the future and
thus its most precious resource, are also its most
vulnerable elements. The situation in which children in
many parts of the world are being deprived of their right
to grow up and live in a peaceful society where they are
entitled to a life free from persecution and violence must
be addressed as an issue of utmost importance to all
members of the international community. Children who
have been traumatized by armed conflicts frequently
suffer lasting and debilitating economic, social and
psychological effects, even when their lives are spared
and no physical harm is inflicted. Those children require
compassionate, skilled and ongoing care, and the
international community has to see to it that such care is
given, because it is to children that the task of post-
conflict nation-building will fall.

 

I wish to offer the high tribute of the Government of
Japan to the dedication and commitment of Mr. Olara
Otunnu, who has recognized the importance of this task and
accepted the responsibility of serving as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict. He has been successful in drawing our
attention to the most difficult situations that children in
armed conflicts are encountering in such places as Sudan
and Sierra Leone. His responsibilities for raising the
awareness of society on this question, promoting the public
dissemination of information about the plight of children
and offering ways and means to combat the problem are
extremely important.

The inspiring statement that we have just heard from
him points to the critical importance that we have to attach
to this problem. The concrete suggestions he made are
worthy of careful consideration on the part of all of us. I
sincerely hope that he will be eminently successful in
playing this critical role of advocacy, which will help
expedite the efforts of the United Nations system to cope
with this urgent problem. However, the success of his work
requires more than his personal efforts. It is essential that
the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and all other relevant United Nations
bodies and specialized agencies, as well as non-
governmental organizations, extend to him their full support
and cooperation. It is essential also that international bodies
working in this area coordinate their own efforts on behalf
of children with those of this new office.

On that understanding, I am happy to announce at this
time that in recognition of the importance of this mission
carried out by Mr. Otunnu and his office, the Government
of Japan intends to contribute $100,000 to support the start
of this very important office of Children and Armed
Conflict. Furthermore, I should like to state that we in
Japan are willing to host, in cooperation with the office of
Mr. Otunnu and other relevant United Nations organizations
and agencies, a public international symposium in Tokyo on
the issue of children in armed conflict in the context of
situations in our part of the world.

The involvement of child soldiers in armed conflicts
is an issue which particularly demands our urgent attention.
In many recent intra-State conflicts and civil war situations
in Africa and elsewhere, children in their early teens, who
under normal circumstances should be enjoying their time
on the playground, have often been seen on the
battleground engaged in killing their opposite numbers
with machine guns and other lethal weapons.

Japan urges all parties to armed conflicts to strictly
observe article 38 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the relevant provisions of the Geneva
Conventions prohibiting children under 15 years of age
from being used as soldiers. Japan is convinced that we
should go further and pursue the goal that no child under
the age of 18 will be recruited and used in armed conflict.
Japan is participating in the working group for the
addition to this effect of an optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict.

Japan is also deeply concerned about the plight of
children who have fallen victim to anti-personnel
landmines. In order for our children in the twenty-first
century to live free from the fear of landmines, we in
Japan have been promoting a "zero-victim programme",
aimed at enhancing demining activities, providing
assistance to mine victims and seeking a universal and
effective ban on landmines. As a country which signed in
December 1997 the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and is
currently working toward its ratification, Japan
specifically urges that the current consultations at the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva make further
progress towards the early commencement of negotiations
for a treaty to ban the export of all landmines.

In view of the cardinal importance of saving children
from the scourge of armed conflicts and other hazardous
environments, the Government of Japan has been
extending cooperation through bilateral assistance, grants
for small-scale grass-roots projects and support for non-
governmental organization activities that aim to provide
educational opportunities and improve the health and
nutrition of children affected by armed conflicts. It has
also extended and will continue to extend such
cooperation through relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF),
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC).

In the area of demining and victim assistance, my
Government announced last year its contribution of 10
billion yen to be disbursed over the next five years, and
I sincerely hope that this will have a positive effect on a
reduction in the number of children who fall victim to

 

landmines, as well as on the rehabilitation and social
reintegration of child victims.

Another important aspect of the problems involved is
the unintended adverse consequences of sanctions on the
civilian population, especially on its most vulnerable
sectors, such as children. General Assembly resolution
51/242 prescribes that foodstuffs, medicines and medical
supplies should be exempted from the United Nations
sanctions regimes and that the sanctions committees should
give priority to handling applications for the supply of
humanitarian goods for the civilian population. The efforts
to promote the elaboration of sanctions in such a way as to
focus specifically on the targeted regime without producing
negative effects on the civilian population, including
innocent children, should be further pursued. Japan intends
to be actively involved in this process.

Let me conclude by expressing my Governments
appreciation to such international organizations as the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), UNICEF, UNHCR, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR)
and ICRC, as well as numerous non-governmental
organizations, for their tireless efforts to protect children in
situations of armed conflict and to promote their welfare. In
closing, I wish to stress once again the importance of the
mission that Mr. Otunnu and his staff are undertaking and
to express my sincere wish that Mr. Otunnu will succeed in
giving tangible hope to those children currently living in
despair. We in the international community must spare no
effort to ensure the right of children everywhere to live in
peace, for it is on children that our future depends.

