Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): 1 also would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
statement and her invaluable contribution to the peace
process in Timor-Leste.

I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences
for the demise of Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, Deputy
Special Representative for Security Sector Support and
Rule of Law. I welcome the Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, Mrs. Sofia Borges, and thank her for
her presentation. I would like to limit my remarks to
the issues of political development, humanitarian and
social development and the security and judicial
system.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/522) and the climate of calm and stability in
Timor-Leste during the reporting period. That situation
has undoubtedly facilitated the focused implementation
of the Government's National Strategic Development
Plan. The continuous operationalization of the Plan -
and its transformation into a series of medium-term
development plans within an agreed time frame - is
highly commended. We urge donors to provide the
assistance required to cover the deficit in the Strategic
Plan and also to provide long-term predictable support.

Investments in the three economic pillars
identified by the Government, namely, agriculture,
natural resources and tourism, if properly harnessed,
will engender economic growth and accelerate the pace
of development in the country. Indeed, the prospects of
transforming Timor-Leste from its present status as a
low-income country to high-income status in the next
20 years is realizable if the Government steadily
implements the Plan.

The constructive interaction between the various
political parties and major stakeholders in guaranteeing
peace, harmony and continuity in governance is
commended. We note in particular the Government's
"Road to peace and national unity" initiative, which
has helped to foster dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties. We welcome the pronouncements of the
United Nations Secretary-General and the President of
the Frente Revolucionaria do Timor-Leste
Independente (Fretilin) urging the parties to approach
the future with renewed determination to achieve
peace, stability and development. The parties should be
guided by those pronouncements while undertaking the
review of the voter registration process and
strengthening the electoral bodies for the 2012
elections.

We also welcome the resolve to assign a greater
role to women and youth in governance, as that will
allow for the incorporation of a balanced gender
perspective in the decision-making process. It will also
promote implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, as well as Council resolution 1325
(2000), the United Nations Convention on the Rights
of the Child, and resolution 1704 (2006). The
Government's two-year training initiative for members
of the Youth Parliament will equip young people with
the leadership and other skills needed to make
meaningful contributions on key policy issues. The
contributions of United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United
Nations Development Programme and UNICEF in that
regard are appreciated.

On the humanitarian and social development
aspects, although Timor-Leste is no longer facing a
humanitarian crisis, the devastation caused by the
recent widespread flooding and landslides should be
given adequate attention. We commend the efforts of
UNMIT, the Food and Agriculture Organization and
the World Food Programme to provide food and
technical and logistic support to the Government and
people of Timor-Leste. The international community
should not let up in strengthening its response capacity
to address that natural disaster.

With regard to security, we welcome the stable
situation in the country and the increased policing
responsibilities of the national police (PNTL) in four
more districts. To achieve the timeline for the full
transfer of policing responsibilities to the PNTL,
especially in the remaining three districts, the capacity
needs of the force should be met through training,
mentoring and senior development. The PNTL should
continue to take measures to build trust and confidence
with the people.

Effective disarmament mechanisms, command
and control structures, weapon control mechanisms and
planning processes, as well as adequate logistic
support, are so critical for the creation of a strong and
effective PNTL. Human rights violations, impunity and
gender-based crimes by members of the security
services impinge on the credibility of the services and
should be addressed.

We note the Government's anti-corruption efforts,
including the Anti-Corruption Commission and the
appointment of an Anti-Corruption Commissioner and
two deputies. We commend UNMIT for posting
international and national advisers to the Commission
to bolster its efforts.

We support the ongoing gradual phased
drawdown of UNMIT police and look forward to the
next assessment, which will determine the final
drawdown phase. With the expiration of the
recruitment notices in September, the United Nations
must confront the challenges of recruiting qualified
United Nations police to advise and train PNTL
officers.

We also look forward to the Council's upcoming
visit to Timor-Leste, which will provide an opportunity
for a comprehensive assessment of the challenges
facing UNMIT.

In concluding, we wish to comment UNMIT and
the United Nations country team for their continued
support to the people and Government of Timor-Leste.

