The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to imperil the prospects for peace and stability in the Middle East. At a time when we need a spirit of reconciliation and political determination, oppression by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories continues unabated. As documented in numerous United Nations reports, the demolition of Palestinian houses, regular attacks by settlers and movement restrictions remain as daily practices. Those egregious practices undermine the two-State solution and the established parameters for a just and durable peace. The use of excessive and disproportionate force against civilians, arbitrary arrests and the impunity with which Israeli forces operate also constitute a serious threat to the rules-based international order. Attempts to erode the status of Jerusalem, the inhumane blockade in Gaza and the illegal settlements have all been part of a recurring pattern that severely curtails the fundamental rights and freedoms of Palestinians. The people of Palestine live in a permanent state of emergency. Decades of occupation and blockade have severely weakened the Palestinian economy, as well as its critical infrastructure and health system. The tragedy of Palestinians has been compounded by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has had devastating socioeconomic repercussions in addition to its public-health implications. The situation in Gaza remains particularly fragile. The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip has entered its thirteenth year. As Special Rapporteur Lynk stated, "We are no longer on the edge of a humanitarian crisis, but in the middle of one...there is no comparable situation in the world where a substantial population has endured such a permanent lockdown." The recurrent electricity and fuel shortages have severely undermined the delivery of essential health care and water and sanitation services. Chronic shortages of medical supplies and hospital beds, combined with population density and the dilapidated infrastructure, have significantly increased the risk of a major COVID-19 outbreak. We welcome and support the health measures that the Palestinian Government has implemented against the spread of the virus. Despite facing the worst financial crisis in its history, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) remains on the front lines in providing vital educational, health, relief and social services, as well as emergency assistance. We call upon the international community to step up its support to UNRWA, which provides a lifeline for millions of Palestinians. Until a just and lasting solution to the Israeli- Palestine conflict has been reached, the work of UNRWA will remain absolutely indispensable. It is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency. Today the most immediate and pressing challenge facing the Palestinians is the Israeli Government's illegal plans for the annexation of the West Bank. Annexation would be a grave violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as of the United Nations Charter and the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. It would exacerbate the grievances and suffering of Palestinians at the hands of the occupying Power. The Palestinian land and the people of Palestine should not be sacrificed for the sake of Israel's brazen policies of violence and occupation. An overwhelming majority of the international community objected to Israel's plans. The Human Rights Council condemned the annexation plans and called for the High Commissioner for Human Rights to compile a report on the impact of a possible annexation. We look forward to that report and call the Security Council to also shoulder its fair share of responsibilities and take urgent action to counteract the threat of annexation. Some claim that recent developments bode well for the settlement of the conflict and that the threat of annexation has been thwarted. Facts on the ground show otherwise. As pointed out in the latest report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People (A/75/35), the agreements recently signed neither bound Israel to negotiations with the Palestinians, guided by the internationally agreed parameters, nor included the Palestinian people. Any initiative aimed at a just solution to the question of Palestine must consider the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, engage Palestinian leadership and be based on the two-State solution, according to international law, United Nations resolutions and agreement between the parties. The recent normalization agreements, which failed to meet any of those criteria, can in no way bring us closer to a two-State solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict. Contrary to the announcements made, the expansion of illegal settlements in the Palestinian territories has not halted. Those new settlements will be the building blocks of future annexation plans. That is to say, Israel is physically continuing to implement its annexation plans. The latest example of Israel's steps as the occupying Power, in complete disregard of international law and United Nations resolutions, is the approval of more than 5,000 additional illegal settlements in the West Bank. If the international community is sincere about finding a just solution to the conflict on the basis of internationally recognized parameters, then it is incumbent upon the international community to stop Israel from further expanding those illegal settlements. The measures taken by Israel to consolidate its unlawful annexation of Jerusalem and its surroundings threaten the legal status of the city as well as its demographic composition and its historically multicultural and multireligious character. The international community should refrain from taking any steps that would be tantamount to condoning these illegal actions. Therefore, the intention of certain Member States to relocate embassies to Jerusalem or open them there is a source of grave concern. The status of Jerusalem is a fundamental issue that remains at the heart of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The final status of Jerusalem will be part and parcel of the comprehensive solution of the conflict. In order to reach a negotiated two-State solution, achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation is an urgent necessity. We are pleased with the outcome of the unity talks between Fatah and Hamas. We hope that this process will lead to the successful conduct of elections. We urge the Middle East Quartet and the international community to redouble efforts to restart the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. In that regard, we welcome and support the call of President Abbas to the Secretary-General to convene an international conference to launch a genuine peace process. It is high time for us, the Member States, to act on our collective commitment to the ideals and shared values of democracy, accountability and prosperity for everyone. The international community must redouble its efforts to achieve a negotiated two-State solution based on the 1967 borders and the establishment of an independent, sovereign and contiguous State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The people of Palestine deserve to live in freedom, side by side with Israel, in peace and security. That can be realized only with the open and strong support of the international community. I would like to highlight a couple of points on Syria. We continue our efforts to accelerate the political process and ensure the implementation of all the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). We actively support Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to convene the Constitutional Committee regularly and set the agenda for consecutive meetings. The fourth round of the Committee should be held without further delay and focus on the substance. The constructive efforts of the opposition and the Special Envoy in that regard should be reciprocated. Turkey remains fully committed to stabilizing the situation on the ground and ensuring a lasting ceasefire in Idlib. The regime has been exploiting the 5 March ceasefire as an opportunity to regroup. The regime's military build-up around the Idlib de-escalation area and ceasefire violations aim at disrupting the calm on the ground and derailing the political process. Turkey will continue to take all necessary measures to protect civilians. The Security Council should also raise its voice and not allow the regime to undermine the ceasefire in Idlib. Turkey's resolve to fight terrorism in Syria is firm. We will not allow terrorist organizations to find safe haven in our neighbourhood to launch cross-border attacks on our territory. The terrorist organization Kurdistan Workers' Party/People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG) also threatens the stability and unity of Syria with its increasingly brazen actions. This is a terrorist organization that has the blood of both Turkish and Syrian civilians on its hands. Since October 2019, PKK/YPG has carried out more than 250 terrorist attacks targeting civilians in areas where Turkey conducted operations to establish stability and calm. Those attacks resulted in hundreds of civilian casualties. The international community must demonstrate a united front against terrorism by unequivocally condemning the PKK/YPG's terrorist attacks, without hesitation. In addition to targeting civilians, PKK/YPG seeks to consolidate its power throughout north-eastern Syria through oppression and economic incentives. This is a terrorist organization that usurps the natural resources of Syria; promulgates so-called legislation to provide a legal cover for the confiscation of private property; denies education to other communities, including Christians; and recruits children and denies them their right to education and freedom. Furthermore, the PKK/YPG tries to create faits accomplis on the ground, in blatant violation of principles of the territorial integrity and unity of Syria, as enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015).
