Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the presidency of Senegal for convening this very
important debate and for bringing this important issue
to the forefront. My delegation would also like to thank
the briefers for their comments, which, inter alia,
highlight the need for improved water management and
conservation, with greater international cooperation
on water.

Due to many factors - global climate change, the
number and scale of natural disasters, the increase in
human population, food shortages and water disputes
within and between some countries - the issues related
to the ownership and use of water are likely to gain
more prominence. But many times it is not, and will not
be, water that caused the disputes, but other unresolved
conflicts and their effects, as pressures of population
displacement lead to water disputes.

Being fundamental to human survival, water
can arouse strong passions. However, it need not be
a source of conflict if water resources and their use
are governed prudently. But for that we must take a
comprehensive approach to water. It is therefore critical
that the milestone agreements forged last year - the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development,
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change - be
implemented successfully. They will help ensure that
conditions that could turn into conflicts over water
are mitigated. Along with those, Indonesia supports
agreements among States that require them to ensure
that a clear methodology and dispute-resolution
mechanism on watercourses are available.

Given that 70 per cent of global fresh water is used
for agriculture, there should also be greater support
given to developing countries that lack the capacities
for developing their water conservation and agriculture
production abilities.

Indonesia also takes strong exception to any parties
in conflicts attacking water reservoirs and related
infrastructure, which is discussed in the concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). Using water as an instrument of
war is reprehensible. There can never be a defence
for knowingly or unknowingly targeting water, health
services, food or other essential facilities for civilians.
The Security Council must clearly uphold international
humanitarian law. Furthermore, as Indonesia has
stressed before in various United Nations forums, it
is crucial that the Security Council and other relevant
entities of the United Nations system significantly
elevate principled conflict prevention, credible political
solutions, dialogue processes and mediation to help
resolve conflicts peacefully.

Sustainability is a key feature of Indonesia's
medium-term development plan for the period 2015-
2019, with the security of water, food, energy and
maritime resources among its essential components.
In the area of water security, we are pursuing clear
targets in watershed conservation, water availability,
access to drinking water and sanitation. While
South-East Asia is generally self-sufficient in natural
resources, there are varied conditions in the member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). Seasonal scarcity and a rising demand for
freshwater are realities. To ensure equitable access
and sufficient amounts of water of acceptable quality,
ASEAN 4 through its Socio-Cultural Community
Blueprint 2009-2015, a strategic plan of action and
the ASEAN Working Group on Water Resources
Management - has effectively promoted regional
cooperation and collaboration on integrated water
resources management and will continue to intensify
such efforts.

Indonesia is happy to share its insights and
expertise on water resources management with
interested countries. We also believe that United
Nations agencies, particularly UN-Water, should play a
substantially greater role to assist developing countries
to address the multiple issues related to water.

