President Sassou-Nguesso (spoke in French):
First, I wish to thank you, President Sarkozy, for your
timely and welcome initiative in bringing us together
today to address an issue which can leave no African
leader unmoved: peace and security in Africa. Here,
there is a fundamental issue at stake, namely the
interrelated nature of the issues of peace, security and
economic and social development. While it is true that
poverty is a fertile breeding ground for terrorism, it is
also true that it exacerbates tensions and fuels
conflicts. The effective implementation of the various
commitments made by the international community in
the field of development, will undeniably contribute to
preventing and resolving the many conflicts in Africa.

Currently, there are hardly any new major
conflicts in Africa. Rather, our continent is dealing
with situations that are entrenched in the past. The
efforts made by the African States and the African
Union have led to relative stability and have revealed
positive perspectives, although in certain regions the
situation remains fragile. Now is the time for action -
to seize every way out of the crisis that is available to
us. Developments in the Cote d'Ivoire are to be
encouraged. The international community should
support the ongoing process in that country.

In Darfur, we must act without delay. We must
devote all of our energies to a successful political
dialogue, to the effective deployment of the hybrid
force, as well as to humanitarian assistance and the
economic recovery of the Sudan. All the decisions
already taken and to be taken during the upcoming
weeks must be effectively implemented in the field, in
order to prevent any backsliding, or any deterioration
of the situation, the consequences of which would be
felt beyond the Sudanese borders. For that reason,
Congo welcomes the involvement of the European
Union in securing the borders between the Sudan and
its two neighbours - Chad and the Central African
Republic - as was already the case in the context of
the elections held in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

However, the progress achieved in organizing
democratic elections in that brother country must be
accompanied by firm measures geared to address
pending problems: suppression of the hotbeds of
violence in the east, reform of the defence and security
sector and economic reforms. Therefore, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must continue to work closely
with the authorities in that country in order to build
upon the gains achieved.

But there is also the tragedy in Somalia and an
inclusive political dialogue designed to promote
national reconciliation must be encouraged. The Congo
expects the United Nations to provide the African
Union Mission in Somalia with all necessary support
and to play an active role in stabilizing that torn
country. On all those issues, we welcome the
partnership linking the African Union and the United
Nations and welcome the involvement of regional
organizations, including the European Union and the
League of Arab States.

Finally, the Congo wishes to thank all the
participants in the debate, which has provided a new
opportunity for us to mobilize the international
community for Africa.

