Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank the Permanent Representative
of Spain for his interesting statement and for all his
efforts in leading the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). I also thank the Panel of
Experts for their work in preparing the relevant reports.

Jordan is deeply committed to respecting the
right of all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes; that is particularly so for developing countries
attempting to promote economic growth. These efforts
must be part and parcel of full and complete cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and in accordance with the releveant legal instruments,
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
while consistently taking into account the nature and
quality of security and safety measures applicable to
nuclear installations.

Given the emerging possibility of Iran and the P5+l
achieving an agreement on the political framework and
main elements of a comprehensive agreement on the
Iranian nuclear issue in the near future, Jordan, alongside
the rest of the international community, is eager to
receive details of the agreement and implementation
measures. If a comprehensive agreement is reached on
the Iranian nuclear issue, pursuant to the paramaters
set out by the IAEA for the peaceful production of
nuclear energy, it would represent a first step in the
right direction that we should seize upon to strengthen
regional security. We hope that such an agreement will
bolster the efforts of the international community to
address all the challenges facing the Middle East, in
particular in the field of security, and that it will not
detract from our consideration of all other dossiers in
the Arab region.

Moreover, we reiterate the need for the Committee
to continue to fully meet its responsibilities to pursue
the necessary investigations ofviolations that have been
committed and to maintain a positive commitment,
alongside the Iranian authorities, to clarifying all
outstanding issues related to past violations. We invite
the Iranian Government to respond to the Panel of
Experts's requests for clarification in that respect.
Along the same lines, we encourage States that have
not yet submitted their reports on the measures taken
towards the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions to do so. We also call upon them
to fully cooperate with the Panel of Experts, as the
success of the Committee very much depends on those
States submitting their reports.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to the
role of the Committee, which assists Member States
and international bodies in implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions by considering requests
from Member States concerning Iran's requests for
technical assistance with regard to the provision of
energy and aircraft services. We encourage such
assistance, as it enables Member States to ensure
that they act in conformity with the resolutions of the
Security Council.

