Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me begin by
welcoming the Council's unanimous vote on resolution
2496 (2019), extending the mandate of the European
Union-led Operation Althea. We thank all Council
members for their constructive engagement in that
regard. I am grateful to the two briefers for their
presentations. They were very open, honest, sobering
and comprehensive, and I thank them both.

As Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union a bit later, I
will not make a general statement but will rather speak
to some specific points.

First, I have to say that even having an idea of
what is happening, I was shocked, but I was also
shocked at what High Representative Valentin Inzko
and Ms. Selma Korjenie said in their briefings about
the denial of past crimes, including genocide, the
glorification of criminals and the lack of accountability
and reconciliation. In that regard, I again welcome the
fact that reconciliation will be on the agenda of the
British presidency of the Council this month.

I have a question for the High Representative. He
mentioned that he wants to make the rule of law and
respect for it a priority. In concrete terms, what does he
think he can do with regard to the question that came
up? How can he do more, so that we are no longer seeing
genocide denied? How can he encourage other actors?

With respect to the Sejdie and Finci case, we all
know that it has been going on for a decade or more,
and many efforts have been undertaken in that regard.
Mr. Inzko also put that on his list ofpriorities. How does
he think he can make a difference? What instruments
does he have at his disposal? When he returns in six
months, how does he think he can achieve that? We
do not want to lose the Ambassador here, but for him
not to have the possibility of becoming President
is remarkable.

I also very much appreciated the High
Representative's underlining of gender equality, and
we heard about the victims of sexual violence. My third
question is similar to the previous ones. What does he
think that he can do in terms of tackling that issue?

It has now been a year since the elections were held
and a Government has still not been formed in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is a nightmare we have had before.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is functioning somehow, but
of course we in the Council cannot implement any
legislation or deal with budget questions. The country
is stuck. To some extent it is actually going backwards.
Something has to be done, and only then can we stop
the brain drain.

Those are the questions that I have. I wanted to
thank Ms. Korjenie for at least concluding on a positive
note and saying that we should not despair. But it is
very difficult not to despair when listening to all of
this. Maybe I can ask the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia when they speak later
if they could also address the question of impunity and
how they can contribute to combating the glorification
of criminals and the denials of genocide.

