The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship of the
Argentine Republic - that sounds as though I am
announcing to everyone that it is my birthday so as to
receive gifts. But that is how the system works.

In my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Argentine Republic, it is a privilege to address the
Security Council. My country feels respect and
friendship towards the Haitian people. We are also
grateful to Haiti. On 9 June 1956, Argentina suffered a
coup d'etat. Seven rebels struggling to re-establish the
constitutional order, were granted asylum at the Haitian
embassy in Buenos Aires. The Ambassador of Haiti at
the time, Jean Brierre, saved his guests from being
abducted and shot, with words that we in Argentina
still remember today. He said,

"Just because Haiti is a small country does not
mean that it will allow such an abuse. Quite the
contrary, small countries must be scrupulously
respected because they are small - so that the
rule of law remains a moral imperative, not
something based on force".

My country also feels compassion for Haiti -
compassion in its true meaning, which is to understand
the suffering of others and to wish to share it.

More than a decade ago, the international
community realized that it was necessary to help Haiti
to break out of the vicious circle of poverty,
authoritarianism, violence and desolation. As
Argentina is presiding over the Security Council this
month of January 2005, we proposed to convene an
open debate on Haiti in the hope of finding realistic
and lasting solutions. The Organization has established
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), headed by a talented friend of my
country, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes of Chile,
whom we congratulate on his outstanding performance.
MINUSTAH includes civilian and military personnel
from all over the world. It is an operation in which, for
the first time, many American States have decided to
act together: we feel that MINUSTAH is our mission.

The regional presence in Haiti has made us a part
of a search for a multifaceted solution that has a real
chance of enduring. In this context, my country would
like to see the creation of a number of mechanisms for
cooperation. Furthermore, working within our
capacities, Argentina is undertaking an analysis to
determine the potential for Haiti to export its products
to Argentina with a view to facilitating access to our
markets.

In the area of human rights - which is one of the
pillars of our foreign policy - my country supports the
efforts of the Transitional Government and urges it to
be extremely careful so that there are no violations of
the Haitians' basic rights.

In the humanitarian field, our country has also
wished to have a presence in Haiti. President Kirchner
mandated the participation of White Helmets for
humanitarian assistance. Solidarity is an excellent
therapy for many mental states: arrogance, desperation,
indifference, egomania.

In the context of rebuilding institutions,
Argentina has offered technical assistance to support
the Transitional Government in the tasks of organizing,
supervising and holding free and fair elections as soon
as possible. For the electoral process to succeed, a
broad-based dialogue among all the local political
forces is essential, the only condition being that they
explicitly reject the use of violence. That includes
leaders of the Fanmi Lavalas who have accepted the
democratic process and have rejected violence.

If being in Haiti today is a moral obligation, the
international community must provide the assistance
needed to cooperate in the functioning of a Haitian
State apparatus that can provide essential needs to the
country's inhabitants. The reconstruction of the Haitian
economy, together with the restoration of democratic
institutions and the maintenance of a secure
environment based on respect for the law, is essential.

The donor conference held in Washington
represents a new source of opportunities and hope for
Haiti, and we urge that it be translated into concrete
action. It will be necessary to identify infrastructure
projects and innovative cooperation mechanisms that
will generate economic reconstruction. Donors must
strive to honour their commitments.

We also hope that the programme of work
formulated by the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank will be an action
framework through which we, together with the
authorities of Haiti, can begin to turn the situation
around. For projects that still lack essential technical
expertise, the region offers its most competent
technicians, who can join their efforts with those
already under way.

Sometimes, speaking with excessive candour can
leave the audience with the feeling that the speaker has
not been sincere enough. However, I have tried to
express myself with candour and also with sincerity.
My country renews its commitment to work for
development, peaceful understanding and social justice
in Haiti. I hope that this joint effort, which is the
purpose of this debate, will lighten the path towards
overcoming the difficulties and the injustice in Haiti,
that beloved Caribbean country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Peru.

