Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence of Foreign Minister Camara.
We also thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for
her briefing.

Since taking office, President Keita has remained
actively committed to pursuing the peace process in
Mali. China commends the fact that Government and
the people of Mali have made considerable efforts to
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and achieved positive progress. That said,
in northern and central Mali the security situation
continues to worsen, with rampant terrorist activities
having a serious impact on the peace process in the
country. The international community should continue
to support peace and development in the country.

First, we should assist all parties in Mali in the
implementation of the peace agreement. We hope
that the signatory parties will consolidate the current
positive momentum, continue to strengthen mutual
trust and implement all provisions of the agreement
so as to jointly engage in Mali's development and
reconstruction. The international community should
help Mali build its capacity in the areas of development
and governance, on the basis of respect for Mali's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The Council's sanctions regime in Mali should aim
to support the political process in strict accordance
with the Council's mandate.

Secondly, we must assist Mali in enhancing
its security capacity-building, as a response to the
increasingly complex security challenges in northern
and central Mali and as requested by the Malian
Government. The international community should
continue to support and assist the Government in
redoubling its security and counter-terrorism capacities
so that the Government can gradually assume the
responsibilities for ensuring nationwide security.

Peace and security in Mali are closely linked with
the overall security situation in the surrounding region.
It is imperative to take a comprehensive approach and
engage in regional cooperation with a view to curbing
terrorist activities within and around Mali. China
welcomes the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel to take ownership in the fight against
terrorism in the region, as well as other security threats.
We commend all the work done by the United Nations
and MINUSMA to support the Joint Force.

Thirdly, we must support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in its ongoing work. MINUSMA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif have played an important role and made
tremendous efforts to maintain Mali's stability and
strengthen its security capacity. They have done much to
assist Mali's peace process. We are keen for MINUSMA
to continue to stay engaged and work closely with the
Government and make its active contribution.

China takes note of the vigorous measures taken
by the Secretariat and MINUSMA to better guarantee
the safety and security of peacekeepers. We encourage
MINUSMA to continue to strengthen the security of its
personnel and to ensure that all materials to guarantee
security are in place, while communicating more with
the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and donors
so that MINUSMA is well-equipped and sufficiently
funded to fulfil its mandate and practice self-defence.

China is a firm supporter of Mali's peace
and development. China is an important TCC to
MINUSMA, with more than 400 Chinese peacekeepers
discharging their duties in MINUSMA across a broad
range of functions, such as health workers, engineers,
security guards and so on. Their ability to perform their
duties has been widely praised. China will continue to
work with the international community to contribute to
peace, stability and prosperity in Mali.

