Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like at the outset to thank Mr. Annabi for his
briefing. We have taken note of the progress achieved
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) under very difficult
circumstances, especially in the areas of infrastructure
reconstruction, institution-building, the resettlement of
refugees and the recovery of the economy.

We hope that UNMIK will increase its efforts to
facilitate the participation of all parties and all ethnic
groups in the Interim Administrative Council, thereby
continuing to guarantee the multinational character of
Kosovo.

The situation in Kosovo remains very serious.
The Kosovo Serbs and other minority groups have been
the victims of numerous attacks, and their human rights
continue to be violated. We are deeply concerned about
these developments, as these acts are obviously
organized and premeditated. Investigations of these
human rights violations have not yielded any results,
and their perpetrators remain unpunished; indeed, there
is a very serious situation of impunity. Facts have
shown that the acts of violence committed in Kosovo
are not ordinary acts of revenge or criminal acts, but
part of an attempt to turn Kosovo into an area inhabited
only by Kosovar Albanians. This trend is becoming
increasingly obvious, which is very dangerous.
We are also very concerned at the fact that
Serbian refugees are encountering numerous
difficulties in the repatriation process, and that very
few people have returned. On the one hand, the
extremists among the Kosovo Albanians have resorted
to acts of terror to discourage the Serbs from returning
to their homes. At the same time, acts of kidnapping
and murder have been committed against the refugees
who have returned. The homes of the Serbs have been
taken over or burned or looted. On the other hand, the
protection measures of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) are
not effective enough. Although the committee to help
repatriate the Serb refugees has been established, not
enough work has been done to adopt actual measures.
Given the aforementioned circumstances, we are
concerned that the election be conducted under safe,
free and just conditions.

All in all, the situation in Kosovo is very serious.
This shows that resolution 1244 (1999) has not been
carried out in a comprehensive manner. We hope
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force will make greater
efforts to turn the situation around.

