Mr. Daeie (Serbia): It is my great honour and
gives me great satisfaction to take part today in this
very important open debate, initiated and organized
by China as President of the Security Council. I take
this opportunity to thank China and you personally,
Mr. Foreign Minister, for making it possible for us, in a
year when we are marking 70 years since the adoption
of the Charter of the United Nations, to reconsider once
again and recommit and rededicate ourselves to the
respect and safeguarding of its principles.

The purposes and principles of the United Nations,
as enshrined in the Charter, continue to be just as
valid and important today as they were at the time of
the Charter's adoption. The expectations of saving the
world from the scourge of war, respecting the dignity
of each and every human person and ensuring justice at
all levels are not less now than they were 70 years ago.

We firmly believe that these goals can be achieved
only through strengthening international cooperation
in all fields, based on the principles of the sovereign
equality of States; refraining from the use of force;
non-interference in the internal affairs of States; respect
for territorial integrity and the pacific settlement of
disputes, and through mutual respect and the honouring
of differences.

I take this opportunity to reiterate, on behalf of the
Republic of Serbia, its commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations and the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. The principles of the
Charter of the United Nations are the jus cogens of
contemporary international public law, and their full
implementation is a precondition for the rule of law.
The Republic of Serbia strongly supports strengthening
the role of the United Nations in maintaining peace and
security and respect for international law. The principal
organs of the United Nations can execute their basic
functions effectively only if they are carried out to the
benefit and on behalf of all Member States; they can
be effective only if decisions are made in harmony
with the principles of the Charter, and specifically
those of territorial integrity and non-interference
in States' internal affairs. The Republic of Serbia
supports the efforts being made to assess the work of
all the organs and bodies ofthe United Nations and find
ways and possibilities for improving them, especially
the Security Council's work and effectiveness in
maintaining international peace and security and
finding a unanimous response to the most complex
security challenges and threats we face.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has pointed out
on a number of occasions, the seventieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations is a historic
chance for all Member States to contribute to fulfilling
our common goal - making the world better, more
developed and more just. In that regard, I would like to
reiterate the main principles that guide the Republic of
Serbia in its foreign policy. They are the safeguarding
of the international multilateral world through respect
for international law and the rule of law; the primacy
of the peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue;
and the achievement of greater mutual respect and
understanding among peoples.

We also honour those principles in our current
position as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In
that capacity, I would like to point out today that the
partnership between the OSCE and the United Nations
is vital to the maintenance of long-term peace and
security in the geographical space between Vancouver
and Vladivostok. Cooperating with the United Nations
enables the OSCE to make progress in dealing with
both existing and emerging challenges. That approach
is firmly grounded in the OSCE's 1999 Platform for
Co-operative Security and the principles reaffirmed
in its 2010 Astana Commemorative Declaration. As
security challenges continue to evolve, the nature of
OSCE cooperation with the United Nations must evolve
as well, becoming more pragmatic and action-oriented.
Especially in times of economic hardship, enhancing
synergies and finding new ways of working together that
capitalize on the relative strengths ofboth organizations
are critical. Effective, pragmatic cooperation that builds
on the respective mandates and strengths of the United
Nations and the OSCE is a key objective of the OSCE's
proactive approach.

The sole road to peace and prosperity leads through
mutual cooperation, respect and honour, a convincing
example of which we have been embarked on since
the difficult and challenging years of the 19905 and,
more recently, in Kosovo and Metohija. Tolerance of
every kind, especially religious tolerance, is key to
overcoming the increasingly ruthless problems that
today's world regrettably faces. In my view, respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each and
every State lies at the core of respect for international
law and the rule of law, and the solution to any crisis is
not military intervention but dialogue alone. A sovereign
State cannot emerge by cancelling the existence and
sovereignty of another. The right of a country's citizens
to security, or indeed any of their rights, should never be
realized by violating the fundamental rights of others.

We strongly support the position of China as
President of the Security Council that we should
continue to work as a matter of priority on promoting
peaceful ways of settling disputes, as provided for in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. We
believe that coercive measures should be used only as
a last resort and only in cases when international peace
and security are genuinely threatened or breached. The
dialogue being conducted right now between Belgrade
and Pristina with the facilitation of the European Union
demonstrates in the best possible way our resolve and
full commitment to normalizing relations and achieving
a lasting and sustainable political solution for Kosovo
and Metohija.

Unfortunately, crises are multiplying around the
world, as is the number of people in need of help. We
should therefore all feel called on to make the United
Nations stronger and more efficient, primarily through
contributions by all its individual Members. The
Republic of Serbia is proud of its leadership position in
South-Eastern Europe and of the fact that it ranks seventh
in Europe based on its participation in and contribution
to United Nations missions. As representative of a
country that has peacekeepers deployed in eight United
Nations missions, I would like to emphasize that the
security of the crafters and implementers of global
peace must be one of our priorities.

At the time when the United Nations was taking
shape, ignorant of future threats and challenges, the
world was full of hope that the wounds of two world
wars would heal. We have inherited what has come to
pass over those 70 years and see it as a guideline and
impetus in our endeavour to ensure that history, in its
darkest form, is not repeated. In order to uphold the
ideals that have guided us all these years, each and
every one of us should invest our best efforts to bring
about a better world than the one we have inherited. To
that end, we firmly believe in the future of the United
Nations and the historic role and mission of proactive
multilateralism.

