Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Ithank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing and
for his work as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, for their statements.

I associate myselfwith the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.

When men and women act with courage, there
will always be other men and women who will walk
in their footsteps. On 5 April and 14 June, braving
considerable risks, Afghan men and women chose the
path to the polls, and millions followed them. Despite
intimidation, threats and even Violence, the Afghan
people showed their determination to take control of
their future and their destiny, by choosing the path of
peace and democracy. Their courage and determination
compel admiration and deserve praise, as do the actions
of the Afghan security forces, who were able to ensure
the security of the ballot despite attempts to disrupt the
conduct of the voting through violence.

Today it is crucial that the Afghan voters see their
courage rewarded and their hopes for these elections
not disappointed. We therefore appeal to the sense of
responsibility of everyone involved - the candidates,
who should cooperate with the institutions in charge
of the electoral process and respect their authority, and
the institutions themselves, which should fulfil their
tasks transparently and efficiently. If disputes arise,
they should be dealt with within the legal framework
provided for the purpose, not through the media or by
intimidation or violence.

On 22 July, when the electoral process is complete
and the final results are declared, there will be a winner
and a loser. But the whole of Afghanistan will emerge
a winner if the defeated candidate chooses to concede
defeat with dignity, adding to the legitimacy of the
elected President. And the entire Afghan people will
be victorious if the elected candidate chooses to form
an inclusive Government that represents Afghanistan's
diversity. It is only then that these elections will have
contributed to creating the conditions required for
Afghanistan to progress along the road to stability,
democracy and peace.

It is essential that the electoral process be brought
to a successful conclusion. But there must be advances
in other areas too in order to consolidate the progress
Afghanistan has made in the past decade, starting with
human and women's rights. We hope the future Head of

State will allocate significant spots in his Government
to women and seriously promote their active
participation in the peace and reconciliation process.
We also hope the new executive branch will ensure
the full implementation of the law on violence against
women. The level of women's participation in the 2015
parliamentary elections will be a good measure of the
evolution of their place in public life.

On the issue of children in armed conflict, we are
pleased that the Afghan Government has presented its
third report to the United Nations on its implementation
of the action plan on the recruitment and use of
children in its national security forces. We have no
doubt that the Government will very soon adopt the
road map developed jointly with the United Nations
aimed at speeding up the action plan's implementation.
We are grateful that the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/420) includes information on all the violations
and abuses committed against children in Afghanistan
as well as on the implementation of the action plan.
We thank the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its well-produced brochure
on the protection of Afghan children in armed conflict.
We urge that it be distributed as widely as possible.

The continued increase in the number of civilian
casualties in the conflict is a matter for serious
concern. We firmly condemn the indiscriminate
attacks on civilian populations, which show that one
of the chief challenges to be tackled is that of security
in general and the protection of civilians in particular.
Regarding security, many members of the international
community, including Luxembourg, have expressed
their willingness to remain engaged with the Afghan
people and security forces after 2014. For that, it is
essential to clear up any legal uncertainty surrounding
future international missions in support of the Afghan
security forces. In so doing, Afghanistan will send
a strong signal to its partners about the firmness
of its commitment. We commend the Permanent
Representative's remarks this morning in that regard.

The resurgence of drug trafficking and the
cultivation of opiates in Afghanistan is another cause
for deep concern. This serious and complex problem
should be tackled head on, not just for the obvious
public health reasons but also because there are often
links between the forces of insurgency and drug-
related activities. Meeting this challenge will require
the commitment of everyone, primarily in Afghanistan
but also at the regional level and in the international
community. For its part, Luxembourg welcomes every
initiative aimed at promoting synergies between
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
UNAMA.
This is also the moment to recall that the drug
issue cannot be separated from the development of
the Afghan economy in general. If opium cultivation
is gaining ground, that is due partly to the lack of
economic alternatives. One of the new Government's
priorities should unquestionably be to take measures to
promote growth and create jobs. This is also where the
mutual accountability commitments made at the Tokyo
Conference should come into the picture. Maintaining
international financial support should go hand in
hand with a commitment on the part of the Afghan
Government to economic reforms, the rule of law,
development-oriented governance and the fight against
corruption.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation to the staff of UNAMA for the outstanding
work they do in a dangerous and difficult environment.
At this crucial time, it is important that it has the means
to maintain a presence in the provinces as close to the
Afghan people as possible.

