Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ambassador Sinclair for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Bougainville. I would like
also to welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea at this table and
to thank him for his statement.

Pakistan supports the work of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) and
appreciates the efforts of all the parties which have
worked to seek, facilitate and implement a peaceful
solution to the conflict in that territory. We appreciate
in particular the Government of Papua New Guinea's
courageous decisions and strong commitment to peace.
These have been crucial to the success of the peace
process.

We welcome the completion and verification of
stage II of the weapons disposal plan under UNPOB's
supervision, which took place last month. This was a
crucial step in triggering the constitutional process.
That process will clear the way for elections for an
autonomous Government in Bougainville next year, as
well as the eventual holding of a referendum in which
the people of Bougainville will exercise their right of
self-determination, in accordance with the provisions
of the Lincoln and Arawa agreements.

Pakistan strongly supports this path, which the
parties have courageously agreed to follow. However,
more needs to be done to encourage those groups
which remain outside the peace process to join it.
Peace is the only solution, and this process, painstaking
though it is, remains its best guarantor. However, to
sustain peace, it is crucial to promote and sustain
socio-economic development. The two are indivisible.
Therefore, we urge the donor community to contribute
generously not only to the financing of the peace
process but also to the promotion of long-term socio-
economic development.

Pakistan regards the mandate of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville, which expires
at the end of this year, as crucial for building peace as
well as trust in that territory. We hope that the role of
the United Nations in Bougainville will not end with
the expiry of UNPOB's mandate and that the United
Nations will continue to work there and to stay the
course in facilitating the full implementation of the
peace process.

In conclusion, I cannot but express the wish that
the very successful role of mediation and facilitation
played by the United Nations in Bougainville could
also be replicated in another, albeit far more
longstanding and dangerous, dispute which remains on
the Security Council's agenda - the issue of enabling
the exercise of the right of self-determination by the
people of Jammu and Kashmir, in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council.

