The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Egypt, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdelaziz
(Egypt) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document 8/2005/438, containing the text of a letter
dated 7 July 2005 from the Permanent Representative
of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest possible terms the assassination of the
recently appointed Head of the Egyptian Mission
to Iraq, His Excellency Ambassador Ihab El
Sherif, on 7 July and expresses its condolences to
the family of the victim and to the Government
and people of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

"The Security Council also condemns all
terrorist attacks in Iraq, including the attempted
assassinations of diplomats from Bahrain and
Pakistan and attacks against other civilian
personnel.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
there can be no justification for such terrorist acts
and underlines the need to bring to justice the
the

perpetrators.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Iraqi people in their
political transition, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004). The Security
Council also reaffirms Iraq's independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity and
calls upon the international community to stand
by the Iraqi people in their pursuit of peace,
stability and democracy.

"The Security Council welcomes Egypt's
continued commitment in this regard, as stated in
a letter by the Permanent Representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt addressed to the
President of the Council (S/2005/438), and
recognizes the important role of Egypt and other
neighbouring countries in supporting the political
process, helping control transit across Iraq's
borders, and extending other support to the Iraqi
people."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15p.m.

