Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would first like to congratulate
Japan on its presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December in the final month of its mandate
as a member of the Council. We also commend Italy
for its exemplary conduct of the Council's work in
November. I welcome the presence at today's meeting
of Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic', President of the
Republic of Croatia, and Ms. Nela Kuburovie, Minister
of Justice of Serbia.

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the convening
of the second meeting this year on the progress of the
work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR)and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Elbio
Rosselli, Permanent Representative of Uruguay to the
United Nations, and his entire team for their remarkable
work over the past two years as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

My delegation would also like to sincerely thank
Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the Residual Mechanism, and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the ICTY
and Chair of the Residual Mechanism, for their
enlightening briefings and their decisive work at the
helm of those bodies. In the difficult missions that that
they still have to fulfil they can of course count on my
country's continued support, which, as the President
mentioned, we have manifested by hosting persons
convicted by the ICTR in renovated prison cells that
meet international standards.

The review of the latest report on the implementation
of the ICTY completion strategy (S/2017/1001, annex II) reminds us that the establishment of the Tribunals
was certainly one of the most relevant initiatives of the
United Nations for the preservation and development
of international law and the execution of justice. That
ad hoc judicial system - which has benefited from the
support of the international community, especially the
Security Council, as well as from the cooperation of
every State - has made a substantial contribution to
international criminal jurisprudence and to combating
terrorism and the impunity of all those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
thereby helping to prevent mass crimes and provide
justice for the victims. We are also happy to note the
fundamental role played by the Residual Mechanism in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting stability and
gradual reconciliation in both the Balkans and Rwanda.

As we prepare to turn the final page for the ICTY
on 31 December, we have to ask how we can consolidate
and capitalize over the long term on the enriching
experiences and the encyclopedic legacy acquired
in dealing with the serious crimes that fell under the
Tribunals' jurisdiction. That legacy is also a reference
point for national jurisdictions in jurisprudence and
good practice. This legacy is also about sharing
competencies, technical assistance and the participation
and training of stakeholders to help them to reinforce
their capacities.
At a time when its closure is before us, we must
also think of the consequences of setting up this type
of tribunal in the first place. By that, I mean the fate of
those who have been found guilty and who have had to
serve their sentences; the fate of those who have been
acquitted or of those who have finished serving their
sentences; the fate of the witnesses who have needed to
be protected; and many others.

Turning to the Residual Mechanism, it will begin
to operate on its own from 1 January 2018. Thanks to
the Mechanism, the closure of the ad hoc tribunals will
not become a synonym for impunity or for selective or
incompletejustice. The Mechanism therefore has to take
on the issues of the reintegration of those who have been
acquitted or who have finished their sentences; the best
possible use of financial and administrative resources;
access to archives; the relocation of witnesses; and
systematic auditing to improve its functioning. In other
words, the temporary nature of the Residual Mechanism
entails the need for effective and rigorous management
and the constant support of the Council.

As is evident, the closure should be an opportunity
to take a general stock ofthe gains and the best practices,
but also to explore areas for improvement so as to make
both domestic and international justice more effective
and efficient. In doing that, the ICTY would fully play
its role as a pioneer allowing other international legal
institutions, and even national ones, to draw a great
deal of benefit from its experience.

