Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): As I am
the first speaker, I would like to make some general
comments before posing some questions to the High
Commissioner for Refugees.

I believe that we were all extremely interested in
Mr. Guterres's briefing. We very much welcome his
contribution for at least two reasons. First, we are very
well aware of the crucial importance of the High
Commissioner for Refugees. We know perfectly well
that we all have a duty, an obligation, to assist the High
Commissioner and, more generally, a duty towards
displaced persons throughout the world.
Secondly, as the Security Council, we must have
a strategic vision of crises in the world. I believe that
the parameters for refugees and displaced persons are
very important. In that regard, Mr. Guterres's briefing
supplements the briefing by Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.

I often say that if we are to carry out our work in
a serious manner, we must be mindful of several
geopolitical world maps. Of course, we need a map of
the relationship of forces and a crisis map, but
experience has taught us that maps relating to the
protection of populations and to the situation of
refugees and displaced persons provide us with crucial
information giving us an accurate picture of the
situation to help us in our work.

In addition to those general comments, I should
like now to address the heart of the matter and some of
Mr. Guterres' points.

First, with respect to the Sudan and Chad, I
believe that Mr. Guterres' analysis was interesting and
troubling. I should like to refer to a specific case. With
regard to the refugee camps in Chad, where we are
largely responsible for security, we are seeing growing
tensions between the camps and the local populations. I
would ask the High Commissioner if he has specific
solutions already being implemented or under
consideration to address that problem.

Secondly, with respect to the Sudan, Mr. Guterres
mentioned the return of a large number of refugees,
thanks inter alia to the agreement concluded between
the Sudan, Kenya and UNHCR. Is he contemplating
other agreements of that type with other neighbours of
the Sudan?

My third and fourth questions are more structural
in nature. The High Commissioner spoke of the
problem of refugees and the role played by UNHCR in
rebuilding countries in crisis. He referred, inter alia, to
the relationship between UNHCR and the
Peacebuilding Commission. In that context, it is very
important to develop links between UNHCR and other
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Children's Fund and others. Does Mr. Guterres believe
that such cooperation is sufficiently developed and that
there are prospects for such development, particularly
in the context of what we hope will be the increasing
powers enjoyed by the Peacebuilding Commission?

Finally, I wish to ask about the link between
UNHCR and peacekeeping operations. We note a major
agreement between UNHCR and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with respect to the UNHCR mission to that
country, referred to by Mr. Guterres. I would imagine
that, as often happens in humanitarian affairs, one
ought to be cautious in structuring the relationship
between military activities and humanitarian
assistance. Does Mr. Guterres believe that there is a
role for similar forms of cooperation between UNHCR
and United Nations peacekeeping operations?

I am sorry to have spoken at such length, but the
subject is so fascinating that I should have wished to
ask far more questions.

