Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presentation. I also commend the intervention of
Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). I of course welcome the presence among us
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone. On behalf of France,
I would like to welcome this historic time for Sierra
Leone. I would like to focus on three aspects of the
situation in the country.

Since the signing of the comprehensive peace
agreement in 2002, Sierra Leone has followed an
exemplary path. The closing of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) is the happy conclusion of 15 years" of
United Nations activity in that country. Such success is
of course primarily that of the people of Sierra Leone
themelves, whose resilience and determination to
rebuild their country after the crisis must be admired.
It is also an example of the successful role of the United
Nations in the stabilization.

Since that time, the country has undergone three
peaceful elections. The political situation is stable.
Economic growth should continue thanks to the
Government's readiness to improve the business
climate and to encourage key investments. Sierra Leone
has therefore made significant progress on all fronts.
The United Nations has contributed to that positive
development by supporting the Sierra Leone authorities
at every stage. I would like to commend the successful
and steady management of the transition thanks, in
particular, to the remarkable work of the United Nations
team under the coordination of Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Lessons should be drawn from that success. Where
possible, the United Nations should leave a clear path
for the country to take full control of its destiny.

However. as we know, Sierra Leone stil faces
challenges. The constitutional reform under way is a
historic step in dealing with the root causes of conflict
in the country. The efforts of President Koroma to
promote political dialogue should come to fruition.
All sectors of society should talk and work together.
The general elections of 2017 and 2018 will be a true
test of democracy, and we will watch their smooth
development carefully. The management of national
resources could, unfortunately, be a source of communal
conflict. Fighting corruption should therefore continue
to be a priority for the Government. The United Nations
country team should bear that in mind.

Finally, the closure of UNIPSIL does not stop the
international community from carefully following
the Sierra Leone's development in the years to come.
In that regard, I am pleased to welcome the draft
presidential statement that we will be adopting shortly.
The Security Council calls for the international
community to maintain its commitment over the long
term to the consolidation of peace and development in
Sierra Leone.

The European Union is engaged in the country, as
are the United Nations Development ProgramSAme,
UNICEF, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the World Health Organization, among
others. I would also like to note that the PBC is
proposing a continuation of its work in Sierra Leone to
a lesser degree. It can therefore support the Agenda for
Prosperity promoted by the authorities of Sierra Leone.

