Ms. DiCarlo: I last briefed the Security Council
on Ukraine on 25 April (see S/PV.8516) following the
election of President Volodymyr Zelenskyi on 21 April.

Today the Council is meeting again only days before
another important election, on 21 July, when Ukrainians
will go to the polls to elect their representatives in
Parliament, the Verkhovna Rada. We hope that the
elections will be equally peaceful and democratic and
that they will be inclusive, including reflecting the
broadest participation of women.

In his inauguration speech, President Zelenskyi
emphasized the need for peace and unity and for rejecting
divisive policies. He underlined his readiness to engage
in dialogue in order to advance domestic reforms and
end the five-year conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United
Nations is encouraged by such statements emphasizing
dialogue, peace and inclusiveness. We welcome efforts
at dialogue at all levels, including bilaterally between
Heads of State, and hope that they can bring greater
momentum towards resolving the conflict.

Today's Council meeting coincides with the coming
into force of the law on ensuring the functioning of the
Ukrainian language as the State language. The law,
which regulates the use of Ukrainian as the sole State
language in a broad sphere of Government functions
and services, was adopted by the Verkhovna Rada on
25 April and signed into law on 15 May.

It was adopted after two readings and the
consideration of more than 2,000 amendments, 800
of which have been included. While many of its
provisions commence today, the law also prescribes a
transitional period, from six months to up to 10 years,
for the implementation of other provisions. Also, the
law requires the Cabinet of Ministers to submit to
Parliament a draft law on the realization of the rights of
national minorities of Ukraine by January 2020.

While the new law has raised concerns both within
and outside Ukraine, the Ukrainian authorities have
described it as consistent with Ukraine's Constitution,
particularly article 10, which deals with State and
minority languages, as well as its national legislation
and international commitments.

As part of its regular reporting, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) followed the legislative process and shared
recommendations based on international standards
with the relevant authorities. While many of the
controversial points were addressed in its final version,
the law still raises concerns.

OHCHR recommends that the Ukrainian
Government should elaborate, as established by the
language law, a law on the realization of the rights
of national minorities of Ukraine in order to ensure a
fair correlation between the protection of the rights of
minorities and the preservation of the State language
as a tool for integration within society. That should be
done without undue delay.

The Council of Europe's Venice Commission is
also analysing the law. The draft opinion is expected
to be discussed by the Commission after the 21 July
parliamentary elections.

In that context, we welcome the previous statement
by President Zelenskyi that a thorough analysis of the
law will be conducted. We hope that that will pave
the way for further measures to safeguard the rights
of minorities.

The Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) High Commissioner
on National Minorities has also advised the Ukrainian
authorities regarding language questions in the interest
of ensuring balanced legislation that unites Ukraine's
diverse society. I therefore welcome the availability of
the OSCE High Commissioner, Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
to brief the Council in person on the issue.

It is the fourth time since the beginning of 2019
that the Security Council is meeting on Ukraine. The
current political transition in Ukraine takes place
against the backdrop of the ongoing conflict in Donbas,
many of whose residents continue to face the serious
daily challenges associated with an active conflict.

In recent weeks, we have seen signs that, with
sufficient political will in the Trilateral Contact Group,
concrete steps to improve the security and humanitarian
situation along the contact line are possible. We welcome
the 26 June disengagement of forces and removal of
hardware at the Stanytsia Luhanska checkpoint, as
reported by the OSCE's Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Such steps should be further built on. We
hope to see other confidence-building steps, including
the restoration of the Stanytsia Luhanska pedestrian
crossing bridge and the release of detainees.

However, we note with regret the persistent failure
to reach agreement on a ceasefire. We wish to once again
echo the call of the OSCE for all concerned to work
constructively, including during tomorrow's Trilateral
Contact Group meeting, in order to reach an agreement
on the issue without further delay. The implementation
of a lasting ceasefire should be accompanied by the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from populated areas, the
disengagement of forces and the protection of civilians
and critical civilian infrastructure.

The situation at the contact line remains
unpredictable and volatile. Periodic escalations of
hostilities bring about various levels of intensity of
military engagement. Despite continuing security
incidents and limitations on its activities, the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, under the leadership of the
new Chief Monitor, Ambassador Halit Cevik, continues
to carry out its crucial mandate.

Meanwhile, the human cost of the conflict is still
growing. Ordinary civilians continue to be targeted
and suffer from indiscriminate shelling on a daily
basis, as well as from the threat oflandmines. This year
alone, as of 30 June, OHCHR recorded 91 conflict-
related civilian casualties - 13 killed and 78 injured.
Fighting also continues to damage and disrupt civilian
infrastructure. From May to June, the Donetsk Filter
Station, which supplies clean water to approximately
380,000 people on both sides of the contact line, came
under fire on three separate occasions. So far this year,
water facilities have come under attack more than 60
times. Schools have also come under attack 17 times,
already more than in 2018.
We once again reiterate that parties to the conflict
must take all precautions to avoid civilian harm.
International humanitarian law must be upheld by all
to protect civilians and their access to critical services.
Humanitarian organizations are providing relief to
the most vulnerable communities on both sides of the
contact line, but safe, predictable and sustained access
to all those in need is still a challenge. Their work must
not be politicized or instrumentalized by any party.

The Council unanimously endorsed the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements in resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015. In presidential statement S/PRST/2018/l2 of
6 June 2018, the Council once again unanimously
reaffirmed the centrality of the Minsk agreements, and
on 12 February 2019 the Council held a special meeting
(see S/PV.8461) focusing on the implementation of
the Minsk agreements. The United Nations expects
any concerns related to the Minsk agreements to be
addressed through constructive dialogue within the
existing negotiation formats, in full respect for the
spirit and letter of the agreements, and with a view to
implementing the Minsk agreements as a whole.

Ukraine today has the opportunity to build further
on its reform record and to revitalize the diplomatic
efforts to resolve the five-year conflict in eastern
Ukraine. That will require, first and foremost, political
will on the part of all concerned in the critical search
for peace. We hope that, following the parliamentary
elections and the formation of a new Government, the
recent encouraging statements will be followed by
concrete actions by all actors to bring about at long last
a positive dynamic to implement the Minsk agreements.

In his congratulatory message to President
Zelenskyi, the Secretary-General underscored the full
support of the United Nations for the crucial efforts of
the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group and
the OSCE to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine. He
further reaffirmed the United Nations commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.
In a regional and global environment that is
increasingly fragile, the opportunity for a resolution
of the conflict in eastern Ukraine is also a chance to
achieve greater peace and security in Europe. It should
not be missed.

