When I hear the Serbian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ivica Daeic, speak, I have the impression that it is a copy-paste from previous interventions. We hear so much about the "horrendous crimes committed by the Kosovars". I am just stunned that in his interventions we never hear anything about the horrendous crimes, ethnic cleansing and mass deportation that were committed against the Kosovars in 1998 and 1999. I really regret that. The Serbian Foreign Minister always says that there are not 116 but only 92 countries recognizing Kosovo. I am surprised by this policy of trying to get countries to de-recognize Kosovo. Our Serbian friends are shooting themselves in the foot, because if they are honest about trying to join the European Union (EU), they should work very hard to see that Kosovo is recognized, and they should recognize it themselves. In the historical review we heard from the Serbian Foreign Minister, there was no mention of the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 2010 (see A/64/881), which clearly stated that the declaration of independence of Kosovo did not violate international law. The logic behind this is that the country is legitimate and should be recognized. The discussion at the very beginning about how Kosovo is represented in the Security Council shows that the unresolved relationship between Kosovo and Serbia not only remains a source of tension between the Kosovo and Serbia but also affects the whole region. It is an obstacle to the everyday life of the peoples of both countries and to both Kosovo's and Serbia's path to the European Union. In that context, let me highlight the fact that we very much appreciate and fully support the work of the European Union Special Representative, Miroslav Lajeak. We really appreciate that the normalization dialogue restarted in Brussels in July. I must say that I share the frustration of many that we are not farther than where we were before. The two sides have shown commitment and engagement, and we are encouraged by the substantial work that has been done so far. In addressing the topics on the table, we expect the two parties to continue to engage constructively in good faith, in a spirit of compromise. The goal must be a comprehensive, legally binding, sustainable agreement that contributes to regional stability and enables both countries to become members of the European Union. The EU-facilitated dialogue is the only way to turn both countries' dreams into a reality for their citizens. We were not very happy that you, Mr. President, did not allow Mr. Lajeak to brief us today, because with this dialogue, we want to turn the discussion to the future. Where do we go and where do we make progress? Otherwise we repeat ourselves and talk about the past. So we need to look to the future, and I think that any picture of the dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia remains incomplete without Mr. Lajeak briefing the Council. We very much regret that that briefing has been blocked by the President. We call on Serbia and Kosovo to increase their efforts to build trust and confidence, preparing the peoples of both countries for compromise and reconciliation. Positive rhetoric and concrete confidence-building measures are of the essence in that context. I would like to thank the Special Representative for his words, particularly now as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) this month. The United Nations and the EU Special Representative are exploring options for enhancing the role of women in dialogue. We call upon both sides to include women representatives and civil society in the dialogue and to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of women. I want to highlight the importance of the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court. We expect Kosovo to show its ongoing commitment to the Special Chamber as a demonstration of its commitment to the rule of law and ending impunity. We call on all actors to cooperate with the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo in order to advance accountability in the country as a prerequisite for building trust.
