Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
taking the initiative to convene this Council debate on
the problem of climate change and its consequences for
international peace and security. It is a critical issue to
which we must pay all the attention it deserves.
I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her important
presentation, as well as for her commitment and her
efforts in the fight against climate change. I also
warmly thank the Minister of Water Resources of Iraq,
Mr. Hassan Janabi, and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim for their
very enlightening and inspiring statements.

Not a day goes by without an increasing number of
us falling victim to the consequences of climate change
and environmental degradation. While extreme climate
events are often the most visible, other phenomena
with less immediate effects - such as droughts, the
salinization of soils and rising water levels - contribute
to land degradation, coastal erosion and the depletion
of water resources. Those negative impacts on natural
resources, in the context of vulnerable populations and
economies, can generate or re-ignite conflicts between
communities, provoke population displacement and
jeopardize international peace and security.

The eloquent statements we have heard this morning
are a stark reminder that the impacts of climate change
are imultiplying the risks to international stability. That
is already the tough reality in many parts of the world,
from the Sahel to the Middle East. Yet it also constitutes
a threat to many other regions that are stable today
but which will suffer the impacts of climate change

tomorrow, affecting the stability of our countries and
our societies in ways we could not have prevented.

In this context, I would like to share five main
messages with the Council this morning.

My first message is a call to action. As our
speakers emphasized, the threat of climate change to
international peace and security is an objective fact that
we cannot deny. Its effects are already being painfully
felt and they will go on automatically increasing. From
now on, we cannot turn a blind eye. It is our collective
responsibility to tackle this existential challenge head-
on and use all the tools at our disposal to address it. It is
urgent, because every day lost makes the threat worse.

My second message has to do with the institutional
debate that often resurfaces in our statements on the
subject. Considering the urgency and importance of
these challenges, we must rise above institutional
arguments. The General Assembly and the Security
Council must speak out on this threat to international
peace and security, which concerns us all. However, I
want to reassure everyone that the fact we are discussing
the effects of climate change on international security
here in the Council in no way undermines the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) or the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
which remain the multilateral frame of reference for the
fight against climate change. In that regard, I would like
to remind all concerned that our priority is ratifying the
Paris Agreement and that we will have to collectively
adopt rules for implementing it in December, under the
Polish presidency of the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties to the UNFCCC. That is an essential condition
for maintaining the positive momentum launched in
Paris in 2015 in the fight against climate change and
for ensuring that every country implements ambitious
climate policies, as many countries, including China,
for instance, have already done.

That is how we will be able to fulfil our
collective commitment to keep the rise in the average
temperature below 2 degrees Celsius and, if possible,
1.5 degrees. But the fact is that when we speak of the
effects of climate change on international peace and
security - and this is my third message - we are
engaging in the process of conflict prevention. Here
in New York, the international community must take
ownership of the matter and decide to cooperate in
dealing with the impact on international peace and
security produced by the effects of climate change and
establish genuine preventive diplomacy to do that. In
that regard, I want to voice our strong support for the
Secretary-General's vision and ambition regarding
conflict prevention and the peace continuum, which
must comprehend all destabilizing factors, including
those related to the effects of climate change and the
collapse of biodiversity.

My fourth message concerns the ways in which
we can ensure that the United Nations has a robust
analytical capacity in this area. In that regard, we
welcome the progress that the Council has made
in the past few months in recognizing the adverse
effects of climate change in various regions such as
the Lake Chad basin, Somalia and Mali, as well as
in calling for better assessment and management of
climate change and ecological risks. Those advances
should now be translated into concrete action. That
demands that the United Nations develop its capacity
to analyse risks in order to warn us about the security
risks related to climate change in every region of the
world. The Deputy Secretary-General has reminded us
of the remarkable initiatives that she has undertaken
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, and France fully supports and actively endorses
those crucial major efforts. What we want to do is to
expand that approach to other regions of the world.
It will now also be necessary to take a next step and
recommend measures and actions to be implemented
by national Governments, United Nations agencies
and regional organizations to both prevent the adverse
effects of climate change on security and protect and
restore biodiversity.

Finally, my fifth message is that the entire United
Nations system must mobilize to tackle the challenges
related to the security implications of climate change.
The Secretariat, the General Assembly and the Security
Council have a shared responsibility in that regard.
They must rely on all of the specialized agencies and
institutions dealing with the environment, together
with the United Nations Environment Programme; they
must work on climate with the UNFCCC, the World
Meteorological Organization and the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change; on agriculture with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
on desertification with the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification in order to come up with
appropriate analyses, propose courses of action and
implement them on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to assure you, Madam
President, of France's resolute commitment to working
alongside you to build a multilateral, twenty-first-
century diplomacy that fully integrates the effects of
climate change into its approach to conflict prevention.
In the face of the reality of climate change, one of the
greatest challenges of our time, we must move forward
together and with our eyes wide open.

