Ms. Luna (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the valuable briefings by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, and the President-designate of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen. The Dominican Republic welcomes the initiative to convene this meeting, and we would like to begin by reiterating our unconditional commitment to the NPT as the cornerstone of the disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation architecture and an essential tool in the maintenance of international peace and security. We believe that the only guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is their prohibition and total elimination. That is why we support the adoption and endorse the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, as we believe that it complements and reinforces the NPT. We are concerned about the major challenges facing the NPT, including the termination of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF), the nuclear situation in North Korea and the standoff involving the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran. With the official termination of the INF, the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture is under the terrible threat of the possible resumption of the arms race that we thought had been left behind with the Cold War. We therefore urge the parties concerned to renew the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and begin negotiations on new arms control measures. Similarly, with regard to the nuclear issue in North Korea, we hope that greater efforts will be made to resume dialogue with a view to achieving the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula under the safeguards and additional protocols of the International Atomic Energy Agency. We also emphasize the importance of preserving the JCPOA, which was the successful result of diplomacy and multilateralism. We believe that Iran must continue to comply with its commitments in accordance with the Plan of Action and resolution 2231 (2015), while, at the same time, the other parties must ensure that Iran enjoys the previously agreed economic benefits. On another note, we express our concern about the number of existing nuclear weapons and those on alert status and the inclusion of the policy of nuclear deterrence in security doctrines. It is therefore imperative that States honour their commitments without distinction. Of the three fundamental pillars of the NPT, the disarmament pillar has seen the least progress. It is in a state of paralysis and requires that effective measures be taken in good faith with a view to general and complete disarmament, in accordance with the provisions outlined in article VI of the Treaty, which remains applicable despite its lack of implementation. It is also necessary to respect and implement the agreements reached at previous Review Conferences, including the 1995 resolution on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, the13 practical steps adopted in 2000 and the action plan adopted in 2010. Moreover, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty remains a key component of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime. We therefore call on annex 2 States to accede to and ratify the Treaty to facilitate its entry into force. It is imperative to negotiate as soon as possible a legally binding, non-discriminatory and verifiable instrument banning the production of fissile material. In conclusion, we hope that States will commit to reducing strategic risks and ensuring the establishment of credible verification mechanisms to promote confidence-building and transparency and facilitate cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We reaffirm our support for the NPT and its Review Conference, and we hope that, when it next convenes, concrete and proactive measures will be agreed.
