Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Mr. President, I
would like first to thank you for pronouncing my name
correctly. I wish to express my great satisfaction at
participating in this debate and to congratulate the
French presidency of the Council for having chosen a
topic so important to the African continent, one which
constitutes one of the challenges that we must meet but
whose recipes for success remain to be clearly
determined.

I also wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to all speakers who preceded me for proposals that will
enrich the experience that the African Union is
working to develop.

As far as we are concerned, one could not have
chosen a better time to debate a topic so vital to
thousands of Africans who daily endure the
consequences of armed conflict. The African Union has
just concluded its summit at Addis Ababa. It has
thought a great deal about issues of peace and security
in Africa and declared 2010 the year of peace and
security in Africa. Indeed, for the African Union this
debate constitutes a substantial contribution to that
objective, which is aimed at seeking lasting solutions
to the conflicts in the African continent. It is a
continent where thousands of men and women are
deployed as part of United Nations political and
peacekeeping operations and where the Peacebuilding
Commission is sparing no effort to ensure that peace
becomes a lasting reality in Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Guinea Bissau and the Central African Republic.

As African heads of State indicated in the Tripoli
Declaration, Africa is determined to put a definitive
end to the scourge of conflicts and violence, aware of
its shortcomings and its errors but motivated by the
will to mobilize all means and human resources
necessary and to seize every opportunity to promote
and advance the agenda for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as for post-
conflict reconstruction.

Therefore we cannot but seize the opportunity
afforded us by today's exercise to share the varied
experiences that can enrich the action of the African
Union, which has itself gone through a number of
important stages in its efforts to meet, in a
comprehensive and global way, the challenges of the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts in
Africa. Efforts include the setting up the Peace and
Security Council, the development of the necessary
normative and institutional frameworks, including the
continental peace and security architecture, and the
adoption of numerous instruments on human rights,
governance, the rule of law, democracy, elections,
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation,
terrorism, and policies of good-neighbourliness.

Those instruments constitute a consolidated
whole of norms and principles, respect for which will
significantly reduce the risk of conflicts and violence
and will contribute to peacebuilding. We believe that a
number of elements of that consolidated whole,
developed by the African Union, are also necessary for
the successful transition for countries emerging from
conflict.

As this Council well knows, the African Union is
present in Darfur, alongside the United Nations,
through the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The African Union
has also deployed a force in Somalia, which is
currently 5,500 men strong, to protect the institutions
of that country - the only country in the world that
has had no State, no institutions for close to 20 years
and has been abandoned by almost everybody. It is
therefore natural that our organization should be
interested in today's debate and in exit and transition
strategies.

In Darfur, the report drawn up by the panel led by
the former South African President, Thabo Mbeki,
which was presented to the Security Council
(S/2009/599, annex 1), contains important elements for
an integrated approach for crisis exit and transition
management.

A question that is often raised here in this
Chamber is that of how to reduce the boundaries
between peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding. A
number of ideas have been raised here today
concerning the forecasting, from the initial phase of
peacekeeping operations, actions for peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction. It would be useful to re-
enforce the idea of a hybrid formula, by which
peacekeeping operations would be bolstered by
significant peacebuilding actions aimed at
strengthening national capacities, including the
creation of conditions conducive to establishing strong
State institutions. It has been demonstrated in a number
of cases that deterioration of the State usually leads to
degradation of other components of the economic and
political apparatus, and even of the social fabric of the
country.

We also need to reflect on an increased role of
civilian personnel during this phase, as underscored by
the delegation of Gabon, including recourse to the
diaspora of the States concerned, in cooperation with
local authorities.

In addition, at a time when there are signs of
impatience to see Blue Helmets leave certain countries,
including African countries, there is a need for us to
address the issues of timelines, without questioning the
achievements in the field of peace and stability in those
countries.

The implementation of exit and transition
strategies must start, as indicated in the concept paper
that the French delegation has so kindly shared with us
(S/2010/67), by defining a clear and credible mandate
in order to preserve the prestige of the mission in the
eyes of the public it serves. Our approach to
peacekeeping, including through the Peacebuilding
Commission, is silent on this matter, and it is high time
that these bodies, whether it be the peacekeeping
operations or the Peacebuilding Commission, address
it.

We also believe, along with Brazil, that we must
strengthen the concept of development and lay the
foundation for development during the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding phases. Indeed, peacebuilding
requires timely assistance to meet immediate needs.
However, there are often difficulties in moving from
emergency to substantial development assistance.
Introducing such innovative elements will contribute to
a successful exit and transition strategy, as it will
enable peacekeeping operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission to leave behind a solid basis for stable
peace in countries emerging from crisis.

The African Union has included the concept of
development into its approach to post-conflict
reconstruction. In that context, in decision 228 (VII) of
the Executive Council, the Commission was asked to
develop the African Union Policy Framework on Post-
Conflict Reconstruction and Development, based on
the relevant provisions of the Protocol Establishing the
Peace and Security Council and on experiences
accumulated on the continent. As a result, the African
Union Commission has undertaken a number of
initiatives that led to the adoption of the decision
endorsing the African Union Policy Framework.

The African Union is also working on the
development of guidelines on policy revisions at the
national and regional level, as well as on the creation
of a database for African experts on post-conflict
reconstruction and development, which will be made
available to member States emerging from conflict.
The African Union is also working on mobilizing
resources to that end and on capacity-building,
including through the use of volunteers.

In conclusion, I would again like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for this
initiative and express the hope that our deliberations
today will lead to recommendations that will advance
our collective peacebuilding efforts in countries
emerging from crisis situations.

