Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his briefing
on the implementation of the Framework agreement on
peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes Region. We believe that it is
the cornerstone for ensuring stability in the Great Lakes
region. We are in favour of the full implementation of all
the commitments by all signatories, including respect
for sovereignty, non-interference in other countries'
internal affairs and strengthening confidence-building
measures among the countries of the subregion.

In that regard, we note the effective interaction
between the Congolese leadership and neighbouring
countries in the region in August 2016, as well as the

beginning of the joint follow-up mechanism established
through the collective efforts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania to counter
the Allied Democratic Forces. The positive outcome
was the meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
for Peace, Security and Cooperation Agreement, held in
Luanda on October 26, that showed that the mechanism
exists and acts independently without external support.

We should note that, three years following its
signing, the military provisions of the Framework
agreement remain far from being implemented. We
commend the work of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which remains committed
to combating gangs and stabilizing the situation,
and welcome the resumed full-scale cooperation, in
June 2016, between Kinshasa and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in that area. But
the armed groups remain active in the country and in the
region, in general, and their activities prolong the ethnic
conflicts, provoke the illegal spread of weapons and
worsen the humanitarian situation. It is clear that there
is no military solution to the conflict. Comprehensive
measures are needed to eliminate its underlining
causes, including through the strengthening the State
authorities in the liberated areas.

We are concerned about the situation with respect
to the repatriation of several hundred of ex-combatants
from the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) from Uganda,
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Of
course, the ongoing contacts between the Congolese
authorities and the leadership of the M-23 is welcome
news, but the lack of progress in this area has already
led to repeat offences by the combatants. In this
regard, we are naturally concerned by the repeated
mutual accusations about supporting combatants and
recruiting refugees into their ranks. We think that the
sides have to display maximum restraint and avoid an
escalation including through using the expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism, which is provided for in the
Framework agreement.

Another challenge for the Framework agreement
is the issue of having the allies of Mr. Riek Machar
present on the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Without going to the genesis of the problem,
we call upon Mr. Djinnit and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Maman Sidikou to do everything
they can to make sure that the relevant provisions of
resolution 2348 (2017) are implemented. We know the
role played by the Special Envoy in trying to bring
private investors into the region and in providing a
new dynamic to the economic cooperation among
countries in the region, thereby strengthening peace
and cooperation there.

A number of country signatories to the Framework
agreement are still on the Security Council agenda
because of the still-unresolved conflicts. The
continuation ofthese conflicts is fed by social networks
via the Internet. We call for putting an end to the rhetoric
of hate on the part of members of the opposition and
spoilers who have found refuge in Western countries,
in particular those from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in Belgium and South Sudan in the United States
and the United Kingdom. Without this, the provisions
we have in resolution 2327 (2016) will make no sense.
Africans, should not have to pay with their lives so that
the citizens of those countries can enjoy the freedom
of expression.

Many countries in the region are at a stage where
they are the creating or reforming their democratic
institutions. Some of them are in the pre-election
period. We welcome the effective mediation efforts
and good offices of the United Nations, the African
Union and the East African Community, which helped
launch a national mechanism for political dialogue
in Burundi and helped to bring the negotiating
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
a successful conclusion. At the same time, there is no
doubt that political conclusions will lead to lasting
stability only if they are arrived at by the members of
the political processes themselves. Trying to provide
them with recipes or to interpret agreements achieved
is unacceptable.

