Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I am
particularly pleased to hear so many members of the
Council speak in the Spanish language, including in the
statement by our Ukrainian colleague.

At the outset, I congratulate on Spain on its
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and on holding today's debate.
Before I begin, I would also like to join the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain in his remarks
concerning the Deputy Secretary General and his
briefing. I would also like to thank Mr. Kim Won-soo,
Mr. Finlay and Mr. Min for their participation today.

The work of your delegation, Sir, that led to our
adoption of today's resolution 2325 (2016) was an
outstanding example in terms of transparency and
inclusivity. The text was provided to Member States well
in advance so that they could easily reach consensus
during negotiations.

To speak in the Chamber on the use or the threat
of the use of weapons of mass destruction forces us
to recall the pre-eminence of international law and
the obligations and rights of States recognized in the
Charter of the United Nations. Cautious and collective
action through multilateral instruments is the best
assurance for every one and all of us. In adopting
measures to prevent the use or the threat of the use of
weapons of mass destruction, Member States have the
obligation to strictly live up to their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter.

Uruguay has implemented foreign policy that
focuses on the need to make progress in universal
and transparent negotiations with a View to achieving
general and comprehensive disarmament under a strict
international regime. The Deputy Secretary-General, I
believe, summarized that need very well when he said,
"There are no right hands for wrong weapons."

Uruguay is deeply concerned by the growing
threat of terrorism and the risk of non-State actors
obtaining, developing or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons, or their delivery systems given
their unpredictable and devastating consequences.
This debate is therefore most timely, given the very
serious threat to international security. To counter
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, it is
essential to undertake the utmost efforts to achieve
the goal of disarmament and non-proliferation. It is
essential to adopt urgent measures to provide effective
protection against the use or the threat of the use of such
weapons by States and non-State actors, but always in
conformity with the Charter and international law.

In that regard, Uruguay urges all Member States
fulfil their obligations, regarding arms control,
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems. We
commend and encourage the work and progress of
United Nations agencies, including the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency in that area.

The best preventive tool we have now is resolution
1540 (2004). It is the primary legally binding instrument
that covers the three categories of weapons of mass
destruction. My delegation wants to emphasize that
international cooperation and assistance are essential
to effectively implementing measures contained in
resolution 1540 (2004). The resolution that we have
adopted today unanimously is a clear demonstration of
the commitment to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and contains valuable references
to the need of assistance and cooperation that must be
implemented rapidly. Increased coordination of efforts
at the national, regional, subregional and international
levels, as appropriate, is also essential in order to
strengthen the response to this serious challenge. States
are responsible for taking all appropriate measures in
accordance with their national legislations and in line
with international law to strengthen export controls,
monitor access to intangible technology transfers and
information that could be used to develop weapons of
mass destruction.

Transparency in the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is
another issue that we consider essential. We urge the
Committee to continue promoting forums for dialogue
and activities that involve the participation of all
Member States in order to strengthen and improve the
implementation of the resolution. Uruguay will begin
work on the development of the national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), with
the technical assistance of the 1540 Committee and the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism, within
the framework of its programme for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) in the Americas.

On a personal note, my next statement in the
Security Council will be next year, when the terms of
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela
will have ended. I take this opportunity to thank them
on behalf of my delegation for their excellent work and
valuable contributions, which we hope to build on. We
will continue to work together in the coming year.

