Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
welcomes the signing, on 17 December in Skhirat, by
most representatives of the various political parties and
tribal clans of Libya of the Libyan Political Agreement,
sponsored by the United Nations. The Agreement is
aimed at forming a Government of National Accord.
Jordan pays tribute to the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya; the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Martin
Kobler; and the brotherly Kingdom of Morocco and
the neighbouring countries that hosted and backed the
Libyan political dialogue.

Jordan voted in favour of of resolution 2259 (2015),
which was submitted by the United Kingdom, because
we are convinced of the importance of providing
international assistance for the Political Agreement and
the future Government of National Accord. We hope
that the Agreement will mark an important step forward
in restoring security and stability in Libya and in
achieving the aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people
to the reconstruction of the State and the maintenance
of its unity. We cherish the hope that the Agreement will
improve the humanitarian situation in Libya and help to
achieve economic development. In that respect, Jordan
reaffirms the importance of international support for
the Government of National Accord in all fields, as
clearly stipulated in the resolution and the declaration
adopted in Rome on 13 December, in accordance with
the priorities and requests of the Libyans.

The international community must ensure that there
is no political vacuum in Libya. We would also like to
reaffirm the importance of the current Government.
The international community should provide it with
the support and assistance necessary to manage
current affairs and meet challenges until the creation
of a Government of National Accord. We hope that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
take into account those concerns.

Jordan, in keeping with the resolution, urges the
Presidency Council in Libya to create the Government
of National Accord within 30 days and to develop
security measures to ensure its stability throughout
Libya. The forces of extremism and terrorism, in
particular Daesh and other evil-doers, have taken
advantage of the internal fighting and the deterioration
of the situation to occupy significant strategic areas.
It is therefore important to oppose terrorism Within
the framework of an international partnership with the
Government of National Accord and legal institutions
based on the Skhirat Agreement.

Finally, we would like to reaffirm the importance
of the sovereignty of Libya, as well as its independence,
security, and territorial integrity and unity. We wish
to underscore the importance of having the Security
Council continue to back the brotherly nation of Libya
for a better future in dignity, freedom, stability and
security.

