Mr. Manalo (Philippines): It is my delegation's
pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security
Council at this crucial time. We also wish to commend
on your judicious stewardship of the Council. We
further wish to commend and congratulate the German
delegation for its efficient guidance of the Council
during its presidency last month.

My delegation also appreciates the tireless efforts
of Mr. Blix, Mr. ElBaradei and their team of inspectors.
We strongly support every effort to resolve the
issue of Iraq in a peaceful way. However, we have
found that this is not enough and that we have to
balance this with efforts at putting diplomatic and
political pressure on the Iraqi leadership to disarm.
This is a difficult balance - calling for peace while at
the same time making sure that the Iraqi leadership
does not misinterpret our desire for peace as a refusal
to resort to all means necessary and allowed by the
United Nations Charter and international law.

What we want is a stable and secure Middle East,
for a stable and secure Middle East region means a
safer region for everyone, particularly the 1.5 million
Filipinos there. The unresolved issue of Iraq's weapons
of mass destruction places the stability of the Middle
East in peril and could be a direct threat to all of the
people in that region, including our Filipinos there. We
truly fear the threat, the use and the spread and transfer
of weapons of mass destruction and what this would
mean to our peoples in the Middle East and elsewhere,
as well as to our desire to win the war against terror.

Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) has
found Iraq to be in material breach of its obligations
under relevant resolutions. Full and verifiable
compliance has not been achieved. In her statement
during the thirteenth Non-Aligned Summit in Kuala
Lumpur, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo called on
the Iraqi leadership to comply with its obligations and
to spare the heroic people of Iraq the agonies of a
devastating conflict. President Macapagal-Arroyo also
said that there is a great future for the Iraqi people
beyond this crisis and beyond strategic accommodation
with United Nations demands. President Arroyo also
believes that there is a great future for an outward-
looking and pluralistic Iraq.

We share everyone's hopes for peace, but we
must always be ready to take decisive action to
preserve and maintain a meaningful peace.

