Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We share the feeling of deep sadness at the
passing of Nelson Mandela, a leading political figure
with whom the entire world associated a sense of
fairness and freedom.

We thank the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their detailed briefings on the
progress of the judicial proceedings and the task of
winding up their activities.
We would like to begin by congratulating Togo
on the recent appointment of a candidate from that
country, Mr. Koffi Afande, as the sixteenth judge of
the ICTY. We hope that, as stipulated when the issue of
the appointment of an additional judge was proposed,
he will actively participate in the work of the Tribunal
and that, given the large number of cases, his work will
assist in bolstering the effectiveness of the Appeals
Chamber, in line with the opinion of the President
of the Tribunal set out in the relevant request to the
Security Council.

We eagerly await the decisions on the Seselj
case in the Trial Chamber and on the Sainovie et al.
and Bordevic' cases in the Appeals Chamber, which,
as we understand, have been delayed for a number of
procedural reasons. We closely follow and study the
course of those protracted cases and hope for their
objective consideration.

Unfortunately, there are ongoing difficulties with
regard to the translation of cases in both Tribunals. The
slow translation work continues to lead to significant
delays in the legal proceedings. With regard to the
translation of the judgement on the Prlic' et al. case,
rendered in May, the Tribunal has postponed work for
a year, justifying the delay by the large caseload. The
same translation issue was the root cause ofa significant
delay in the Butare case ofthe ICTR, where the material
took an excessive length of time, that is, from July
2011 to February 2013. We urge the Presidents of the
Tribunals to pay the closest attention to that problem.
The Tribunals have the financial means to resolve the
issue, including through the outsourcing plan.

We must mention yet another problem that could
ultimately hamper the closure of the Rwanda Tribunal
within the set time frame, namely, the resettlement
of individuals acquitted by the Tribunal in secure
countries. We understand and support the humanitarian
significance of that task. However, it must not be a
reason for postponing the closure of the ICTR. The
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals was established in order to resolve such
issues. That is the very body to which the function
should be transferred in a timely manner. In our View,
there are no legal constraints in that regard. We note
the assurances by the ICTR President and Prosecutor of
their readiness to undertake the transfer of that issue to
the Residual Mechanism by the end of 2014.

In general, we would like to underscore once

again that the practice of drawing out legal proceedings
contradicts the text outlined in resolution 1966 (2010),
that is, a swift drawdown of the work of the Tribunals.
The delays undermine the interest in international
justice and are costly to the international community.
They incur, inter alia, an increased financial burden for
States Members of the United Nations. We underscore
our commitment to that resolution.

