Mr. Kasuri (Pakistan): At the very outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also wish to thank you for your timely initiative in
organizing today's ministerial meeting. The issue of
justice and the rule of law is both important and most
relevant to the work of the United Nations and the
Security Council. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his important contribution,
which highlights the expertise within the United
Nations system that will stand us in good stead in the
future.

The quest to define and, subsequently, to
implement justice and the rule of law has been central
to the march of civilization. It is critical to the
realization of social and economic justice, and for the
implementation of political, economic, cultural,
religious and environmental rights. Establishing the
principles of justice and the rule of law is essential to
the establishment and maintenance of order at the inter-
State and intra-State levels. Faithful application of
those principles strengthens the system, while failure
entails serious, and often tragic, consequences.

The relevance of justice and the rule of law for
international peace and security is also self-evident.
Situations posing a threat to international peace and
security must be dealt with by the United Nations, and
primarily by the Security Council, in line with the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. In particular, the use of force should be
consistent with the Charter's principles relating to
collective security.

The framers of the Charter placed the pacific
settlement of disputes ahead of enforcement measures.
In our quest for justice and the rule of law at the
international level, we must respect the framers' intent
and fully operationalize the mechanisms provided for
the peaceful settlement of international disputes. The
resolutions and decisions of the Security Council must
also be implemented uniformly and without
discrimination - and also with equal force,
irrespective of their falling within Chapter VI or
Chapter VII. Selective implementation creates an
unjust environment, deepening conflicts and
compounding the suffering of people. It erodes
confidence in the system and undermines the
credibility of the United Nations.

We must also ensure consistent application of
international human rights and humanitarian law and
all the provisions of the Geneva Conventions. The
international tribunals set up by the Security Council
are playing an important role. They have shown that,
within their scope, no one is above or beyond the reach
of international law. We stress that impunity for serious
crimes against humanity, including genocide, must
come to an end. Responsibility for such violations must
go up the chain of command. Appropriate mechanisms
should be created towards that end. The international
community set new standards in dealing with the
violators of international humanitarian law in Bosnia.
Those standards must be applied equally to other
conflict situations, especially where people are under
occupation and alien domination.

The situation in occupied J ammu and Kashmir is
a case in point calling for the urgent attention of the
international community. Over the past 13 years, more
than 80,000 Kashmiris have been killed, and thousands
have been wounded, by Indian security forces. There
are innumerable cases of torture, rape and extra-
judicial killing. No one has ever been prosecuted in a
real manner, despite the fact that such crimes have been
extensively documented by international human rights
organizations. Justice for the people of occupied
Kashmir requires an end to impunity for these crimes,
and their resolution, through the realization of the
Security Council-mandated right of self-determination.
We are all familiar with the dictum, If you want peace,
work for justice. That applies, in great measure, to the
situations in Kashmir and Palestine.

The Security Council has in recent years
contributed to various aspects of justice and the rule of
law. That is reflected in the measures and norms
instituted for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration programmes that have been established
within the context of peacekeeping operations, and the
strengthening of international criminal justice. The
Council and the international system must continue to
build upon those efforts.

Justice and the rule of law play a crucial role in
societies emerging from conflict. In that context,
financing reconstruction processes is a critical area
where much more needs to be done. The need for
rebuilding national institutions and the necessary
infrastructure cannot be overstated, such as was the
case in Afghanistan and, now, in Iraq. Generous
international assistance and expertise should not only
be committed, but also fully delivered, to post-conflict
societies to create new legal and constitutional
frameworks and security and judicial structures, as well
as to refurbish law-enforcement capacities. The failure
to provide such financial and technical support can
unravel efforts for the restoration of peace and security,
and even cause a relapse into conflict.

The desired objectives in conflict and post-
conflict situations can be significantly advanced with
greater coordination within the United Nations
system - in particular among major organs such as the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council - and by taking into account the judgements
and advisory opinions of the International Court of
Justice. Pakistan has already proposed the
establishment of ad hoc composite committees to
address the complex crises in the African continent in
their political, economic and social dimensions.
Consideration should also be given to the creation of a
separate unit to assist post-conflict States in the re-
construction of their judicial systems.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the
commitment we make to strengthen and advance the
international rule of law will be a lasting legacy for
future generations. Today's discussion advances our
dialogue on that essential need of humankind. We have
no doubt that the Council will continue to follow this
subject with the commitment and seriousness that it
deserves.

