Mr. Berger (Germany): It is a pleasure to see you
preside over this open debate, Sir, and let me say that
the large number of delegations taking the floor, even
at this late hour, shows how pertinent it was for the
Korean presidency to organize it.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by that
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. We
also welcome the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/2) and the establishment of a standing
reporting procedure.

Many of us recall a photograph that went around
the world very recently. It is of a small boy walking
down a street, staring straight at the bodies of dozens
of slaughtered men, found in a river near Aleppo.
It is just one example of the horrors that children
continue to face each and every day in Syria and of the
psychological trauma that that war will have on a whole
future generation. The civil war in Syria is intensifying
and, as we heard from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights today, the pain and suffering it inflicts
on the civilian population continue to increase in scale
and scope. The war has moved into the major cities.
Indiscriminate attacks on Civilians, especially women
and children, often caused by the use of explosive
weapons with broad impact in densely populated areas,
remain the most appalling aspect of the Syrian conflict.

According to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the disproportionate and
indiscriminate killing of children in the course of
military operations may amount to war crimes. In
Syria, boys and girls are being bombarded in their
neighbourhoods. We recall that the Syrian uprising itself
was triggered by children in Dara'a being subjected to
torture, some of them for weeks. Schools and hospitals
must be zones of peace where children are granted
protection even in times of conflict, as is stipulated in
resolution 1998 (2011). Yet in Syria the United Nations
has documented Government attacks on schools and
the denial of access to hospitals for civilians. In some
cases, anti-Government armed groups have targeted
school buildings. During her recent visit to Syria in
December, the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict learned from the Syrian Government
that at least 1,300 school facilities had been damaged
since violence broke out.

In Syria we are also witnessing the devastating
consequences that deliberate attacks on hospitals,
health workers and ambulances have for the sick
and wounded. All parties responsible for targeting
medical personnel, punishing medical personnel for
performing their duties or attacking or misusing the
Geneva Conventions' emblems should know that such
acts constitute war crimes. We remain convinced
that accountability for such grave violations must be
ensured.

In that context, we wish to recall that States from all
over the world have requested that the Council refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

