Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General and thanks him for his important statement.

The Chinese delegation voted in favour of
resolution 1511 (2003), which the Security Council has
just adopted. In view of the situation in Iraq and the
common aspirations of the international community,
China consistently maintained that it was necessary for
the Security Council to adopt a new resolution so as to
help Iraq to achieve peace and stability, restore
sovereignty and bring about economic and social
development as soon as possible.

The text of resolution 1511 (2003) is a marked
improvement over that of the original draft presented
by the delegation of the United States. It incorporates a
number of reasonable ideas and suggestions from all
the parties concerned, including China. The resolution
will undoubtedly have a positive impact on the
endeavour to promote the political process in Iraq,
accelerate the transfer of power from the Coalition
Provisional Authority to the Iraqi people, gradually
strengthen the role of the United Nations and increase
transparency in Iraq's economic reconstruction. Those
are the reasons why we voted in favour.

There is a broad consensus of all the parties
that - as is the fervent desire of the Iraqi people - a
leading role should be ensured for the United Nations
in the political process in Iraq, and that there should be
an early restoration of Iraq's sovereignty, in order to
achieve the goal of an Iraq run by the Iraqi people.
Like many other Member States, we have consistently
held that the resolution should contain clear and
explicit provisions on these major questions. To that
end, we adopted a forward-looking and practical
approach during consultations, with the earnest hope of
achieving broad consensus among Council members.

During consultations on the draft, France,
Germany, Russia and many others put forward a series
of sound suggestions, and the Secretary-General also
made some important comments. We emphasized on
many occasions the need for the sponsors of the draft
resolution to accord those suggestions serious
consideration, and it would have been better if it had
incorporated more of them. The fact that we voted in
favour of the resolution, therefore, does not mean that
we are fully satisfied with its contents.

The Security Council has an obligation and
responsibility to remain actively seized of the matter. It
has adopted almost 70 resolutions on the question of
Iraq. Resolution 1511 (2003) will not be the last. As
the situation develops there, the Security Council
should further consider, in a timely fashion, such
questions as how to reinforce the important role of the
United Nations in the Iraqi political process and how to
speed up the restoration of sovereignty to Iraq.

It should be pointed out that history and
experience have proved that a definitive and desirable
solution to the Iraqi question calls for concerted efforts
and extensive participation by the international
community. In this regard, the views of the vast
majority of the Arab and Islamic countries, especially
Iraq's neighbours, should be fully respected.

I conclude by reiterating that the Chinese
Government and people are greatly concerned about
the current situation in Iraq and attach importance to
the country's political and economic reconstruction.
We hope that, with the strong support of the
international community and the active assistance of
the United Nations, Iraq, which has suffered so greatly
from the hardships of war, will see the early restoration
of its sovereignty and embark on the path of peace,
stability and development. China is ready to continue
to work tirelessly to contribute to that end.

