Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Allow me, first, to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Nakamitsu for her briefing.

In maintaining international peace and security,
the only choice must be to move forward on right path.
Although the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty was bilateral in nature, its positive effect
was felt by all States. The Treaty was an important part
of the arms-control and disarmament infrastructure. It
contributed, at least to some degree, to a reduced threat
from nuclear and conventional weapons. We therefore
regret the termination of the INF Treaty. It is a major
step backwards in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We share the concern of Under-
Secretary-General Nakamitsu that the collapse of the
INF Treaty will remove one of the few constraints on
the development of dangerous classes of missiles.

My delegation has no desire to use this very
important meeting to determine only who is right and
who is wrong. The stakes are too high. Therefore, allow
me to make the following points.

First, Indonesia regrets the inability of the
relevant parties to continue dialogue to uphold the
INF Treaty. We are concerned that the Treaty's
termination could lead to a new arms race. Given that
some are already modernizing nuclear weapons and
developing new armament technologies, the Treaty's
absence will exacerbate the great strain weighing on
the global disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
spurring instability.

Secondly, Indonesia calls upon all parties to
exercise maximum restraint, because maintaining
regional and global stability is our common priority. We
must uphold the rules-based international system, with
effective multilateralism and meaningful negotiation as
key principles. Let me draw the attention of the relevant
parties to some vital instruments aimed at maintaining
peace and stability, particularly the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, which emphasizes
confidence-building measures as the basis for relations
between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and its partners. Major States that were parties to the
INF Treaty are also parties to the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia. Therefore, the
obligations under the latter still apply.

Thirdly, Indonesia stresses the imperative of
preserving and advancing the general arms-control,
disarmament and non-proliferation regimes. As a party
to both the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, as one of the major proponents of the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and as the
coordinator of the working group on disarmament of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Indonesia
continues to support every effort to limit, reduce
and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery. We also reiterate our long-standing
commitment to verifiable and effective treaty-based
nuclear arms control and disarmament.

While hoping that the relevant parties will negotiate
the creation of a new and even more effective instrument
to replace the INF Treaty, we would welcome an early
discussion of the future of the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty and other arms-control agreements.

Reaffirming Indonesia's commitment to the Treaty
on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, or
Bangkok Treaty, in ensuring the security and stability
of the region, Indonesia calls upon all the relevant
parties to sign the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty as
soon as possible.

The existence of even one nuclear weapon, by
design or accident, poses immense risks of catastrophe.
Indeed, there are no right or wrong hands to possess such
weapons. As Indonesia has emphasized repeatedly, total
elimination is the only guarantee against this threat.

