Mr. Bante (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank you, Madam President, and to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of
Luxembourg. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Executive Director of UNICEF and the Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation of UNESCO for
their statements.

I take this opportunity to commend the efforts
by the Security Council and its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy for their ongoing work
to protect children.
We note with concern that armed conflicts continue
to exacerbate the situation of children, which, as stated
in the Secretary-General's report for 2013 (S/2014/339),
has become more alarming. Indeed, the report gives
an overview of the trends and new developments, in
particular the explosion in the number of killings of
children and physical attacks against them in several
countries, in particular Afghanistan and Iraq, and
serious and systemic attacks against them, such as in
Syria, Gaza or Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
2013, the recruitment of children by the parties to the
conflict in Central African Republic became a common
occurrence, and they are being used on a large scale and
serious violations are being committed against them in
South Sudan. The recent kidnappings of children in
Nigeria are a new source of concern.

In this brief period, we have noted over 4,000 new
cases of the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict in the countries under review. In a number of
countries, children are the targets of serious abuse,
including sexual violence, whose perpetrators very
often remain unpunished, despite the legal provisions
of countries and international humanitarian law.
Cases of hospitals and schools being bombed or used
for military purposes are frequent in the majority of
countries covered by the report. Furthermore, schools
are increasingly among the primary targets of a number
of armed groups, as is the case in Mali, Yemen, Nigeria,
Afghanistan and Thailand. The intensification of
conflicts and emergence of new conflicts in a number
of places explains the increase in the number of abuses
against children. All of that requires that new measures
be taken and that consideration be given to the United
Nations approaches and strategies to adapt them to the
new contexts.

We note that progress was achieved in 2013 by
a number of parties to conflict. While insufficient,
that progress should be welcomed, especially when it
concerns armed groups, which have a greater tendency
to commit crimes against children. In that regard, we
pay tribute to the active involvement of the United
Nations, including that of the Secretary-General,
with the support of the Security Council, through
various decisions and initiatives. We would also like to
commend the efforts undertaken by the various actors
within the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and we encourage them and assure them of
our continued support.

We should not lose sight of the fact that impunity
is one of the main causes of the increase in violence
against children. The report of the Secretary-General
contains a number of recommendations for the
strengthening of the protection of children. We support
those recommendations and encourage the Secretary-
General to continue his efforts, together with all players
working for the protection of children, including the
United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations. We support the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and the Secretary-General for his
initiatives to encourage dialogue with armed groups
and we urge him to continue to work closely with
regional and subregional organizations in those fields.

To substantially improve the situation of children,
we believe that special focus should be placed on a
cohesive policy for preventing those types of violations.
Other measures could also be considered, including the
strengthening by States of their criminal legislation to
ensure that no grave violations are committed against
children and to guarantee that individuals who have
been recognized as guilty of such acts are punished.
New measures and strategies to protect schools,
teachers and hospitals, which have recently been the
primary target of certain armed groups, are worthy
of special attention. Broad adherence by States to the
international Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocol could yield improvements in this
situation.

With respect to schools targeted by attacks based
on cultural and identity grounds, new measures
and strategies within the framework of the United
Nations protection strategy need to be initiated and
implemented. The Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
which was launched in March, is aimed at putting an end
to and preventing the recruitment and use of children
in the national security forces of those countries by
2016. The campaign's objectives were approved this
year in resolution 2143 (2014) and require the continued
support ofthe Security Council and the commitment of
the international community.

The important role being played by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the Security
Council's technical body, should be emphasized. We
believe that the Group can continue to work with the
different actors active in the field, as has taken place
under the chairmanship of Ambassador Sylvie Lucas.
In that way, it could further participate in the process
of protecting children, given the new situations arising
throughout the world, which require appropriate or
urgent solutions.

In conclusion, we would again like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as well as the UNICEF Office
and our bilateral partners for their multiform support,
which has enabled Chad to fulfil its action plan in
less than two years and to ensure that it is no longer
listed in the annexes of the report of the Secretary-
General covering the period from January to December
2013. We wish to underscore that the political will of
the country's authorities has played a fundamental
role in that process. Chad remains ready to share its
experience, in particular at the regional and subregional
levels, to strengthen the protection of children in armed
conflicts.

