Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, allow me to express our deep
satisfaction to today see you, Sir, in this Chamber serving
as the President of the Security Council during the month
when Gambia has taken on the responsibilities of the
presidency. We also are grateful to your predecessor,
from whom you have taken the baton of Africa in the
work of the Security Council. We have all been very
lucky to have been working this month and last under the
presidency of Africa, which has given the world many
wise and thoughtful political leaders.

Russia has consistently been committed to a
comprehensive implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council to settle the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
We have completely supported the activities undertaken
by the United Nations Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency to carry out their
mandates. We have unswervingly striven to bring about
Iraq's complete fulfilment of its obligations under those
resolutions. That is the only way that sanctions can be

 

lifted. In this regard, to comply strictly with resolution 687
(1991), the first step will be to lift the oil embargo once all
the Iraqi "disarmament dossier" issues have been dealt with
and moved to the long-term-monitoring stage.

Thanks to the successful mission of the Secretary-
General to Iraq, there exists a real opportunity to speed up
the process of achieving a comprehensive settlement in the
Persian Gulf. Moscow greatly appreciates the agreement
between the Secretary-General and the Iraqi Administration.
It is a major diplomatic success for the entire international
community, and it testifies to the effectiveness of the
instruments the United Nations has to peacefully resolve
international conflicts. We pay tribute to the diplomatic
skill, wisdom and courage of the Secretary-General in
defending the principles of the United Nations Charter.
Russia has taken concrete steps to support the
Secretary-General's mission and has done everything
possible to overcome the crisis relating to the activity of the
United Nations Special Commission in Iraq. My country
was guided, moreover, by the main goals: the need for full
elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction,
maintaining United Nations monitoring in this field and
avoiding the extremely dangerous consequences for the
entire region in the event of an uncontrolled development
of the situation.

The Memorandum of Understanding, signed in
Baghdad on 23 February 1998, meets these goals. The
United Nations Special Commission has been given the
opportunity to continue its work unhindered in Iraq on the
basis of current procedures, in full compliance with the
decisions of the Council, including the need to respect
Iraq's sovereignty, dignity and legitimate security concerns.
A firm basis has been laid to speed up the implementation
of the recommendations made last November by the special
session of the Special Commission as to the need to make
its work more effective and to enjoy broader international
support. Russia, for its part, has already made proposals to
the Special Commission for further enhancement of its
participation in the Commission's activities.

We also expect a rapid clarification of the agreed-upon
procedures for examining and inspecting the presidential
sites, so as to promptly get on with full implementation of
the Memorandum of Understanding, under the control of
the Secretary-General. The Memorandum has full legal
force. It meets all the generally accepted norms for the
practice of international law in the area of international
agreements. Already approved by the Security Council on
24 February when the Secretary-General reported to
Council members on the results of his mission, this was
addressed by the Council President in a statement on that
very same day.

The resolution adopted today, despite the
complicated process for harmonizing it, reflects many
points fundamental for us and for many other delegations.
This made it possible to ensure a consensus in the
Council.

The main goal of the resolution is not only to again
reaffirm support for the Secretary-General's mission, but
also to officially approve the Memorandum and to
emphasize the need for its rapid and full implementation.
The resolution contains nothing that would go beyond the
boundaries of the agreements achieved by the Secretary-
General in Baghdad. It is important that the resolution
contains a confirmation of Iraq's obligations and that
there is mention of the commitment of all United Nations
members to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Iraq, Kuwait and the
neighbouring States.

The resolution contains a political warning to Iraq,
whereby new violations by that country will have
extremely serious consequences. At the same time, there
has been full observance of the legal prerogatives of the
Security Council, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. The resolution clearly states that it is precisely
the Security Council which will directly ensure its
implementation, including the adoption of appropriate
decisions. Therefore, any hint of automaticity with regard
to the application of force has been excluded; that would
not be acceptable for the majority of the Council's
members.

A special role in reaching consensus was played by
the clear and unambiguous statements by the sponsors of
the draft resolution during informal consultations about
the absence in the text of such automaticity. If the
Memorandum of Understanding is violated, which we
hope will not happen, then the Security Council would
discuss the situation that would have arisen at that time
and would take the relevant decision. In the statement of
the representative of Japan at today's official meeting,
this position was clearly confirmed on behalf of the
sponsors. We are grateful for this.

No one can ignore the resolution adopted today and
attempt to act by bypassing the Security Council. At the
same time, the resolution clearly shows that there is a
light at the end of the tunnel by confirming that, with
 

regard to the current sanctions regime, the Council will be
guided by the provisions of its resolution 687 (1991), which
include, of course, paragraph 22 on the criteria for lifting
the oil embargo. We hope that this will take place soon.

