When I was preparing for today's meeting, I was looking through the press clippings and saw one published today about two Russian diplomats who were expelled from the Netherlands yesterday. They worked for Russian spy agencies and were caught stealing high-tech information from the Netherlands. The article mentioned the four Russian spies who were caught red-handed two years ago when they parked their truck outside the building of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and tried to hack the OPCW. The Russian Ambassador has a very long statement this morning, but he does not mention anything about Russia's hacking. Germany has been on the Security Council for two years, and in all of the meetings on this topic during that time, Russia has undermined the OPCW. Today is another example of that. I find it very treacherous that the Russian Ambassador takes offence at the understanding that questions on this issue should be dealt with in closed consultations and that we expected only statements to be made today. I would like to thank Director-General Arias for his statement, and I assume that Russia's statement is an attempt at intimidation, to try to catch him off guard. If Russia were genuinely interested in the substance on this issue, it would not have obstructed all of the efforts made over the years to gather evidence. It would not have blocked the OPCW verification mission. It would not have blocked the attribution of accountability. After two years on the Security Council, we have to say that the Russian efforts to undermine the OPCW have failed. The OPCW remains a very strong and respected organization. It has functioned well, despite the constant efforts to undermine it, or, to quote the Russian Ambassador, despite the smear campaign that is being led against it. Under difficult circumstances, Mr. Arias has done a very good job. On behalf of the German Government, I would like to thank him for his personal commitment and that of the Technical Secretariat in all of their efforts to uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention. My thanks also go to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu. I have a lot of admiration for her and the way in which she always upholds her unwavering position in defending the global norm of the non-use of chemical weapons. After seven years and 86 progress reports, few advances have been made on the Syrian chemical-weapon file. For seven years, the Syrian regime has stalled and obstructed the investigations. The regime has failed to make any declaration concerning its chemical weapons programme and arsenal that can hold up to scrutiny. We heard from the briefers today that 19 questions remain unanswered. Among those are questions relating to a chemical-weapon production facility, and we must not take that lightly. The regime has refused to cooperate with the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team. It has chosen to ignore the decisions adopted by the OPCW's Executive Council. Worse still, despite the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the Syrian regime has continued to use chemical weapons against its own people in their country, in Khan Shaykhun and Ltamenah, as we have heard today. Germany calls on the members of the Security Council and those soon to begin their term on the Council to continue to stand up for international law and the Chemical Weapons Convention. I implore them not to succumb to the war of attrition that is being waged here. Germany will continue from outside the Council to support the OPCW and strive for accountability. We will support the OPCW's attribution mechanism, which we believe is key. In his statement, the OPCW Director-General confirmed that the use of nerve agents constitutes a violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. That re- emergence, as we have seen in Syria and in the terrible cases of the Skripals and Mr. Navalny, must not be tolerated. There can be just and lasting peace in Syria only if the perpetrators of those most heinous crimes are identified and brought to justice. National jurisdictions in Germany and elsewhere are starting to fill the current void. The Office of the Federal Public Prosecutor General in Germany is collecting information on the use of chemical weapons, and just recently civil-society organizations filed charges concerning the chemical-weapon attacks in Ghouta and Khan Shaykhun in Syria. There is a ray of hope.
