We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and his commitment to humanitarian work. The Niger welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Syria (S/2020/327) and the analysis on possible alternate entry points, which will enable the Council to assess the appropriateness of those crossing points. The report paints a detailed picture of the difficult situation of which we all are aware. We have repeatedly been presented with the troubling humanitarian situation in Syria Arab Republic. In fact, not long ago, we adopted a resolution (resolution 2504 (2020)) to lower the number of cross-borders entry points, thus reducing access to humanitarian assistance for Syrians in need. Amid the already complex humanitarian situation in Syria, the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) adds another layer, making it even more difficult to manage. The Secretary-General reported that in Syria "fajll efforts to strengthen COVID-19 preparedness and response were severely constrained by the global shortage of personal protective equipment, ventilators and other vital medical supplies" (S/2020/327, para. 18). Nevertheless, we commend the cooperation among the Syrian authorities, the World Health Organization and national organizations to prevent and curb the spread of COVID-19. Those efforts must continue, especially when it comes to providing medical products and equipment. The 10-year conflict in Syria has significantly damaged the country's infrastructure, including health facilities, which leaves a large number of people vulnerable to contracting the virus. With millions of displaced persons living in densely populated, overcrowded camps where social distancing is near impossible, there is a great danger of large-scale spread of the virus among refugees and internally displaced persons. Over and over again, we have heard from Mr. Lowcock how important the cross-border operation is to humanitarian action in Syria. The Niger fully supports the cross-border mechanism, which is essential for the survival of many Syrians. We will also support any further agreements that make humanitarian access faster and more secure while respecting Syria's sovereignty. In conclusion, as I have stated before, the unity of the Council, especially when it comes to humanitarian issues, is critical in order to take the right decisions and make progress on the different aspects of the Syrian situation.
