At the outset, South Africa wishes to reiterate its support for efforts to achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. In this regard, South Africa fully supports the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), whose primary mandate, as established in resolution 690 (1991) and all subsequent resolutions, is the holding of a free and fair referendum on self-determination for the people of Western Sahara. Our conviction remains that a resolution of the Western Sahara matter lies in upholding international legality and that the parties should conduct themselves within the confines of adopted Security Council resolutions and international norms. The Council should never permit international legality to be overturned by political reality; doing so would undermine the very foundation of the rules-based international system that the United Nations is built upon. In this regard, South Africa firmly believes that the Council has a vital role to play in resolving the issue of Western Sahara. However, we believe it has fallen short of its responsibility. During our 2019-2020 term on the Council, South Africa has abstained twice on the MINURSO mandate renewal due to the substance and working methods of the Western Sahara file. It has been disconcerting to us that the Security Council working methods on the Western Sahara file have been uniquely biased and non-transparent. This is a disturbing trend, given that it is the duty of the Security Council to objectively assist the parties to move towards a mutually acceptable, negotiated settlement, and to treat the interests and concerns of both parties in a balanced and equal manner. In terms of the working methods on this file in the Security Council, South Africa has consistently raised its concerns that the "negotiating process" of the draft resolution through the Group of Friends remains an obstacle to making progress on the Western Sahara file and undermines the working methods of the Council. A draft text is presented to Council members, who have to accept it as a fait accompli despite the fact that the majority of us has been elected to serve on the Security Council and have the responsibility to engage on every matter on the Council's agenda. South Africa would also like to place on record that this is the only mandate that is negotiated in this manner and is not considerate of the views of Member States, particularly of African Member States, which are excluded from the Group of Friends. In this regard, unlike other Council outcomes, there was once again no real attempt to reach a compromise on the contentious paragraphs so that we could be assured of a balanced text reflective of the views of all Council members. Let us be clear: there was no attempt to reach consensus. Regarding the substance of resolution 2548 (2020), South Africa would like to raise several points. As it stands, the text does not reflect the current realities on the ground, which were clearly outlined by the Special Representative of the Secretary- General in his briefing to the Council on developments pertaining to the human rights, humanitarian, security and political situation in Western Sahara. In terms of the appointment of a personal envoy, South Africa fully supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to find a suitable candidate. However, the current text does not adequately reflect the urgency that the United Nations find a personal envoy to resume the stalled United Nations-led political process. Given the growing sentiments and calls by one of the parties, the Frente Popular para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y Rio de Oro to disengage from the United Nations process due to perceptions that the United Nations is not doing enough, South Africa advocated for a more balanced text, which would have sent a positive signal to the parties that one party was not favoured over another. It is in this context, in the absence of a personal envoy and with a stalled political process, that we supported a return to a six-month mandate. The intention was to send a strong signal to the parties that the Security Council remained seized of this matter, following the developments on the ground. Additionally, we would have hoped that this would prompt the parties to cooperate with MINURSO and each other, while taking steps to build much-needed mutual trust. The notable decline in compliance with the terms of military agreement No. 1, as described in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/938), is a direct result of the stalled political process and the frustration among the parties. The situation in Guerguerat is a case in point. We therefore urge both the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO to strictly abide by the terms of the ceasefire agreements, particularly military agreement No. 1, to avoid acts that could lead to a rise in tension and possible hostilities in the territory. South Africa has repeatedly called for the clarification of the terms "realistic/ realism", and this issue has not been satisfactorily addressed. In our view these terms remain ambiguous, and that does not contribute to a neutral political process. The word "realism" in the draft resolution would be interpreted as implying that the Council favours political reality over international legality. This interpretation could set a precedent that would set aside international law in favour of the principle that "might is right". South Africa maintains that realism in the context of resolution 2548 (2020) is related to the negotiations and not to any outcome. We note and recall that the use of the terms "compromise" and "realistic/realism" are derived from the recommendation set forth in the Secretary-General's April 2008 report (S/2008/251), which calls on both parties, Frente POLISARIO and Morocco, to show realism and a spirit of compromise as these are essential to maintaining the momentum of the process of negotiations. However, we would also like to put it on record that the context under which we voted in favour of these terms in 2008 during our first term on the Security Council was underpinned by South Africa's approach to having a constructive text that would bring the sides together. Today, these terms have been taken out of context, and we cannot support the distortion in their application that we have seen in recent years. In its fourteenth preambular paragraph, resolution 2548 (2020) continues to welcome Morocco's "serious and credible Moroccan efforts to move the process forward towards resolution". The context and relevance of retaining this phrase has changed. Unfortunately, this phrase has led to destructive ambiguity and resulted in some regrettably interpreting the Council's intention as favouring one proposal over the other. My delegation reiterates its understanding that, based on South A frica's having been a member of the Security Council that was part of the negotiations on the text of resolution 1754 (2007), the text of that resolution in which the Council "tak[es] note" of both proposals and where it calls on the parties to enter into negotiations based on both proposals is clear. Any attempt to place one proposal over the other would undermine the negotiations process and be counter-productive to the spirit of future negotiations based on the two proposals. Further to this point, this part of the text of resolution 2548 (2020) blatantly ignores the efforts of the Frente POLISARIO and fails to present the facts by omitting an accurate chronological description of the parties' efforts; this language can easily be interpreted as showing biased towards one party over another. Additionally, it is unclear as to why the facts should be presented in this manner. The Council and the incoming Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General should remain objective without pre-empting any final status of the negotiations. Of grave concern to South Africa is the fact that not all resolutions of the Security Council pertaining to Western Sahara are being acknowledged. It would appear that only resolutions from 2007 onwards are acknowledged, which sets a negative precedent as it sends a message that any resolution before 2007 is irrelevant when, in fact, we are bound by all Council outcomes on this matter. On human rights, we note that, in the seventeenth preambular paragraph of resolution 2548 (2020), the text indicates the Council stresses "the importance of improving the human rights situation in Western Sahara and the Tindouf camps, and encourag[es] the parties to work with the international community to develop and implement independent and credible measures to ensure full respect for human rights, bearing in mind their relevant obligations under international law". However, there is still no explicit reference or responsibility given to MINURSO to, in its work, monitor the human rights situation on the ground. A human rights monitoring mandate for United Nations missions has become almost standard. It is therefore of concern that this mechanism has once again been rejected in Western Sahara. That having been said, resolution 2548 (2020) does call on the parties, Frente POLISARIO and Morocco, to continue with the negotiations, which we acknowledge. South Africa once again proposes that the Security Council visit the occupied territory, as it did in 1995, to assess the situation on the ground in an effort to break the current political impasse among the parties. Keeping in mind the limitations imposed by the pandemic, the Security Council should consider a virtual visit, and, should the pandemic subside and safety regulations related to travel permit, we should look into the possibility of physically visiting Western Sahara in future. Notwithstanding the many other African issues on the Council's agenda, Western Sahara requires the Council's attention and should not be treated any different from them. In this regard, we propose that, just as the Security Council engages with the African Union on other issues on the Council's agenda, there be more formal coordination with the African Union on Western Sahara. It is for the reasons I have just outlined that South Africa abstained in the voting on the resolution. Going forward, we appeal to the Council to review its working methods and conduct its business in a transparent and impartial manner, as the way it approached this issue undermines the Council's ability to meaningfully effect change on the ground and move towards the resolution of this long-standing matter. In conclusion, South Africa appeals to the Secretary-General to urgently appoint a Personal Envoy to advance a political process that has been stagnant for far too long. To the parties to the conflict, namely, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO, we urge that they engage in a direct and substantive dialogue that can pave the way towards a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political resolution of this matter.
