Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I join others in very
warmly welcoming this British initiative to hold this open
debate today.

I am very conscious that there are many States with
a very much stronger claim than mine to the Council's
time on this critical subject. I will therefore be very brief
and approach the subject from the perspective of New
Zealand's experience as a small contributor to
peacekeeping efforts in Africa. Our commitments have
included Angola, Somalia, Mozambique and Sierra Leone,
as well as refugee relief in the Great Lakes region.

There is a widespread and understandable feeling
that Africa is not getting a fair deal when it comes to the
provision of United Nations peacekeeping resources. The
credibility of the Council requires that it be seen as

 

even-handed in its attention to crises, wherever they occur
and whether CNN is there or not.

New Zealand is deeply concerned at the apparent trend
over the past few years - to which there have been just
some exceptions - away from financing peacekeeping by
means of assessed contributions towards relying to far too
great an extent on voluntary trust funds instead. This strikes
at the collective responsibility that lies at the heart of the
Charter. In practical terms it means that those regions that
fail to attract donor support will not receive from the
United Nations the response they are entitled to. My
delegation was therefore particularly pleased to hear the
clear view expressed on this by the Secretary-General just
this morning.

The other side of this coin, of course, is that the
parties to a dispute who have agreed on the need for a
United Nations peacekeeping presence are obliged to do
everything in their power to ensure the security of
peacekeepers and the safety of other United Nations and
associated personnel. There should, we believe, be a greater
focus on prevention, especially through the Secretary-
General's exercising his early-warning role, as provided for
in Article 99 of the Charter.

Finally, as has been extensively reported, the root
causes of much of the conflict in the region include the
high level of poverty and underdevelopment and the
inequalities in opportunity among different groups. The
Security Council, we suggest, should make far greater use
on these issues of its relationship with the Economic and
Social Council, provided for in Article 65 of the Charter.

