Mr. Ould Teguedi (Mauritania) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Togolese delegation for organizing this debate and the
President of the Togolese Republic for his
participation. My country also thanks Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and his efforts.
We also thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

The issue of security and development has been
one of the major challenges facing the Sahel region
since the end of the last century. The region has
suffered the eruption of conflicts and armed rebellions,
as well as severe environmental upheavals, such as the
great drought of the 1970s that pushed hundreds of
thousands of farmers into large cities that lacked
adequate infrastructure, thereby promoting the
smuggling and trafficking of arms and all sorts of
goods. This in turn led to the expansion of organized
crime networks, terrorism and human trafficking.
Those trends have been exacerbated in areas of the
region where States have been undermined by security
and economic structures that are inadequate to the size
of their territory and by difficulties in effectively
monitoring porous borders.

Since the start of the century, our country has
been hamstrung by the activities of organized crime
networks and terrorist attacks at a time when we have
not been prepared to deal with such threats. The first
signs of the threat emerged in 1994, when members of
a Salafist group related to some foreign extremists was
arrested, while others managed to find refuge in
Somalia and Afghanistan. That group reappeared in
2003, after the occupation of Iraq. Some young
Mauritanians, seeking to make their way to Iraq, made
contact with the former Algerian Armed Islamic Group,
which is active in the mountains that range from
southern Algeria to northern Mali, in order to train in
using weapons before going to Iraq as jihadists.

Today, our country hosts no terrorist base or site.
Attacks are perpetrated from a rear base to which they
return immediately afterwards. Nevertheless, the
system of effective security mechanisms in place along
the border makes infiltration into our country more and
more difficult.

The Mauritanian Government wishes to guarantee
stability and security in our country in order to achieve
its socio-economic objectives. It is determined, despite
its immense territory and modest resources, to tackle
those challenges and place them at the centre of our
priorities. This effort has two dimensions. One is
national, and under that framework Mauritania has
developed a strategy following three guidelines.

The first is prevention and territorial security.
Preventing all terrorist activity within our national
territory requires securing our borders through efficient
border controls and permanent monitoring of the same;
the creation of mobile armed intervention units that are
well-equipped, including for aerial surveillance;
cooperation among countries in information-sharing;
and the control of immigration in order to prevent all
infiltration of terrorist recruiting elements.

The second is awareness-raising and education.
The Government has initiated actions aimed at
countering terrorism on its own territory through
communication campaigns involving public debates
and the media.

The third is treatment and punishment. In
addition to ratifying conventions and protocols,
Mauritania has established a legal framework aimed at
defining and punishing terrorism-related crimes and
financing. Under that framework, the Government has
set out to train and professionalize officials
participating in the fight against terrorism in all its
aspects.

I turn now to the regional dimension. In the face
of the transnational nature of the terrorist threat, and
given the weak economic resources of the region, the
countries most exposed - a group commonly known
as the "field" that includes Algeria, Mali, Mauritania
and Niger - have strengthened their cooperation on
security matters by meeting periodically since 2010,
first in Algiers, then in Bamako in 2011 and in
Mauritania in January this year, with a view to
periodically adjust their shared strategy and fight
against the phenomenon.

Through such cooperation, we have created
counter-terrorism organizations, including an outreach
and liaison unit, with the objective of exchanging
information on security issues; a joint operational
committee of chiefs of staff with human and material
resources for rapid ground intervention; and a follow-
up technical committee for projects aimed at
development in this area. Meetings with partners from
outside the region were convened in September,
November and December 2011 in Algiers, Washington,
DC, and Brussels, respectively, to secure funding for
regional projects in vulnerable and impoverished areas
of the four countries of the field.

Following those steps, significant results were
achieved. The first was the dismantling of several
active or dormant terrorist cells and the elimination of
some 465 terrorist individuals over the past three years.
Several attempted terrorist attacks failed owing to a
dozen operations. Operational bases of Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb near Mauritania, which were
threatening its national security, were dismantled.
Thirty-five groups of traffickers of all sorts were
eliminated. Security staff was well organized and
trained. Young people gained awareness of the terrorist
threat and its various mechanisms. A reliable database
was established from data gathered on the modus
operandi of cells and their financing. Several supply
lines of the various terrorist groups were eradicated.

In conclusion, the terrorist phenomena should be
taken seriously because it is a genuine threat for the
countries of the region. We note that terrorist groups
are increasingly well equipped and trained.
International cooperation is essential in order to
eliminate the phenomenon, which is transnational. It
must be in the context of a partnership and respect for
the sovereignty of the countries concerned.

