Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Ijust arrived in New York
last night, and this is the very first meeting in which I
am participating as the new Permanent Representative
of Japan. I am truly grateful to be in the Chamber.

In the year 2000, the Council heard a briefing on
peacebuilding by Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, with an emphasis
on reconciliation (see S/PV.4219). In her briefing,
Mrs. Ogata said that, for her agency, peacebuilding
was not an abstract concept. She saw the concrete,
sometimes desperate, needs of returnees in places
where communities remained deeply divided. She said
that she was exploring new avenues, in particular in
the promotion of community coexistence, as the first
step towards reconciliation. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees launched
a project in the returnee areas of Rwanda and Bosnia
called Imagine Coexistence, which consisted essentially
of support to small community-based, inter-ethic and
income-generating activities around which they built
clusters of such other activities as sports.

It has been nearly 20 years since Mrs. Ogata,
who passed away last month, made her statement in
the Security Council Chamber. Nonetheless, I believe
her thoughts and actions on how to achieve tangible
reconciliation are not obsolete. She was a true trailblazer
in the field of peacebuilding and will be remembered
for her quest for human security.

Over the ensuing two decades, Japan has sought to
build on Mrs. Ogata's work and address the question
of reconciliation in devastated areas of the world. We
have supported national reconciliation processes in
several countries and will continue to do so. Based on
this experience, I would today like to highlight three
key qualities that Japan believes are necessary for
supporting lasting reconciliation processes.
First, they must be inclusive, welcoming the
voices of women, youth, community leaders and faith
leaders, and the private sector. Secondly, they must
offer socioeconomic development, ensuring that those
who have been affected by inequality, in particular
young people, are given employment opportunities.
Thirdly, they must have sustainable frameworks that
allow for the building of strong institutions with broad
national ownership.

The foregoing three elements - inclusiveness,
socioeconomic developmentandstronginstitutions-are
not independent, but rather parts of a whole. How, then,
can we, as the international community, accelerate all
three to promote reconciliation? In our view, one of the
most effective ways is to ensure that the voices of the
people on the ground are reflected in our efforts. Each
reconciliation process is unique and must include the
personal perspectives of those who live it. We therefore
need to ensure a people-centred approach, emphasizing
the value of human security.

I would also like to point out that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) is a useful platform where we can
share good practices and learn lessons. Through its
convening power and its advisory role to the Council,
the PBC, together with the Peacebuilding Fund, can
help connect New York and the field more closely.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
belief in the importance of reconciliation in addressing
the root causes of conflict and contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

