Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): My delegation is gratified
that, once again, the Security Council is meeting in an
open format to discuss the multifaceted challenges
posed by small arms and light weapons, which involve
security, humanitarian and development dimensions. In
that regard, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Abe for introducing the report as the basis of
our discussion.

As is widely acknowledged, in many regions of
the world, the excessive availability and misuse of
small arms and light weapons have led to violent
conflicts, unabated crime and gross violations of
human rights, which have contributed to immense
suffering and a pervasive sense of insecurity. Over
500,000 people continue to be killed each year and
millions more are wounded by small arms and light
weapons. The horrendous toll in human lives and
countless injuries reflects the fact that, in reality, small
arms and light weapons are actually weapons of mass
destruction.

As we reassess the nature and scope of violence
in a number of conflicts in the world today, it is clear
that the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
particularly those that are illicitly and illegally
transferred, constitutes the primary reason for
addressing the problems posed by their illegitimate
acquisition. Such illegal activities have not spared any
country or region. A sizeable number of those transfers
are directed at our region, thereby endangering stability
at the national and regional levels.

In Indonesia, such unlawful smuggling of small
arms and light weapons has posed grave threats to our
territorial integrity by fostering separatist movements
and promoting criminal activities. Hence, their
unregulated circulation is no longer tenable and, in
fact, would be detrimental to our national interests, in
particular our internal stability.

Furthermore, like other South-East Asian
countries, Indonesia tends to view this problem in the
context of transnational crime because it is generally
recognized in our region that arms smuggling is
interlinked with cross-border crimes, such as terrorism,
money-laundering and drug trafficking.

At the global level, it is pertinent to recall the
Millennium Declaration of 2000, by which Member
States collectively decided

"to take concerted action to end illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons, especially by
making arms transfers more transparent and
supporting regional disarmament measures".
(General Assembly resolution 55/2, para. 9)

Thus, as we approach next September's high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly to review the
Declaration, the coordinating and consultative role of
the United Nations has been crucial and is bound to
take on greater significance.

In recognizing the continued efforts to deal with
the critical problems posed by the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, the Security Council has
undertaken numerous measures to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, as set out in the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action. While those measures have led
to positive results in some areas of the world, the
problem has persisted in others, with the potential to
ignite ever greater disasters. This has therefore become
a concern of the international community.
Next year, the United Nations will once again
host a conference to review the follow-up to and
implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action.
Preliminary discussions on the relevant issues have
already begun, including possible agreements on
legally binding measures, marking and tracing,
brokering, export controls, civilian possession and the
role of non-State actors.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2005/69
and is gratified to note that substantial progress has
been achieved in some key areas. However, we deem it
essential that efforts be undertaken in other areas as
well. In that regard, allow me to address some of the
report's recommendations that we consider very
important.

On recommendation 4, we share the widely held
view on the need for greater interaction between the
General Assembly and the Security Council to deal
with the threats posed by illicit transfers of small arms
and light weapons. While no structured mechanism
between the two organs has been established, we will
support continued efforts to develop a coherent policy
and a comprehensive strategy of the United Nations on
small arms and light weapons.

In post-conflict situations, as reflected in
recommendation 7, we underscore the importance of
implementing programmes related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), in particular
as an essential part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we welcome the work
initiated by the Secretariat to develop a set of policies,
guidelines and procedures for planning, implementing
and monitoring DDR.

With regard to recommendation 12, given the
voluntary nature of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, we are gratified to note the
remarkable progress made with respect to participation
in two reporting instruments which have contributed
greatly to confidence-building and security among
Member States. Nonetheless, in our view, the Register
needs to be further developed in order to attract the
widest possible participation.

Finally, we commend the work undertaken by the
Open-ended Working Group on tracing illicit small
arms and light weapons, which has recently completed
its second substantive session. With regard to the
nature of an instrument on that matter, we fully
recognize the existence of differing views among
Member States and will endeavour to resolve them at
the next substantive session, to be held in June this
yean

We are also aware that the 2001 Programme of
Action is a politically binding document which was
adopted as a result of consensus. However, taking into
account the increased danger posed by the illicit
acquisition and transfer of small arms and light
weapons, an international instrument of a legally
binding nature for tracing such weapons has indeed
become imperative.

In conclusion, we believe that small arms and
light weapons continue to pose a grave threat to human
security throughout the world and that they will not go
away without impetus from the highest levels and
without stronger unity of effort, including on the part
of the Security Council. The United Nations - and its
organs, such as the General Assembly and the Security
Council - is naturally the body under whose auspices
comprehensive strategies can be developed and where
such efforts should be coordinated. It stands to reason
that all of us should give the Organization the support
and resources it needs to be able to achieve the
objectives that we have set for ourselves.

