Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to welcome the convening
of this meeting on the maintenance of international
peace and security and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, the relevance and
timeliness of which invites us to turn to the resources
of the Charter and the Security Council for answers to
the concerns of our world regarding peace and security.
I also wish to express my sincere appreciation for the
kind invitation to participate in this high-level meeting.

I congratulate Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres on the quality of his statement, as well as the
former Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
insightful contribution.

The convening of this meeting by your country,
Mr. President, 27 years after its liberation by an
international coalition led by the Security Council, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of our
common Organization, is a strong symbol of the strength
of our principles. My country, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council at that time, in 1990
and 1991, contributed significantly to the triumph of
the law and the values enshrined in the Preamble to
the Charter by playing a decisive role in the adoption
of resolutions 678 (1990) and 687 (1991), seeking
to end Iraq's annexation of Kuwait. C6te d'Ivoire's
resolute affirmation of the founding principles of our
Organization at a decisive moment in its existence
reflects the deep values of my country and its faith in
the ideal of the United Nations Charter.

Born from the resolve of States to protect people
from further destructive conflicts, the United Nations is
constantly working to maintain international peace and
security. Its Charter advocates the peaceful settlement
of disputes and regulates the use of the coercive
measures it provides in the event of the persistence of
a conflict. Our Council is therefore conversant with
Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter, in addition
to the provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter I, on
building and preserving peace.

The geopolitical changes of the world have
reinforced the need to put the Charter and the Security
Council at the centre of our reflections on international
peace and security by going beyond the constraints of
sovereignty - increasingly brandished by Member
States - and prioritizing our obligation to end serious
attacks on the right to life. The sustainability of the
architecture of the maintenance of international peace
and security is therefore based on the ability of the
Charter to adapt to the requirements of each major
period in history, as well as that of Member States to
restore the strength of moral values in their relations.
In such circumstances, it is necessary to assess the
impact of the changing nature of conflicts and the
emergence of new global threats on the effectiveness of
the instruments of the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Cote d'Ivoire is convinced that one of the greatest
responsibilities of the international community today
is the prevention of armed conflict, which, if properly
managed, could save humankind from further suffering.
It is in that spirit that the participants in the 2005 World
Summit, held here at the United Nations, emphasized
the pressing need to promote a culture of prevention. In
that context, it is appropriate to highlight and commend
the good offices of the Office of the Secretary-
General, which constitute a fundamental element in
conflict prevention and resolution through preventive
diplomacy. The effectiveness of that instrument,
however, lies in the ability of the Secretary-General to
embody the moral authority of our Organization and his
persuasive force, particularly in regard to the Security
Council and General Assembly.

Our Organization has transformed itself
structurally so as to be able to detect the beginnings
of conflict and ensure that conflict prevention
and diplomacy are no longer discrete tools largely
dependent on, inter alia, the good will of the parties
and cooperation of neighbouring countries. To that end,
we must make conflict prevention a key component in
how the United Nations operates in the area of peace
and security. My delegation encourages training in and
support for early warning mechanisms put in place by
subregional and regional organizations, and support for
the establishment of prevention mechanisms by civil
society structures. We must, however, recognize that
the efforts of the international community to prevent
conflict have not been enough to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts in the world.

By signing the Charter of the United Nations in
1945, the founding Members sought to create a new
world order based on multilateralism and its mission to
make peace a universal common good, the preservation
of which has been entrusted to the United Nations
and the Security Council, within the framework of its
fundamental responsibilities.

The proliferation of intra-State conflicts and civil
wars is straining the United Nations peacekeeping
system, established during the Cold War, in response to
the problem of global insecurity. It raises as a priority
the question of the legitimacy, legality and necessity
of the use of force against a Member State, without the
prior authorization of the Security Council, in order to
prevent civilian massacres.

That issue, which remains relevant, especially in
the light of the paralysis of our Council when facing the
most serious crises, is central to the doubts concerning
the effectiveness of the instruments of the Charter.
Indeed, the effectiveness of those instruments is
sorely tested when confronting serious human rights
violations and mass crimes such as those perpetrated in
Somalia in 1993, Rwanda in 1994 and Bosnia in 1995,
even though a peacekeeping operation was present on
the ground.

Beyond peacekeeping operations, the issue of the
legality and necessity ofthe use of force also arises with
regard to armed interventions by coalitions formed to
act in the name of peace. For my country, the use of
force to maintain international peace and security must
be authorized exclusively by the Security Council in
order to give it the legal authority necessary to prevent
any type of excess and abuse.

The leaders of our world Organization and its
Member States have always courageously found in the
painful events we have faced, as well as in the Charter,
the instruments and means to rebound and reform the
system to maintain peace. It is hard to speak of the
change in our Organization's response to global disorder
without highlighting the profound and multidimensional
transformations of peacekeeping operations, inspired
by the lessons of the Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia
and the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, which
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) brought to light.
While those responses remain imperfect, they are in
many cases the only ones that have saved millions of
people and led to success in many countries, including
Cambodia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mozambique,
Namibia, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone, C6te
d'Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti.

My country can attest to the effectiveness of the
range of provisions of the Charter concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security when
they enjoy the necessary legitimacy and legality and
are accepted in good faith. The success of the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire, which we celebrated
in this Chamber, was the culmination of a process in
which all the measures set forth in the Charter and
adopted by the Security Council were put into practice
in my country. I would point to the most important steps,
including a political agreement and the authorization
of the parties prior to the deployment of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire; a sanctions regime,
including an embargo against arms and diamonds, as
well as individual sanctions; the authorization to use
force to destroy heavy weapons threatening civilians;
and respect for the political agreement and the ballot
results certified by the United Nations.

The international peace and security system,
derived from the Charter, is at a crossroads. It should
provide new responses to global challenges, such as
terrorism and climate Change. My country calls upon
the Council to take stock of its impact on international
peace and security. These new developments oblige
the United Nations to redefine its functions and
methods by focusing on ways to prevent crises, expand
partnerships and broaden the scope of its activities
for peace and security. As Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres underscored,
"Prevention requires us to address root causes
across the three pillars of the United Nations: peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights. It must be the priority in everything we do."
(A/7I/PV.60, p. 13)

Cote d'Ivoire believes that the much-needed reform
should also involve closer cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, which
would be an asset in the fight against terrorism. The
Council should provide increased support to entities in
that fight, such as the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the African Union Mission in Somalia, in which the
United Nations is not ready to engage.

In the light of the new challenges facing our States
and the role the United Nations must play together with
us, there is an urgency to forge ahead with Security
Council reform in order to strengthen its legitimacy and
its acceptance by all. Only a strong Security Council
that reflects today's world will encourage States to
shoulder their primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.

