Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The deteriorating political,
security and humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is indeed a matter of serious
concern. The continued instability in the country has
displaced many and caused a major humanitarian
crisis that requires serious attention. We thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, Ms. Jeanine Bandu
Bahati and Abbe' Donatien Nshole, Secretary-General
of the Conference Episcopale Nationale du Congo,
for their briefings on the latest situation, following
the visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
week by the Dutch Minister and Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock.

The current humanitarian emergency in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be seen in
isolation from the political and security situation in the
country. We believe that the problem requires a long-
term and sustainable solution, as stressed by the French
representative. The current humanitarian situation is
worrying because of the very large affected population,
which has reached a record high. We strongly support
the call for mobilizing more resources to save lives,
particularly vulnerable children and women in the
severely affected areas of the country.

We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian actors
on the ground who are supporting education, water
and sanitation as well as agricultural projects to meet
the needs of the displaced people. We are hopeful that
the humanitarian donor conference for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to be co-hosted by the European
Commission, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United Arab Emirates next month in Geneva, will help
raise the estimated $1.7 billion required to address
emergency needs in the country, including for the
4.5 million internally displaced people.

It will be very difficult to resolve the humanitarian
crisis and the human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - the gravity of which has
been so ably and passionately described by Ms. Bandu
Bahati - without addressing the country's political
and security problems. The continued instability in the
eastern, southeastern and central parts of Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to displace huge
numbers of people.

The implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement is absolutely imperative to address
the political impasse in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in a consensual and inclusive manner and
to ensure the organization of a peaceful, free, fair
and credible election. In that connection, we note the
measures taken by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the announcement of the
electoral calendar. However, we believe more needs
to be done in terms of confidence-building measures
The fairness and credibility of the election is a very
serious matter, as Abbe' Nshole stressed. Of course, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also faces armed
groups that are not known for being responsible.

The initiatives of countries of the region and the
efforts of the African Union to support the momentum
in preparations for the election deserve the support
of the international community. Enhancing the
coordination of the United Nations, the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other international partners is necessary to facilitate
coherent and effective support for the electoral process,
which is so critical not only for the peace and security
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also of
the wider Great Lakes region.

