The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (cote d'Ivoire) took the seat reserved for him
at the Council table.

The President: The Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the events that occurred in Cote
d'Ivoire at the end of March and at the current
impasse in the peace process defined in the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of investigating all alleged violations
of human rights committed in Cote d'Ivoire so
that those responsible do not remain unpunished.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the territorial integrity and unity
of Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council recalls that it
endorsed the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, which
remains the only possible solution to the crisis in
Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council further recalls that
all Ivorian political forces have committed
themselves to implement fully and with no
conditions the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. The
the

Security Council decided, on the basis of this
commitment, to deploy the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire to support the process
of peaceful settlement of the crisis, which is to
culminate in 2005 with the organization of free,
fair and transparent elections.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
individual responsibility of each of the Ivorian
actors in the settlement of the crisis.

"The Security Council expresses its
readiness to consider further steps to encourage
full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and to promote the process of national
reconciliation in C6te d'Ivoire, including actions
that might be taken, if necessary, against
individuals whose activities are an obstacle to the
full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

