Mr. Davutoglu (Turkey): I wish to start by
expressing our thanks to the French presidency and
to you, personally, Sir, for organizing this timely and
very important meeting on Syria and inviting us, the
neighbouring countries that have borne the brunt of the
crisis in Syria. I also extend our appreciation to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and to United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres for
their lucid and comprehensive briefings on the situation.

When I received the invitation to the meeting
I decided without any hesitation to come, as it was a
meeting of the Security Council, which is the primary
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, on the issue of Syria that has been seriously
threatening both regional and global peace and security
for a long time. Itseemed that the meeting would
be very significant as it had been organized by the
Security Council after an absence of the action and
determination required to put an end to the brutality
and bloodshed that has been taking place in Syria for
the past 18 months.

I was particularly encouraged by the fact that the
humanitarian dimension, which calls for urgent action,
would be on the agenda, and thus became hopeful that
the Council would finally act with one voice to take
long-overdue steps in the context of the humanitarian
issue. Apparently I was wrong in my expectations. I
understand that today the Council will, yet again, be
unable to put forward a unified position to stop the
humanitarian tragedy. This meeting will not end with
even a presidential or a press statement, let alone a
robust resolution.

Not even all Council members are represented at
this meeting at the level of foreign minister. While I
regret the absence of some of my colleagues, I would
like to believe that their non-participation is not an
indication of their level of interest and concern in view
of the developments in Syria.

The situation in Syria needs no further description.
Everything is taking place in front of our eyes. Every
day a new massacre is being committed against the
Syrian people. Now, the regime has started to deploy
fighter jets against people in the cities, in addition to
using heavy artillery and tanks.

How long will we sit and watch while an entire
generation is wiped out by random bombardment and
deliberate mass targeting, as in Azaz or Aleppo? Let
us not forget that if we do not act against such crimes
against humanity happening before our very eyes, we
will become accomplices to those crimes.

We need to ask ourselves whether our good
conscience is comfortable about such inaction. We
need to ask ourselves how we will explain such
inaction when we preach to coming generations about
being virtuous and righteous. Do we really need to
revisit experiences of the 1990s and earlier and repeat
the same mistakes? We know very well the cost of
procrastination - Srebrenica, Halabja and Gaza. In
all of those cases we lost civilians. All of those cases
have entered the annals of history as the symbols of the
heavy price paid by the civilian population because the
Security Council did not act in time. There is no reason
to make that notorious list any longer.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon acknowledged
during his recent visit to the Balkans that, "We must
learn from the lessons of Srebrenica." He continued,
"The international community failed to provide the
necessary protection to many people who were killed at
the time when they needed our support", in Srebrenica.

That is what is happening right now in Syria.
Although the international community has made its
position in view of the situation in Syria abundantly
clear - through several General Assembly resolutions
that each passed with more than 130 votes in favour- the
Security Council still has failed to provide the necessary
protection to the people of Syria who need our support.
We cannot again place the United Nations in such an
uncomfortable situation of apologizing for inaction or
negligence related to the tragic situation in Syria.

We in Turkey open our doors to every Syrian
brother and sister who runs for safety, regardless of
his or her religion, sect or ethnicity. We embrace every
Syrian brother and sister. The number of Syrians we are
accommodating is now greater than 80,000. Currently,
another 10,000 Syrians are waiting at our borders for
accommodation. We are constantly building new camps
to host them. However, it takes approximately one
month to build a camp that will usually become full
after two days, as the average number of daily entries
is about 4,000.
Currently we accommodate the Syrian refugees in
11 camps, comprising both tent and container cities.
Three new camps, each with capacity for 10,000
refugees, are under construction. We provide for all
of their needs, including education, health, vocational
training, social and psychological support and leisure.

Since the intense influx exceeds our capacity to
accommodate, we have had to mobilize every means
at hand to fill the gap. In that vein, we have opened up
student dormitories and gyms while the schools remain
on summer break. Currently, 17,000 Syrians are being
accommodated in such centres. However, the schools
will open in just a couple of days.

Yes, we are building new camps and will try to
transfer them to those camps. Yet we are fast becoming
short of suitable areas to build camps, as well as means
to support them. I have not even mentioned the tens of
thousands of Syrians who escaped to Turkey and are
living in various cities and towns and putting an extra
strain on local resources and infrastructure.

We do all of that with a sense of high responsibility
as we regard our Syrian neighbours as our brothers and
sisters with whom we share a long history and often a
common fate. We will continue to stand in full solidarity
with them and to address their needs. However, the scale
of the tragedy in Syria is growing so out of proportion
that Turkey is finding it increasingly difficult to cope
with the ensuing challenges all alone.

Up until now, we have provided funding for
accommodation, upkeep and other services. The amount
that we have spent so far has exceeded $300 million
and keeps rising each day. But the financial issue is
secondary as compared to the humanitarian issue.

We have already informed the international
community of our readiness to accept assistance offers.
While expressing our gratitude to those countries that
have responded, I must also report that the overall
response fell far short of what was required.

As to the appeal by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
for $193 million under the regional response plan,
the international community has so far funded only
$65 million, or 34 per cent. However, Turkey's share
from that amount can only be considered symbolic. I
do not wish to be misunderstood. I am not here today
to mention those figures in order to complain about our
Syrian brothers and sisters coming to Turkey, nor am I
asking for more funding.

We will continue to try to do our best in providing
the best possible services in full conformity with
international rules and regulations, as UNHCR
representatives have praised our efforts and principled
approach. However, there is an increasing sense in
Turkey that, through making such a sacrifice and
tackling an enormous issue on its own, we will lead
the international community towards complacency and
inaction. We feel that the open-door policy of Turkey
and Syria's other neighbours is in fact absorbing
any potential international reaction, as the tragic
consequences of the brutality by the Syrian regime are
all being dealt with by the neighbouring countries.

However, given the fact that we are using up all
of our capabilities and our preparations can no longer
cope with the flow of refugees, attempts to tackle the
current influx by regular measures will meet serious
difficulties. Therefore, from now on we must focus
on steps necessary within the borders of Syria. In
that vein, we have started to deliver humanitarian
aid at point zero, namely, at the border. We have also
established relief reception centres in Kilis, Gaziantep
and Hatay - our border cities * for that purpose.
Relief items stockpiled at those centres are delivered to
the Syrians by the Turkish Red Crescent.

We have formally informed the United Nations of
the operation. It was a necessary step as the millions of
people who are unable to escape are in acute need of
help. The threat of famine is looming as we approach
winter. The wounded cannot get treatment, because
Syria's clinics and hospitals are either being bombed by
the regime or lack the equipment essential for treating
people. Although we are opening our hospitals and
treating every Syrian who is in need, many cannot
make it to the border and usually die from loss of blood.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are more than 2 million
internally displaced people (IDPs) in Syria. In the face
of a humanitarian disaster of such proportions, the
United Nations should begin establishing IDP camps
within Syria without delay. Needless to say, such camps
should have full protection.

Let me also be clear that there is only one side that
is responsible for this tragedy: the regime in Syria.
None of the refugees are fleeing Syria because of the
opposition groups, which are struggling to stop the
killings there. The refugees coming to Turkey and the
other neighbouring countries are fleeing the Syrian
regime, not other forces. The Syrian people are the
victims of that oppression.

The situation in Syria has long been a threat to
international peace and security. That makes it the
direct responsibility of the Security Council. It is the
Council's duty to take action to develop the necessary
responses to the pressing challenges that Syria poses.
We therefore appeal to Council members to take on
the responsibility for putting an end to the atrocities
the regime has committed against the people of Syria,
enabling a democratic transition in accord with the
legitimate demands of the people and thereby restoring
security and stability in our part of the world.

We all have an interest in the developments in Syria.
Our views may diverge, but our objectives, I believe,
converge. We are all for Syria's security, stability and
prosperity. The territorial integrity and national unity of
Syria is sacrosanct for all of us. None ofus is interested
in imposing anything on Syria by force. No matter what
we discuss here or there, it will be the Syrian people
who will have the final say on their country and their
destiny. They will decide their life, their governance
and their future. However, all of us have a huge interest
in bringing the current conflict in Syria to an end as
quickly as possible. The longer the strife continues,
the more difficult the new period will be. Radical and
terrorist organizations and groups will enjoy fertile
ground. We cannot let that happen. Regional and global
security, as well as our own, will be at stake.

The Cold War era is long behind us. Accordingly,
we must put behind us the reflexes and mindset that
stem from that era. We must put behind us any sterile
power struggles and competing interests. The United
Nations is facing a serious test. That test is about
whether or not the Organization can represent the good
conscience of the international community and act in
accordance with it. In other words, it is about whether it
can translate humanity into practice or not. So far, the
track record has not been promising.

For instance, when Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, took up his job, on 23 February, the number of
Syrians seeking protection in Turkey was approximately
10,000. When the first group of United Nations
monitors arrived in Syria, on 16 April, the number of
refugees went up to 25,000. When the monitors left,
on 20 August, the number had reached 70,000. Today
it is more than 80,000. The United Nations cannot
afford to fail this test. Failure on such an issue would
be irredeemable, and the regional implications in
particular could be disastrous.

We are taking the necessary steps to minimize
the negative ramifications of the Syrian situation as
they affect Jordan, Iraq and, in particular, Lebanon,
since regional security and stability is our national
priority. However, the longer the pressure from the
crisis in Syria continues to build, the more difficult
it will be to keep the countries in the region immune
to ripple effects. All this renders the task of the new
Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Brahimi, a daunting one. We
welcome his appointment and wish him every success.
He will receive our full support, as his predecessor did.

I understand that it cannot be easy for the Council
to comprehend the scope of the challenges and threats
that Syria's neighbours are facing merely through
media reports or second-hand observations. That is why
I think it would be very useful for Security Council
members to come to Turkey and the other neighbouring
countries and visit some of the camps. I am sure that
the camp residents would be very interested in what
Council members have to say and the kinds of solutions
they would bring to their acute and tragic problems.

Similarly, I am sure that Council members would
be very interested to hear the vivid stories ofthe ordeals
that Syrian people have endured at the hands of the
shabiha or of the regime's forces. Many of them may
be very disturbing. But shying away from such things
as summary executions, brutal rapes and mass killings
of entire families with babies in cradles will not make
them go away. All of them are real and are part of the
reason that such a large number of people have sought
refuge.

Under the circumstances, we wish to suggest that
the United Nations should take the following practical
steps in order to deal with the current humanitarian
disaster in Syria.

First, the Security Council should visit the camps in
the countries bordering Syria in order to see the impact
of the situation and get first-hand information about it.

Secondly, the Council should pursue a unified
approach to stopping the indiscriminate aerial
bombardment of residential areas, which leads to mass
internal displacement.

Thirdly, the focus should be on solving the issue of
IDPs within Syria's borders.

Fourthly, if, despite such steps, Syrians are still
compelled to flee for safety, the necessary measures
should be taken to absorb them internationally.

Lastly, a joint committee, made up of the
neighbouring countries and UNHCR, could be
established to deal with the refugee issue. Such a
committee should be given a mandate by the Security
Council and could also facilitate the work of the Joint
Special Envoy.
As I said at the beginning, I was expecting this
meeting to produce tangible solutions to the suffering
of the Syrian people. But we still have nothing new to
say to the millions of Syrians who are suffering at the
hands of the regime, as the United Nations system finds
itself trapped in inaction. The people of Syria find this
situation extremely difficult to understand.

Nonetheless, even if the United Nations in general,
and the Security Council in particular, continues
to be paralysed while the regime in Syria violates
every known value, law and moral principle, Turkey
will continue to uphold the principles of the United
Nations - on its own, if necessary - and defend
the moral values dictated by the good conscience of
the international community. We are facing not just a
serious crisis but a test of our humanity. If we shy away
from our responsibilities today, we will be accountable
to future generations and face the harsh verdict of
history. Humanity must always prevail over insanity
and cruelty.

