I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Wafa Mustafa for their briefings. There is an urgent need to relaunch a credible political process in order to bring Syria and the region back on the road to stability. France will not recognize the results of the sham elections held on 19 July in the areas controlled by the regime. In order to be legitimate, any election must meet the criteria set out in resolution 2254 (2015): it must be free and transparent, take place under United Nations supervision and allow all Syrians, including the diaspora, to participate. The recent parliamentary elections did not meet any of those criteria and deprived millions of displaced Syrians and refugees of their right to vote. The only legitimate political process is the one taking place in Geneva under the aegis of the United Nations. We call for the resumption of discussions as soon as possible, in preparation for the third meeting of the Constitutional Committee. The regime's continued blocking of the work of the Constitutional Committee is unacceptable. It will be the responsibility of the Security Council to take note if the Committee's work is blocked again. The Constitutional Committee alone will not be sufficient to establish a credible political transition. All the elements of resolution 2254 (2015) must be implemented in order to meet the expectations of the Syrian people. Ms. Mustafa reminded us of the importance of making progress on the issue of detainees and missing persons. The Council must unite in response to her call and that of the Special Envoy for the release of prisoners and greater access to detention centres. The establishment of a ceasefire under the aegis of the United Nations remains more necessary than ever. Growing instability, particularly in the areas reconquered by the regime and in the north-west, as well as the resurgence of Da'esh in the centre of the country, are worrying. The coronavirus disease pandemic is spreading, including in the north-west, while humanitarian access to that region has been reduced in the absence of agreement in the Council. The truce in the north-west must be preserved, and an immediate cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause must be implemented in accordance with resolution 2532 (2020), which endorsed the Secretary-General's appeal. That is the condition for uniting our efforts in the fight against the terrorist groups listed by the Council, in full compliance with international humanitarian law. In the current context, the priority remains responding to the immense humanitarian needs of the population throughout Syria. That is what France and the European Union have once again committed to at the fourth Brussels conference. France regrets the non-renewal of the cross-border mechanism for the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, which provided vital access for 1.3 million people in the Aleppo region. We will continue to assist Syrians and ensure that this aid is not diverted or manipulated by the regime. The economic crisis in Syria is the result of disastrous economic management, chronic corruption and the regime's destruction of its own country. European sanctions target individuals and entities that participate in the repression and profit from the fallout from the conflict. They are accompanied by mechanisms to safeguard humanitarian and medical aid. Neither France nor the European Union will finance reconstruction until a credible political process is initiated. France will continue to fully support mechanisms to fight impunity and welcomes in that regard the latest report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry regarding Idlib.
