Mr. Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry (Pakistan): Let me
first discharge the pleasant duty of congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the skilful manner in which you are
guiding the work of the Security Council during this
month. I would also like to take this opportunity to
extend to the Permanent Representative of Greece and
the rest of the Greek delegation our congratulations on
their successful presidency of the Council last month.

We appreciate the holding of this open debate as
yet another important juncture in Afghanistan's march
towards peace and stability. I would like to thank Mr.
Jean Arnault, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his informative briefing. This meeting
offers a good opportunity to review progress towards
the objectives of the Bonn process, especially the
culminating step of the parliamentary and provincial
council elections that will take place next month.

Pakistan shares the concern over increased
insecurity in Afghanistan, the causes of which are
several and complex. As a United States official stated
to The Financial Times on 6 June 2005,
"Last year the order of concern for security in
Afghanistan was Taliban, Al-Qaida, warlords,
drugs. This year, it's going to be: drugs, warlords,
Al-Qaida, Taliban".

The Secretary-General's report (S/2005/525)
outlines a number of remaining challenges in the fields
of security, institution-building, security-sector reform,
the reintegration component of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
counter-narcotics, public-sector and civil-service
reform, reconstruction and infrastructure development,
socio-economic recovery and uplift and the provision
of basic services to the Afghan people.

We need a comprehensive strategy for success in
Afghanistan that addresses the security, political,
economic and social objectives of Afghanistan. The
Secretary-General's report observes, inter alia, that

"Security, effective institutions and development
will require time and concerted efforts, to build
upon the political achievements of the past three
and a half years". (S/2005/525, para. 81)

The report also states that

"Even without the burden of violent
insurgency, the reconstruction of Afghanistan
faces a truly formidable combination of
challenges, including the pervasive drug economy
[and] some of the worst social and economic
indicators in the world". (para. 84)

Apart from Afghanistan itself, no country has a
more vital stake in the establishment of peace, security
and prosperity in that country than Pakistan. Peace in
Afghanistan is essential for the tranquillity and
development of Pakistan's own border regions. Peace
will enable the nearly 3 million Afghan refugees who
remain on our soil after 20 years, virtually without
international support, to return to their homes
voluntarily and in dignity and honour. Peace and
economic revival in Afghanistan will accelerate the
already burgeoning trade and economic cooperation
between Pakistan and Afghanistan. And peace in
Afghanistan will open up the shortest transit routes for
trade, energy, raw materials and goods between Central
Asia, South Asia and the rest of the world, with
enormous economic benefits to Afghanistan, Pakistan
and all other countries of the region.

There is, therefore, no ambiguity in our
commitment to help the Government of Afghanistan
and the international coalition in restoring security and
achieving the other agreed goals of the Bonn process.
Cross-border traffic is one, but not the major, element
in Afghanistan's insecurity matrix. Pakistan is making
an enormous effort. We have mounted a determined
campaign to eliminate Al-Qaida and Taliban elements
on our side of the border. We have captured over 700
of them, the highest number captured by any country.

As President Musharraf observed a few days ago,
as a result of our efforts, Al-Qaida's command and
control structure has been broken and largely
dismantled. That terrorist movement now operates
largely through splinter cells in many countries. We
have deployed 75,000 troops, for the first time in
history, in the frontier tribal areas of Pakistan, for
pacification and interdictions, largely with the
concurrence of the tribes involved. Seven hundred
posts have been established along the border; 4,000
troops are being added for interdiction duties in the run
up to the Afghan parliamentary elections. I might
mention that our troop strength on the border is higher
than the combined strength of the national and
international military presence within Afghanistan. We
are therefore disappointed that these great efforts,
which are being made by Pakistan at considerable
sacrifice of human and financial means, have not been
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General.

The effort to prevent the two-way flow of Al-
Qaida, Taliban, tribal or criminal fighters is a
cooperative endeavour among Pakistan, Afghanistan
and the United States forces in Afghanistan, and is
promoted, inter alia, through the Tripartite
Commission. In particular, Pakistan relies on aerial and
electronic real-time intelligence from the United States
side to succeed in interdiction operations, for which we
have created a rapid reaction force.

Pakistan supports the continuation of the
presence of the United States and International
Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) in Afghanistan until
peace and stability are fully restored there and until a
viable Afghan National Army can assume full
responsibility for the country's security. Most of the
coalition's fuel, food and other supplies come from
Pakistan. Thus, those who raise doubts about
Pakistan's commitment to peace and security in
Afghanistan, often by exaggerating the threat of cross-
border movements, are those who wish to find excuses
for their own failure, or those - some of whom we
have heard here - who wish to poison relations
between Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Pakistan's relations with Afghanistan have
improved considerably and have become diversified.
They are marked by the frequent exchange of high-
level visits; progressive institutionalization; record
levels of transit trade, which has doubled in the last
three years; bilateral trade, which is now more than
$1.2 billion; and our active participation in the
reconstruction of Afghanistan.

During the visit of our Prime Minister to Kabul in
July 2005, a number of economic cooperation
programmes were agreed upon, including the
announcement by Pakistan of additional assistance of
$100 million for Afghan reconstruction. Those funds
will be utilized in consultation with Afghan authorities
on projects prioritized by the Afghans. Of the $100
million pledged earlier by Pakistan at the Tokyo
Conference, almost $50 million has already been
utilized for humanitarian assistance, projects in
infrastructure, health, education and transport, and
capacity-building of State institutions. The remaining
amount has been allocated for several hospitals in
different cities and for faculty blocks in universities, as
well as for the Chaman-Spin Boldak rail track.

In the context of institution-building, Pakistan is
also providing training to Afghan officials in several
fields including diplomacy, judiciary, police, counter-
narcotics, agriculture, customs and banking.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the
discussion on the post-election agenda will provide a
unique opportunity for a broad dialogue between
Afghanistan and the international community, in
particular the countries of the region. Pakistan stands
ready to play its part in that process and reiterates its
full support for durable peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We also call on the international
community and the United Nations to remain steadfast
in their commitment to Afghanistan. In that context,
we look forward to the report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General on the future role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan.

