Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to address the Security Council on behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom of
Belgium.

First of all, I would like to thank Azerbaijan, as
President of the Security Council, for convening this
debate and for preparing the excellent concept paper
(S/2013/613, annex) before us.

The Netherlands and Belgium attach great
importance to this open debate. It gives the wider
membership of the United Nations the opportunity to
interact with the Security Council on a topic that is not
merely a matter of internal procedure, but that has a
profound impact on the way we attempt to make our
universal Organization work.

Let me start by acknowledging that real progress
has been made over the past few years. The Netherlands
and Belgium commend both the permanent and
the successive elected members of the Council.
The commitments put forward in presidential note
S/2013/515, adopted in August, deserve not only our
appreciation but expedient implementation.

Nonetheless, further progress on the improvement
of the working methods of the Security Council
is desirable. It would help to enhance the Security
Council's accountability towards other Member States,
and would further increase the transparency, legitimacy
and effective implementation of its decisions. The
concept paper prepared for this meeting contains an
interesting overview of the recent work and events on
the working methods of the Security Council. It lists
a number of good suggestions, virtually all of which
the Netherlands and Belgium are happily support.
Nevertheless, we would like to draw the Council's
attention to some specific ideas.

First, we appreciate the fact that the chairs of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) are invited to brief the Council
when the situation in "their" country is being discussed.
However, we strongly believe that the Council's work
would benefit from allowing the chairs of the PBC
country-specific configurations to participate in the
much more interactive closed consultations that usually
follow the public briefings.

Secondly, we welcome the monthly wrap-up
sessions, but believe they could also be much more
interactive and thus provide the opportunity for an
assessment based on a more analytical approach.

Thirdly, we commend the United Kingdom and
Australia for having organized a horizon-scanning
debate at the start of their presidencies. The Netherlands
and Belgium would favour building on that precedent

to establish horizon-scanning meetings as an integral
part of our efforts with regard to preventive diplomacy.
Therefore, we encourage other Council members to
hold horizon-scanning meetings on a regular basis.

Fourthly, the cooperation between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations in the area
ofpeace and security has greatly improved and become
more diversified. We commend the Council in that
regard. Regional organizations should be heard even
more frequently in the Council, not only on thematic
issues, but in discussions of the situations in countries
in which they are involved. Furthermore, relations
between the Council and legal institutions, such as
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, could be strengthened, given their
potential role in conflict prevention and resolution.

Lastly, the Netherlands and Belgium would
appreciate earlier notification of certain options
considered by the Council in cases where said options
have possible budgetary implications that affect
the entire membership. In that regard, the cost of
peacekeeping missions in particular comes to mind.

As I said, the Netherlands and Belgium value the
efforts that have been made so far to improve the working
methods of the Security Council. The suggestions in
the President's concept paper deserve further careful
consideration. We count on the Security Council
members, in particular the permanent members, to join
their efforts with the wider membership to continue to
enhance the transparency, legitimacy, effectiveness and
interactivity of the Security Council.

