Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I should like to begin
by extending the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting today on the agenda
item before us, which reflects the renewed
determination of the Council to protect children from
the ravages of armed conflicts. My delegation also
commends the Secretary-General for his timely report,
which details the advances made towards the protection
of children affected by armed conflict.

My delegation has noted with deep concern the
current deplorable situation of children in armed
conflict. According to statistics provided by the United
Nations Children's Fund, approximately 20 million
children have been forced to flee their homes because
of conflict and human rights violations and more than 2
million have died as a direct result of armed conflict
over the last decade. At least 6 million children have
become permanently disabled or seriously injured and
more than 1 million have been orphaned or separated
from their families.

The rights of children in armed conflicts should
be acknowledged and respected. We believe that those
rights should be made an explicit priority and firmly
entrenched in peacemaking, peace-building and
conflict resolution processes, as well as in
demobilization and reintegration plans. In view of that,
we value the integration of child protection into the
mandates and reports of peacekeeping missions and the
training of personnel, as well as the appointment of
child protection advisers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

My delegation is concerned about the continuing
use and recruitment of children as child soldiers.
Statistics indicate that, currently, about 300,000 child
soldiers, including boys and girls under the age of 18,
are involved in more than 30 conflicts worldwide.
Once children are carrying guns and involved in armed
hostilities, their prospects for enjoying life with the
rights set out in the 1989 Convention on the Rights of
the Child will be severely undermined.

Indonesia continues to support concerted
international efforts to alleviate the sufferings of
children dragged into conflicts. Indonesia is a party to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
upholds the political, socio-economic and civil rights
of children and strongly supports the Optional
Protocol, which strengthens that Convention by calling
for a minimum age of 18 for participation in hostilities.

We also pay particular attention to the importance
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes in addressing the issue of child
soldiers, especially in the post-conflict period. The
overarching considerations concerning the future DDR
for children proposed by the Secretary-General could
become a good basis for further reflection on the issue.

My delegation deplores the incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse of women and children,
especially girls, in humanitarian crises and conflict
situations. In this regard, we emphasize the importance
of special protection for children at refugee camps and
the observance of the Secretary-General's bulletin on
special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse and those to improve
greater awareness of personnel's responsibilities as
United Nations peacekeepers, especially in the
protection of vulnerable populations.

Armed conflicts have generally been kept alive
by a continuous supply of weapons. Children become
victims and victimizers when they are involved in
armed conflict. Statistics show that between 8,000 and
10,000 children are killed or maimed by landmines
every year. It is very pertinent in that regard that we
strengthen our commitment to address the impact that
landmines, unexploded ordnance and the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons have on children.

Complex emergencies have an impact on adults
and children that affects them in various ways. Such
situations create additional burdens for children when
they are displaced from their homes and communities
and become separated from their families.
Humanitarian assistance - including family
reintegration programmes - is important if we are to
address such situations.

In sum, the future of humanity depends on
children. The use of children in armed conflict casts a
dark shadow over their future, for children who are
exposed to violence often carry fears and hatred in
their hearts and minds that have profound and long-
term effects. Hence, much needs to be done to alleviate
their suffering and to ensure that, through adequate
support programmes, they can take their rightful place
in their societies. We are duty bound to extend our
cooperation to the Secretary-General in his efforts to
address the issue of children affected by armed
conflict.

I would be remiss in my duty if I concluded my
statement without commending the role played by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, who
has made significant contributions to uplift the lives of
less fortunate children - for many of whom life will
now be worth living - as well as the role of the United
Nations Children's Fund in addressing the issue. As far
as fulfilling the mandate of the Special Representative
is concerned, my delegation stresses the importance of
close consultation and cooperation between the special
adviser and Member States.

