Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Egeland for his briefing today and the
Secretary-General for his report.

Our delegation feels that this biannual meeting to
address the issue before us has become one of the most
interesting and important activities of our Council,
because the briefings always provide us with an
opportunity to diagnose our world's crises from the
perspective of the protection of civilians. That
perspective is growing in importance from the political,
moral and strategic standpoints. It has thereby become
an extremely important backdrop to our management of
daily affairs.
From Mr. Egeland's briefing today, I shall retain
as a guiding principle the four crises he mentioned: the
"crisis of protection" he described in West Africa; the
crisis in humanitarian access, illustrated, naturally, by
the situation in Darfur; the crisis in respect for
humanitarian law, as evoked by Mr. Egeland for the
Middle East, where, unfortunately, terrorist acts -
inherently counter to human rights - are followed by
illegal or disproportionate reprisals that, at least in the
long term, weaken the cause they seek to defend; and
the crisis in security of humanitarian staff. For the
latter, the list of examples grows ever longer. From
Afghanistan to Iraq, from Kosovo to Cote d'Ivoire, the
roll of countries and situations in which United Nations
or humanitarian workers are falling victim to attacks is
continuously growing.

Mr. Egeland indicated that progress has been
made and that no conceptual breakthrough is imminent,
but that efforts must persist on all fronts. In that
context, we agree with his suggestion that we again
frame a Security Council resolution highlighting
certain positive elements of the balance sheet and
defining new prospects in other areas. I do not wish
today to address all the points that might be raised.
Other colleagues have done so already, but I would
focus on four subjects that are matters of concern and
that the Security Council might address further,
perhaps in a new resolution.

First, with respect to instruments, it is usefully
suggested in the documents before us that it might be
possible to develop interaction between the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, perhaps the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Security Council on the basis of the
model proposed for the Darfur situation, which could
be usefully systematized and developed. This is just
one idea among several. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's initiative of establishing the post
of Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

Secondly, with respect to humanitarian access,
my delegation does not entirely agree with all of the
suggestions of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs. For instance, the concept of
financing the humanitarian aspects of peacekeeping
operations must be considered with caution. We believe
that such financing may occasionally be justified in a
restrictive way, but that it would be wrong to attempt to
extend too broadly throughout the budgets of
peacekeeping operations aspects that are not directly
connected to the maintenance of peace. This follows
upon the very interesting discussion that took place
under the Pakistani presidency on peacekeeping
operations and their future.

One of my own personal conclusions from the
discussion was that the idea of a comprehensive
operation must certainly be retained, but that at the
same time one must be sure not to exaggerate in this
sphere, because too many peacekeeping operations
would ultimately destroy all of them. Perhaps we must
retain the concept of complex and comprehensive
peacekeeping operations, but decentralize
responsibilities and financing in order to avoid
reaching financial limits that could well work to the
detriment of such operations. I mention this because I
am seeking to demonstrate that we must take all
aspects into account in our thinking. In the proposals
contained in the report before us today, certain points
may be counterindicated by a more general approach to
our responsibilities. However, we must do more on
humanitarian access. We must further perfect our
approach, even through a resolution. It is essential to
place greater obligations on Governments and non-
State actors. It is essential that in this domain, the
international community use the incentives and, when
necessary, the pressure at its disposal in order to do
more.

I would say to Mr. Egeland that, with respect to
Darfur, on which I know he has good critical judgement,
it seems to me that, at least in terms of the Council's
approach - and here I join in the point of view of
Ambassador Cunningham of the United States- we
have still made some progress and that it would be
useful to make a record of that progress in order to
draw lessons for the future.

The third subject concerns impunity. It is in our
view a crucial issue. It is an issue that enables us to get
at the roots of the evil in several situations. We
therefore hope that in the coming weeks and months,
the Council will continue to refine its approach on this
issue. On this point, we believe that the report of the
Secretary-General makes some very useful proposals,
including one for a gradated approach for carrying out
the fight against impunity in cases of grave and
widespread crimes against civilian populations.

Perhaps we could add a more specific point about
a different situation: attacks that are less widespread
and more isolated and selective but whose
consequences can be tragic in a crisis situation. We
have had recent examples in crises managed by the
Security Council. In recent weeks, there have been
cases in which it has proven essential to be able to
monitor certain individuals' personal responsibility in
violations of human rights and attacks on civilian
populations. That was the case, for example, in Sierra
Leone, where we are doing what we should be doing.
We must find the formulas which may not necessarily
be identical but which will be of a similar nature and
be appropriate for the situations the Council now faces.

The fourth and final issue that I shall mention is
that of sexual violence and the implementation of
human rights. Of course, the personnel serving the
United Nations must be irreproachable and impeccable
in those domains. Like others, we welcome the
Secretary-General's bulletin on sexual violence
(ST/SGB/2003/13). We believe it is important that
those standards be applied to both military and civilian
personnel and that the appropriate arrangements be
established with the troop-contributing countries.

I would add that, naturally, my delegation
associates itself with the statement to be made by my
Irish colleague on behalf of the European Union.

