The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation welcomes Judge Theodor Meron and
Mr. Serge Brammertz in their respective capacities as
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their informative
briefings. We also congratulate Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra, Permanent Representative of Peru, on
the work he has accomplished as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in
the work of the Mechanism with regard to its judicial
activities, including those pertaining to the enforcement
of rulings, the protection of victims and witnesses,
archive management, and the prospect of improved
conditions for the implementation of the early-release
regime following the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2422 (2018). We encourage the Mechanism
to continue and complete the implementation of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS), as set out in the progress report
issued by the OIOS in March, in order to achieve
the objectives set by the United Nations in line with
resolution 1966 (2010).

Notwithstanding the progress that has been made
by the Mechanism in the fulfilment of its mission, C6te
d'lvoire is concerned by the persistence of challenges
yet to be overcome, particularly with regard to Member
States' cooperation with the institution and judicial
cooperation between the countries of the former
Yugoslavia. In this regard, my delegation reaffirms the
importance of States' cooperation with the institution
in implementing the Mechanism's mandate, especially
in connection with the search, arrest and transfer
of fugitives and the implementation of the rulings
handed down. We therefore encourage all Member
States to further strengthen their cooperation with the
Mechanism, and we appreciate the contribution of those
countries providing multifaceted support.

Cote d'Ivoire is of the opinion that judicial
cooperation among the countries of the former
Yugoslavia is essential for the search and arrest of
perpetrators of war crimes who are no longer present
in the territory where they are presumed to have
committed such crimes. My delegation therefore urges
national authorities to play an active role in the fight
against impunity by adopting concrete measures to
improve judicial cooperation in the region.

In conclusion, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like to pay tribute to Mr. Theodor Meron, President
of the Mechanism, who will step down from his post
on 18 January 2019, following several years of tireless
work in the service of international justice. I would also
like to wish Judge Agius, who will succeed President
Meron in January, every success.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister of Justice of Serbia.

