Ms. Amos: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the situation in Gaza.

The current crisis in Gaza is taking place against
a backdrop of decades of instability, poverty and
vulnerability resulting from repeated outbreaks of
hostilities and an ongoing blockade by land, air and
sea. The blockade leaves only two crossings for limited
pedestrian movement and one for the movement of goods.
As a result, more than 80 per cent of Gaza's population
of 1.8 million - more than half of them children under
the age of 18 - relied on humanitarian aid before the
outbreak of hostilities. Various restrictions apply to the
use of land within the Gaza Strip, and 80 per cent of
its fishing waters are totally or partially inaccessible.
Around 57 per cent of Gazans are estimated to be food-
insecure, and unemployment remains high, at 43 per
cent. The economy is moribund.

This volatile situation has been exacerbated by
24 days of conflict. More than 1,300 Palestinians have
been killed and 6,000 injured. More than 80 per cent
of those killed were civilians, including 251 children.
Israel has faced rocket fire. Fifty-nine people have been
killed, of whom three were civilians and 56 soldiers,
with dozens more injured. Up to 440,000 people in the
Gaza Strip are now displaced, amounting to almost
24 per cent of the population, and more than 240,000
are being hosted in schools belonging to United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), while others are seeking refuge
wherever they can - in Government buildings and
hospital grounds or with families and friends. People
flee to areas they believe are safe from attack, but
those areas are becoming harder to find. Gaza is just 45
kilometres long and between 6 and 14 kilometres wide,
and the Israeli military has advised that 44 per cent
of Gaza is a buffer zone. With the blockade in place,
most people are unable to leave Gaza even to get urgent
medical attention.

So they come to United Nations facilities for
protection when their homes and neighbourhoods come
under fire - more than 240,000 people. But more than
103 ofthose facilities have come under attack, including
an UNRWA school that was hosting more than 3,300
displaced people yesterday. Nineteen were killed and
more than 100 injured. The United Nations has lost
seven staff members, and other humanitarian workers
have been killed since the outbreak of hostilities. The
reality of Gaza today is that no place is safe.

The Secretary-General and other senior United
Nations officials have condemned this and other attacks
in the strongest possible terms. The parties to the conflict
have an obligation - an absolute obligation - to protect
civilians from direct or indiscriminate attacks. Under
international law, United Nations operations, personnel
and premises must remain inviolable, and parties to the
conflict should protect humanitarian workers. There
can be no justification for failing to do so.

The ongoing violence has led to the widespread
destruction of homes, public services and infrastructure
throughout the Gaza Strip. More than 9,000 homes have
been destroyed or damaged according to preliminary
reports. More than 130 schools and other educational
facilities have also sustained damage. Two of the three
main United Nations compounds, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs office
in Gaza, have also been damaged. Medical facilities
have not been spared, with 24 damaged or destroyed
and some hit multiple times. That includes Al-Aqsa
Hospital, which was hit on 21 July, causing significant
damage to its top two floors and killing four people.
On 29 July, Shifa, the main hospital in Gaza, which
is also sheltering thousands of displaced persons, was
damaged as well.

In addition to schools, hospitals and other civilian
infrastructure, Gaza's only power plant was struck on
Tuesday and its fuel tanks destroyed. Parts of Gaza will
remain without any electricity while others will receive
it for only two hours a day. Under the best possible
circumstances, repairs are expected to take months to
complete. The immediate, medium- and longer-term
impact on the functioning of water, sanitation and
health-care facilities, as well as on food production,
cannot be overstated. Water and sewage systems are
also severely damaged, andI am deeply concerned about
water systems' possible contamination. Hundreds of
thousands of people are without access to regular water
supplies, and the ongoing violence is preventing urgent
repairs. If the current situation persists, the number of
people without water will significantly increase.

The United Nations and our partners on the ground
are working to meet the growing humanitarian needs.
UNRWA is delivering water and food to shelters in
addition to its regular programmes. The World Food
Programme is providing food to people in UNRWA
shelters and others, as well as to patients and hospital
staff. The World Health Organization is facilitating
the transfer to hospitals of medical supplies, including
fluids and surgical kits, and is coordinating requests
from hospitals run by non-governmental organizations
for medical equipment, fuel and other supplies.
UNICEF is delivering paediatric drugs to hospitals and
health facilities, providing psychological support for
children and families and working to restore access to
water and sanitation. But the relief effort is stretched.
The ongoing fighting and insecurity are hampering our
ability to move around and have made it difficult to
maintain sustained delivery of assistance to people in
need.

Until a long-term ceasefire is agreed on, we need
more humanitarian pauses to enable us to reach those
in need. Pauses must be daily, predictable and long
enough for humanitarian staff to be able to dispatch
relief to those in need, rescue the injured, recover the
dead and allow civilians some reprieve so that they can
restock and resupply their homes.

It is urgent that the Government of Israel and
Hamas and other militant groups comply with their
international legal obligations, including international
humanitarian and human rights law. Each party must
be held accountable to international standards, not the
standards of the other party. We have all witnessed
in horror the desperation of children and civilians as
they have come under attack with no safe place to go.
Under international humanitarian law, the Government
of Israel and Hamas and other militant groups must
distinguish between military objectives and civilian
objects, and between combatants and civilians. They
must also avoid harming civilians or civilian objects,
and protect them from the effects ofmilitary operations.
As I have said to the Council before and in different
circumstances, even war has rules.

Funding is also urgently required. The United
Nations family has appealed for additional funds, and I
ask Member States to respond quickly and generously
to those appeals. We cannot provide adequate assistance
without an urgent injection of funds.

The violence must stop and the root causes of the
conflict must be addressed. The people of Gaza want
to live in safety, security and dignity. The people of
Israel want the same thing. I hope the international
community can help them to achieve it.

