The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Cuba,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Malaysia, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey, Venezuela and Yemen, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
17 April 2006 from the Permanent Observer of

Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document 8/2006/241 and which reads as follows:
"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Monday, 17 April 2006, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
17 April 2006 from the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Paul Badji to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 17 April 2006 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Qatar to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"Pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council, I have the
honour to request the participation of Yahya A.
Mahmassani, Ambassador and Permanent
Observer for the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, in the open meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, scheduled for this
afternoon, 17 April 2006."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2006/244.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to requests contained in letters
from Bahrain, document S/2006/227; from Yemen,
document S/2006/239; and from Malaysia, document
S/2006/240.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.


