Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Egypt on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to express my appreciation for the
convening of several important high-level meetings
on pivotal issues such as countering terrorism and its
impact on international peace and security. I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson;
Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi, Secretary-General of Al
Azhar Islamic Research Academy; and Mr. Stephen
Crown, Vice-President and Deputy General Counsel of
Microsoft, for their exhaustive briefings.

We met last month for an open Security Council
debate on countering terrorism and its impact on
international peace and security (S/PV.7670). We
are meeting again today to confirm the will of the
international community to assume global governance
of international peace and security. As I mentioned
in the meeting last month, to do so will require a
willingness to replace many concepts and mechanisms
of international action with new concepts and
mechanisms created by the Security Council consistent
with existing policies, with a view to implementing the
relevant resolutions of the Council in order to minimize
the threats to international peace and security.

We recognize that the implementation of Security
Council resolutions could be much more effective. With
the upcoming review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June, together with the
efforts to implement the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
was discussed in Geneva in April, international action
could be strengthened and the tools at our disposal
shaped so as to be more complementary, giving rise to
a clearer vision of the way in which the international
community should respond to extremist and terrorist
ideologies.

Over the past 10 years, expressions of hate have
increased, especially in our region. Over the past
five years we have seen a sixfold increase in the use
of social media, which has further given voice to the
prevalent attitudes in the region. Promoters of terrorist
and extremist ideologies have used social media
to spread hatred, taking advantage of the existing
political, cultural and social vacuum, in order to
achieve objectives that are in complete contradiction
with the three religions that come from our region.
Those ideologies are also in contradiction with the
principles, traditions and customs of our region, which
is the cradle of all of the world's civilizations.

Technological progress should have been used to
build prosperity for the region and the entire world,
rather than be used by extremist forces for purposes
of sabotage and destruction of one of the world's most
important civilizations. That is why it is urgent that we
undertake the steps necessary to fight and prevent the
propagation of extremist ideologies, which will require,
first and foremost, addressing the root causes of the
problems in the region and resolving them one by one.
They represent the main threats to international peace
and security.
Today, we are forced to confront many types of
hate speech, all reflecting the range of extremist and
violent ideologies. They have come to light at a time
when the media and its platforms have not yet achieved
a mature sense of the value of professionalism, thereby
creating a gray area between actions to achieve
political transformation that seek to fulfil the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, on the one hand,
and exploitative media feeding off the current situation
in the world, which is rife with social conflicts and
crises, on the other. The situation in our Arab region,
in particular, presents a fertile breeding ground for
social, political and economic problems that have led
to erroneous interpretations of religious thought, which
then form the basis for erroneous ideologies rooted
in hate, extremism and incitement to violence. The
situation calls for developing new tools to marginalize
extremist ideologies and promote religious moderation.

In that context, some believe that the Security
Council should undertake a review under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, with a
view to criminalizing hate speech, the incitement to
terrorist acts and the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters via electronic media and to preventing
terrorist organizations and affiliated individuals from
propagating their extremist ideas and ideologies, using
the Council's unified sanctions lists. Incitement to
hatred in all of its aspects should be a crime, whether it
is linked to terrorist acts or to terrorist organizations'
use of social and other media.

This might be a propitious time for setting up a
Security Council working group that could look into
prosecuting terrorist organizations that propagate
terrorist ideologies on the Internet and elsewhere. If
such a working group were created, it could have a
situation room, the central mission of which would be to
follow terrorist and extremist publications throughout
the day with a view to taking the necessary steps to shut
them down.

In that context, I would like to refer to some of the
statistics that Mr. Steven Crown of Microsoft shared
with us today. He mentioned that there were more
than 1 billion electronic messages on the Internet each
day, which gives an idea of the importance of direct
communication for those companies and especially for
Microsoft in the quest to find a solution for dealing with
those messages that simply spread extremist ideologies.

Such a mechanism would prevent the dissemination
and promotion of extremist ideologies and could also
lead to ending financing or mobilization of any type
carried out through social or electronic media platforms.
It could include any type of Internet communication
technology, including audiovisual, other Internet
resources and any type of relevant communication
based on use of the Internet or its applications. I believe
that those ideas are in line with the Council's resolutions
concerning various ways to counter terrorism and
especially its methods of dissemination through the
Internet and related resources, in particular resolutions
2253 (2015) and 2178 (2014), which enable action on the
part of the Council.

In that respect, I wish to underscore the importance
of the Arab media forum, which was held jointly
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and which took place in July 2015 here in
New York. I also wish to emphasize the importance of
the action plan concerning communications to combat
violent extremism to 2020. It was adopted in 2015 as
a preliminary step in the implementation of the joint
Arab strategy to combat terrorism, which was adopted
in 2014.

In conclusion, ascribing all violent and extremist
ideologies to a religion is not possible. Religion exists
to reform the conduct of the person, with a View to
ensuring prosperity, peaceful coexistence among many
peoples and groups, so they may live together in peace
and prosperity, based on the human rights enshrined in
the texts of the divine religions.

