Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for their briefings today.

The United States is concerned by the Secretary-
General's reports of the continued military activities
and presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area
of separation. The mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)is crystal
clear. There should be no military activity of any kind
in the area of separation, including military operations
by the Syrian armed forces. The daily presence of
the Syrian armed forces in the area of separation
diminishes the buffer zone that is essential for reducing
tensions between the parties and keeping the peace. It is
a Violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement
and threatens the 1973 ceasefire.

The United States and the Council cannot accept
Syria's efforts to establish its presence in the area of
separation as a new norm. Therefore, the United States
calls on the Russian Federation to use its influence
with the Al-Assad regime to compel the Syrian forces
to uphold their commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement and immediately withdraw from
the area of separation. Syrian military activities in
and around the area of separation have triggered
misunderstandings and hostilities with Israel that have
put UNDOF peacekeepers in harm's way. The freedom
of movement and safety of UNDOF personnel are of
the utmost importance and must be ensured by the
Syrian authorities.

The United States is also alarmed by reports of
Hizbullah's presence in the area of separation, which
further heightens the potential for hostilities. There
is no chance for peace between Syria and Israel if
Hizbullah is present in the area of separation. Hizbullah
has demonstrated that it is willing to risk its fellow
Lebanese people in attacking Israel, and we believe
that it has no qualms in risking the lives of the Syrian
people as well. As we have said before, the United
States strongly supports and affirms Israel's sovereign
right to self-defence.

The United States welcomes the mission's progress
in returning to its Bravo side operations. Recent
events make clear that Syrian armed forces activities
on the Bravo side go beyond those agreed to in the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The United
States encourages UNDOF and Observer Group Golan
to resume inspections in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side as soon as practical given conditions on
the ground.

Turning to the Golan specifically, we briefed the
Council yesterday that on 25 March, President Trump
signed a proclamation affirming that the United States
recognizes that the Golan Heights are part of the
State of Israel. That announcement does not affect the
1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, nor do we
believe that it undermines the UNDOF mandate in any
way. UNDOF continues to have a vital role to play in
preserving stability between Israel and Syria, most
importantly by ensuring that the area of separation is a
buffer zone free from any military presence or activities
other than those of UNDOF.

This decision is of critical strategic and security
importance to the State of Israel, and the United States
believes it can contribute to stability. As we said
yesterday, to allow the Golan Heights to be controlled
by the likes of the Syrian and Iranian regimes would
be to turn a blind eye to the threats emanating from a
Syrian regime that engages in atrocities and from Iran
and terrorist actors, including Hizbullah, seeking to use
the Golan Heights as a launching ground for attacks
on Israel.

For decades, the residents ofthe Golan Heights have
been subject to the same administration and governed
by the same laws as the rest of Israel. The President's
statement on the Golan reflects a recognition of the
unique circumstances that led us to deem it appropriate
to recognize Israeli sovereignty at this time.

To be clear, the United States supports the goal of
a secure and lasting peace between Israel and all its
neighbours, including Syria. Such a peace should be
achieved through direct discussions. Israel does not
currently have a partner for peace in Syria.

