Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the current situation in Syria. South Africa notes with concern the reports of the escalation of violence in north-west Syria. All parties to the conflict must make every effort to reduce tensions and refrain from any actions that may further exacerbate the situation. We reiterate that all States have the sovereign right to address the threat of terrorism in their countries. We emphasize that any action to counter terrorism must be in line with the obligations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law. External support for armed groups must cease immediately. Syria and its people have long endured the deadly misfortune of being a theatre of conflict that has involved several external role players, who have used the conflict as a proxy for their own interests. The escalation of tensions has reportedly led to the displacement, injury and death of civilians. Manyof those civilians have already been displaced multiple times, with violence and hostilities appearing to follow wherever they flee. All parties to the conflict must adhere to their obligations under international law and international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. In that regard, civilians must be afforded access to humanitarian corridors. Civilians are facing impossible circumstances, with winter upon them. A full military confrontation between the parties must be avoided at all costs, as civilians in already severe security and humanitarian circumstances would be left to face the eventual dire consequences. We once again urge all parties to abide by their commitments under the various ceasefire agreements that have been previously agreed and call for a cessation of hostilities throughout Syria. A cessation of hostilities would also ensure that the necessary humanitarian aid is provided to all those who require it. We call on the relevant authorities to ensure the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of that assistance. As we have consistently maintained, South Africa is firm in its belief that the political and humanitarian situations in Syria cannot be addressed independently of each other. An improvement in the humanitarian situation could improve trust and build confidence among the parties, which could in turn bolster progress and substantive dialogue on the political track. We call on all parties to make the necessary efforts to commit to continued dialogue under the auspices, and with the support of, Special Envoy Pedersen. That would include working to ensure that the Constitutional Committee's third round of talks - with an agenda agreed by both parties - is convened soon and that substantive and sincere discussions are held to ensure that the people of Syria have a safe, stable and prosperous environment in which to live. South Africa remains committed to supporting the protection of the fundamental interests of the Syrian people, the maintenance of peace and stability in the Middle East region and the defence of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the basic norms governing international relations, including respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Syria. In conclusion, we must all remember that the people of Syria have the most to lose should the violence continue. We must do all we can to support efforts to prevent such suffering.
