Mr. Bolton (United States): As requested by the
Security Council in resolutions 1546 (2004) and 1637
(2005), I am pleased to report on behalf of the 29
countries making up the Multinational Forces-Iraq
(MNF-I) on the Force's progress towards fulfilling its
mandate.

This most recent reporting period coincides with
the first 90 days of a democratically elected,
representative unity Government - a substantial break
from Iraq's past. In early June, the formation of a
national unity Government was completed with the
appointments of the Ministers of Interior, Defence and
State for National Security. On 25 June, Prime Minister
al-Maliki presented a national reconciliation and
dialogue project to the Council of Representatives.
This project seeks to reconcile past inequities and rally
Iraqis around the principle of equality without
sectarian divisions. It looks to establish the basis for
national unity through the democratic process and
create the conditions for Iraq to assume a leading
regional and international role. In addition, the Council
of Representatives adopted an accelerated schedule of
sessions. Most of the 24 Council committees have
formed and named chairs. The Council is making
progress on key legislation required to implement the
provisions of the Iraqi Constitution.

In late July, the Government of Iraq and the
United Nations, with the strong support of the United
States, the United Kingdom and other donor States and
international financial institutions, launched an
International Compact with Iraq. The International
Compact will, over the next five years, bring together
the international community and multilateral
organizations to help Iraq achieve its vision of a united,
federal and democratic country, at peace with its
neighbours and itself, and economically self-sufficient
and prosperous.

Since 2003, there have been significant successes
in the development of legitimate political, economic
and governmental institutions in Iraq. The unfolding of
the democratic electoral process that we have
witnessed in recent years has been a crucial success in
building the foundations of a new, free and democratic
Iraq.

Despite these achievements, obstacles remain.
Setbacks in the level and nature of violence in Iraq
continue to create significant challenges to stability,
reconstruction and transition. Sectarian tensions,
purposely incited by insurgents and extremists,
increased over the last quarter, resulting in increased
killings, kidnappings, attacks on civilians and
increasing numbers of internally displaced persons.

Extremists are increasingly interlocked in retaliatory
violence and are seeking to expand their existing areas
of influence. The sustained level of ethno-sectarian
violence is one of the most significant threats to
security and stability in Iraq.

Nonetheless, the Iraqi people continue to reject
overwhelmingly violence as a mean to drive political
change. The international community remains steadfast
with the people of Iraq in their determined drive for a
secure, stable and democratic country. We honour the
memory and sacrifice of all who have lost their lives in
the struggle for a federal, democratic, pluralist and
unified Iraq.

The insurgents, extremists and terrorists remain
capable of and intent on carrying out attacks against
Iraqi civilians, officials and security forces, with the
goal of destabilizing the legitimately elected
Government of Iraq and denying the Iraqi people the
democracy and promise of a better future that they
have chosen the through free and fair elections.

During this period, four of Iraq's 18 provinces -
Baghdad, Al-Anbar, Salah ad Din and Diyala -
continued to experience more than 81 per cent of all
attacks. Al-Anbar and Baghdad are the most seriously
affected, accounting for 55 per cent of all attacks.
Ninewa and Tamim provinces also saw significant
increases in attacks over the previous quarter. Twelve
provinces, containing more than 50 per cent of the
population, experienced only five per cent of all
attacks.

Attacks and civilian casualties, characterized by
ethno-sectarian attacks and reprisals, have arisen.
Violence escalated, notably in Baghdad, which, as the
political, population and media centre of the country, is
a high-value target for the terrorists. Nonetheless,
terrorists have failed to advance their primary
objectives, which include derailing Iraq's political
process and widening their political support among the
Iraqi people. The Iraqi people continue to express
confidence in the Iraqi army to provide for their
security and to reject the extremists' vision of Iraq's
future.

The average number of weekly attacks increased
15 per cent over the previous reporting period's
average, and Iraqi casualties increased by 51 per cent
compared to the previous quarter.
5

MNF-I and the Iraqi Government continued to

make progress, improving the security environment in

Fallujah and some parts of northern Iraq. The Iraqi

army has taken the lead in more counter-insurgency

operations and assumed security responsibility in more
areas.

The insurgency remains potent and viable,
although its visibility has been overshadowed by the
increase in sectarian violence it has sought foment. The
rising sectarian strife defines the emerging nature of
violence in mid-2006.

On 14 June, Iraqi Prime Minister al-Maliki
announced the Government's plan to provide improved
security conditions in Baghdad. Operation Together
Forward is an Iraqi-planned and led operation to ensure
the security of Baghdad against attacks designed to
uproot democracy and derail Iraq's commitment to
progress. As part of this operation, Iraqi police, the
Iraqi army and the national police, supported by the
Multinational Forces, increased patrols and
checkpoints in all areas of Baghdad, while
concentrating on areas of the city that have witnessed
increases in violence and sectarian killings. Security
forces also worked to block terrorist entry into the
capital city.

In July, during his first visit to the United States,
Prime Minister al-Maliki and President Bush
announced an adjustment to the Baghdad security plan.
Multinational and Iraqi units were repositioned from
less active areas of the country. Although in progress
only a short time, this effort appears to have reduced
Baghdad violence in the month of August. Initial press
reports indicate that these adjustments to the Baghdad
security plan have been welcomed by many Baghdad
residents.

Attacks on Iraq's infrastructure continue to
adversely affect oil revenues and the availability of
electricity. The average weekly number of attacks on
critical infrastructure continued to decline, decreasing
from five per week to two per week. Although the
number of attacks is decreasing, the essential services
infrastructure will continue to be a high-value target
for enemy elements. The Multinational Force will
continue to work with the Iraqi Government and other
international partners to strengthen further
infrastructure security.
Although Baghdad remains the focus for
sectarian and terrorist violence in Iraq, violence tied to

the rejectionist insurgency, terrorist intimidation,
political and tribal tensions and criminality continues
in other regions. Sectarian violence is gradually
spreading north into Diyala province and Kirkuk, as
Sunni, Shia and Kurdish groups compete for provincial
influence. Conflict in Al-Anbar province remains
centred on the Sunni insurgency. Al-Qaida in Iraq
continues its intimidation to coerce passive Sunni
support, although tribes are pushing back to eject
Al-Qaida and re-establish their dominant role. In the
southern, predominantly Shia region of the country,
political and tribal rivalries are a growing motive
behind violence, particularly in Basra, with limited
anti-Coalition attacks likely undertaken by rogue Shia
militia with Iranian support.

Iraqi security forces continue to grow and
improve and to conduct more and more independent
operations each day. Multinational Forces continue to
train, equip and mentor the ISF and to transition
security responsibilities of areas to the Iraqi forces as
proficiency allows and conditions permit. Transitions
are evaluated area by area and region by region and are
incremental to ensure an effective and successful
transition of security responsibilities.

Iraq achieved another historic milestone on
13 July with the transfer of security responsibility in
Al-Muthana province from MNF-I to the provincial
Governor and civilian-controlled Iraqi police services.
Moreover, since May of 2006, MNF-I has transferred
an additional 10 forward operating bases to the
Government of Iraq. Fifty-one of 110 such bases are
now under Iraqi control. Dhi Qar province appears
ready to assume security independence shortly, and
several other provinces should meet the transition
criteria before the end of the year.

In August, the Fourth Iraqi Army Division
headquarters officially assumed the lead in its area of
responsibility from the lOlst Airborne Division. This
achievement represents the halfway mark of our joint
goal of putting all Iraqi security forces in the lead of
coordinating, planning and conducting security
operations in Iraq.

Iraqi security forces are increasingly taking the
lead in operations and assuming primary responsibility
for Iraq's security, as Iraqi army and police forces
demonstrate an increased capability to plan and
execute counter-insurgency operations.
As of 4 September, five Iraqi army divisions, 26
brigades, 85 battalions and two national police
battalions assumed lead responsibility for security in
their areas of operation. One hundred and six Iraqi
army combat battalions and 17 strategic infrastructure
battalions are conducting operations at varying levels
of capability. Another three combat battalions are in
the process of forming. In addition, 27 national police
battalions are now operational and active. Although
these units lead security operations, most still receive
support from the multinational forces for their logistics
and operations.

Institutional capability within the ministries of
defence and interior is an increasingly important factor
in the transition to Iraqi security self-reliance. As these
ministries continue to staff, train and equip forces,
efforts are focused on strengthening their capacity to
direct, support and sustain themselves. With more than
two thirds of the Iraqi army combat units now in the
lead, the Multinational Force in Iraq's focus is shifting
towards helping the Iraqis develop stronger logistics
and command and control capabilities. MNFI will also
continue to help develop and mentor the capacity of the
Ministry of Defence to organize, train, equip and
modernize its forces.

In the first week of September, the Ministry of
Defence and the joint headquarters assumed
operational control of the Iraqi ground forces
command, the Iraqi navy and the Iraqi air force. The
Iraqi ground forces command assumed operational
control of the eighth Iraqi army division. The
Government of Iraq will determine when the command
is ready to assume more control, but the transfer
demonstrates Iraq's increasing capabilities.

Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Interior
forces now total more than 298,000 trained personnel.
That includes over 115,000 Ministry of Defence
personnel, over 118,000 police and over 65,000 other
Ministry of Interior forces.

The Joint Committee to Achieve Iraqi Security
Self-reliance announced by Prime Minister al-Maliki
and President Bush on 25 July will develop a
conditions-based road map for full transition of
security responsibility.

The United Nations contributions in Iraq are
vital. We urge the United Nations to continue to fulfil
its mandate under resolution 1546 (2004). On
10 August, the Security Council adopted resolution

1700 (2006) renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for
another 12 months and reaffirming its commitment to
assisting the Iraqi people and Government in building a
productive and prosperous nation.

The role of the United Nations in supporting and
co-chairing the International Compact with Iraq is a
key new component of the role of the United Nations
which was noted in this resolution. The United Nations
now has representatives in its compound in Irbil, and a
United Nations military liaison adviser is currently in
Kirkuk.

Multinational forces, notably the Georgian,
Romanian and South Korean contingents continue to
provide security for the United Nations in Baghdad,
Basra and Irbil, respectively. These troops provide
static site security, reconnaissance, security patrols,
convoy escorts, checkpoints, and, when necessary,
Medevac and emergency evacuation. In addition, Fijian
troops provide static and close-in protection for United
Nations personnel and facilities in Baghdad.

In conclusion, the evolution of a fully free, secure
and prosperous Iraq remains a work in progress.
Training Iraqi security forces to assume primary
responsibility for security is essential. Since taking the
reins of Government in June, Prime Minister
al-Maliki's Government has taken promising steps
towards national reconciliation as well as economic
development reform and reconstruction through the
launch of the International Compact with Iraq. The
Multinational Force and the international community
stand with the Iraqi people as Prime Minister
al-Maliki's Government continues its efforts to
promote national dialogue and inclusion and strive
tirelessly to deliver improvements in security, stability,
and quality of life to the Iraqi people.

Iraq's neighbours share some responsibility for
Iraq's internal security. Syria should prevent financial
and material support, particularly arms, from entering
Iraq. Iran should stop providing munitions and other
support to extremist groups in Iraq. Iraq's regional
neighbours should do more to help Iraq's
democratically elected Government by following
through on pledges to provide economic assistance and
debt relief.

We applaud the Kingdom of Jordan for having
recently sent an ambassador to Baghdad and hope that
other Arab States will soon do the same. Moreover, we

renew our call to the entire international community to
support Iraq's sovereign Government and redouble its
assistance efforts.

The Multinational Force and combined MNF-
International Stabilization Force (ISF) efforts continue
to support an environment that will allow Iraq's
democratically elected Government to succeed and the
Iraqi people to realize a brighter, secure and more
prosperous future.

