At the outset, let me congratulate you, Madam President, on France's assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for this month. We wish you every success in performing your duties during this difficult and unprecedented time, caused by spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). I would also like to thank to the President and the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their respective reports and comprehensive briefings today. We are grateful that the Mechanism has continued making progress throughout the reporting period and continued functioning despite the COVID-19 pandemic. We note the continued progress made by the Mechanism in fulfilling residual activities of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I also would like to underline that the successful conclusion of the Mechanism's mandate in an efficient manner and within a reasonable time frame is of crucial importance for justice and reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region. We must also acknowledge that the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has had some impact on the actions and activities of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since the Security Council last met on this topic (see S/PV.8681). At the same time, competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have taken all responsible measures in fighting the spread of the COVID-19. The Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina declared a state of emergency and set mandatory quarantines. The whole situation with the COVID-19 outbreak, as well as the adequate measures introduced to suppress the pandemic, has had a significant impact on the work of judicial institutions in the country. The work of the Prosecutor's Office and the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is tackling the most, still unfinished and most complicated war crime cases, has been particularly affected. On 30 April 2020, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a new organization of work for all Courts and the Prosecutor's Office in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the light of the current health situation in the country. I would like to remind you, Sir, that throughout the years, cooperation by Bosnia and Herzegovina with the ICTY and its successor, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, has been steadfast and full, as evidenced in their reports. In the same vein, we remain devoted to contributing actively to the Mechanism's efforts to accomplish its mission. We would also like to reiterate our commitment to its work, and to invite all Member States to fulfil their obligations and contribute to the unobstructed work of the Mechanism. We would like to highlight our appreciation of the support of the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations Development Programme in strengthening the human and material resources of judicial institutions processing war crimes and in general capacity-building. Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates the importance of consistent cooperation among the prosecutors' offices and the relevant authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the neighbouring countries, Croatia and Serbia, in accordance with the principles of international justice and the rule of law, which is crucial to investigating and prosecuting war crimes. Finally, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to investigating, prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for war crimes, regardless of their nationality or political or other affiliation. We would also like to emphasize that protecting witnesses is of the utmost importance for all judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is most important for reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as for our path towards the European Union, which is our main foreign policy goal, enjoying broad consensus among all political parties in the country. We will continue to work on strengthening our national judicial system. Full justice means greater trust, stability and progress.
