Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.

First, we wish to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this open debate. With an increase in the
number of conflicts and their negative impact on
international peace, security and development, it is
more important than ever that we be successful in
preventing and resolving conflicts through mediation.

Solving disputes by peaceful means remains the
primary responsibility of Member States. At the same
time, the Security Council has an important role. We
welcome the fact that, last year, a united Security
Council, working in concert with other stakeholders,
contributed to the prevention of a potential outbreak of
Violence in The Gambia.
In line with the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council may call upon parties to disputes to
settle them by peaceful means and may recommend
appropriate procedures for such settlements. The
Nordic countries encourage the Council to make full
use of its mandate to engage in, support and promote
mediation efforts, as it did by providing united and
clear support for the Colombian peace process. In the
Colombian case, we also see the crucial role that a
United Nations mission, supported by a strong Security
Council mandate, can play once a peace agreement has
been signed and the parties embark on the difficult
phase of implementing what was agreed.

The sustaining peace agenda highlights the
importance of engagement throughout the conflict
cycle. At the same time, the increasing complexity of
today's conflicts poses challenges to United Nations
peacemaking efforts. There is a complex relationship
between sanctions andpeace processes. The involvement
of the Security Council brings with it the responsibility
to provide active support for peace efforts and to help
to consolidate peace. We hope that the Council will pay
closer attention to that dimension in situations where
there have been positive developments, for example,
in the relationships between Eritrea and Ethiopia and
between Eritrea and Somalia.

The Nordic countries recognize that regional
organizations are often best placed to take the lead
in mediation efforts. We welcome and will support
in every way possible the strengthened relationships
between the African Union and the United Nations and
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council.

The Nordic countries are concerned about the low
number of women participating in mediation processes.
We support the Secretary-General in his efforts to
rectify that, and we hope that the emerging cooperation
between the regional networks of women mediators
and the United Nations will lead to more inclusive
peace processes, thereby increasing the likelihood
of sustainable peace. The Nordic Women Mediators
Network was established in 2015.

We fully support the Secretary-General's call for
a surge in peace diplomacy. We welcome, and have
contributed to, the increase in funding for mediation
and early preventive efforts by the Department of
Political Affairs in recent years. At the same time,
sustained and predictable funding is required, not only
on a voluntary basis.
As the report (S/2015/682) of the Secretary-
General entitled "The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations"
underscores, the Council's efforts to manage conflicts
should be tailored to support political solutions to
conflicts. We support the United Nations reform agenda
and look forward to seeing how the whole-of-pillar
approach by the United Nations peace and security
secretariat will lead to an enhanced role for mediation
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

However, mediation is not a quick fix or a
one-size-fits-all approach. Social and economic
development remains crucial if we are to address the
root causes. While supporting the United Nations
mediation capabilities, the Nordic countries will remain
major partners in long-term development.

