The President (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
3653rd meeting, I invite the representative of Israel to take
a seat at the Council table; I invite the representative of
Lebanon to take a seat at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Colombia, Cuba,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and the
United Arab Emirates to take the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
and Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) took seats at the
Council table; Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan), Mr.
Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Garcia (Colombia), Mr.
Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Takht-Ravanchi
(Islamic Republic oflran), Mr. Bataineh (Jordan), Mr.
Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia), Mr.
Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr.
Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Tanc (Turkey)
and Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): 1 should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bahrain, Canada, the Comoros,
Djibouti, Iraq, Ireland, Japan, Mauritania, Norway, Oman,
Qatar, the Sudan and Yemen, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Buallay
(Bahrain), Mr. Karsgaard (Canada), Mr.
Djimbanaou (Comoros), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr.
Hasan (Iraq), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr.
Takahashi (Japan), Mr. N 'diaye (Mauritania), Mr.
Biarn Lian (Norway), Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman),
Mr. Al-Ni'mah (Qatar), Mr. Yassin (Sudan) and Mr.
Obadi (Yemen) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now resume its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1996/292, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen. The Comoros has joined as a
sponsor of the draft resolution.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1996/304, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Honduras,
Italy, Poland, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/ 1996/295 , letter dated 17 April 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Emirates to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of resolution 5573 issued on 17 April
1996 by the Council of the League of Arab States.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 17 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the text
of the declaration by the Presidency on behalf of the
European Union on the situation in the Middle East,
which will be issued as document S/ 1996/299.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the two draft resolutions
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolutions to the vote now.

 
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1996/292.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
China, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia

Against:
None

Abstaining:
Botswana, Chile, France, Germany, Honduras, Italy,
Poland, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
result of the voting is as follows: 4 votes in favour, none
against and 11 abstaining. The draft resolution has not been
adopted because it did not obtain the required majority.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution in document
S/l996/304.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


