Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Allow me to join previous
speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his briefing, and to express my appreciation to
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin, for his important remarks. Let me
also congratulate the new Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Staffan de Mistura, on his recent
assumption of his duties. Italy looks forward to
working with him and wishes him success in his
challenging mission.
Italy fully supports the statement delivered by the
Charge d'affaires of the European Union delegation. I
would like to add just a few remarks, drawing on our
national experience and our significant civil and
military commitment to Afghanistan.

In London in January, the international
community and the Afghan Government agreed to
begin a new phase in their partnership and to renew
their commitment to implementing a reform-oriented
nation-building agenda, as first launched by President
Karzai in his 19 November inaugural speech. The
military operations are no doubt essential to creating
the necessary security conditions that will allow the
Afghan economy to grow, create new job opportunities
and enable civil society to revive itself. They cannot,
however, solve the problems of Afghanistan by
themselves, nor do they represent a durable solution to
the conflict. What is needed is a comprehensive
approach.

Thus, the London Conference confirmed the
central role of the civilian efforts in the overall
international strategy for the stabilization and
reconstruction of Afghanistan, and shifted the focus
more towards reinforcing the political, institutional and
development processes and towards a transition aimed
at making Afghan sovereignty real. Coordination
mechanisms have been better defined, while a new
phase has been inaugurated for the progressive
handover of responsibilities to the Afghan counterparts
in the fields of security, governance, anti-corruption
and economic and social development.

It is now imperative that we all work with the
Afghan Government to achieve real progress and
define clear and concrete actions in view of the
important events taking place in the upcoming months:
the Peace Jirga in April, the Kabul conference in June,
a Security Council mission and, most important, the
parliamentary elections scheduled for September. We
also look forward to the implementation of the cluster
approach, which should allow the various branches of
the Afghan Government and Administration to fine-
tune their priorities, manage international funds more
efficiently and better coordinate the implementation of
international programmes.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) must continue to lead and
guide international civilian assistance; hence the need
to strengthen its resources and structures in order to
enable it to fulfil its mandate. International donors
must also do their part, commit to the coordination
efforts, and acknowledge the respective roles of
UNAMA and the Afghan authorities. The Secretary-
General notes in his report that there has been "a
marginal increase in donor alignment and increased
contributions to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund as a result of intense coordination efforts"
(S/2010/J27, para. 18). While this is true, the current
situation is far from the goal set in London to increase
contributions made through the Afghan budget to
50 per cent of the total contributions to Afghanistan
over the next two years. I confirm Italy's readiness to
continue do its part.

We also subscribe to and are ready to make a
concrete contribution to the proposal of the Secretary-
General to set up an advisory group on donor
coordination and aid effectiveness. We are also eager to
work with the United Nations and other international
partners to find an urgent solution to the alarming
vacancy rate, which poses serious constraints on
UNAMA's operability, and on the need to also expand
its presence in the Afghan provinces. At the national
level, we are encouraging candidacies for specific
posts within the Mission.

We support the renewal of UNAMA's mandate
for a further 12 months and believe that the draft
resolution being prepared by the Security Council
should be centred on the notion of transition, as
defined in London. It should set clear priorities for the
United Nations Mission and call upon the Afghan
Government to fulfil its commitments.

Clarity is also particularly important with regard
to UNAMA's involvement in the forthcoming
elections. We strongly believe that the United Nations
has an important role to play in assisting the Afghan
Government in the preparation of credible, safe and
secure legislative elections. The lessons learned from
the 2009 elections must be taken into account so as to
deliver improvements to the electoral process of 2010
and beyond.

We therefore encourage Afghan authorities to
follow through with the commitments made. The time
they have at their disposal should allow them to correct
some of the deficiencies, omissions and discrepancies
in the electoral law and to overcome the technical
difficulties for the organization of the elections. This is
particularly important with regard to the appointment

of the members of the Independent Election
Commission, the Electoral Complaints Commission
and the media commission, as well as the definition of
their mandates. It is also important for voter
registration, vetting procedures for candidates -
which is a much bigger task for parliamentary elections
than for last year's presidential elections - and the
recruitment and training of personnel to be employed
at the provincial level and in the polling stations.

We believe that UNAMA, with the consistent
support of the international community, can take on a
decisive role in helping to overcome these hurdles,
suggesting pragmatic solutions and facilitating any
necessary compromises.

UNAMA action should support regional
cooperation - which, alongside security and
development, was enshrined in London as the third
pillar of the overall stabilization strategy thus
embracing the approach set out at last year's G-8
ministerial meeting in Trieste.

 

We also support UNAMA's political good offices
to sustain reintegration and reconciliation programmes,
as long as they are Afghan-led and transparent and are
carried out in a manner respectful of the Afghan
Constitution and with the support of the international
community. We stand ready to contribute to the
reintegration trust fund, as long as financing
mechanisms will allow for some control over the use of
the resources.

In conclusion, 2010 will be a decisive year in our
overall efforts to stabilize Afghanistan. The events and
processes that will take place in the upcoming months
will be crucial in that respect. It is imperative, as the
Secretary-General underlines in his report, that they be
managed in such a way as to ensure that they reinforce,
rather than undermine, each other. In fact, if well
managed, these events can form the structure of a
transition to greater Afghan leadership.

