Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): The Nigerian
delegation congratulates you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and on initiating this important discussion
on drug trafficking as a threat to international security,
thereby capping two years of productive presence on
the Security Council. We thank the Secretary-General
for his invaluable views and continuing efforts to
tackle the problem. We also thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa for his comprehensive statement and tenacity in
the fight against drug trafficking.

Drug trafficking remains a major challenge to
global peace and security. No country is totally
immune from its devastating effects and none can fight
and win the anti-narcotics war alone, regardless of the
size of the resources at its disposal. In Africa, illicit
drug trafficking, cultivation, processing and abuse are
persistently on the rise and creating barriers to the
continent's development efforts. International drug
cartels outside the region are exploiting the
underresourced border enforcement capacities of some
countries and turning them into transit routes for
prohibited drugs.

West Africa is most affected by the reprehensible
activities of these drug cartels. The subregion is fast
becoming a major warehouse and transit hub for
cocaine and other illicit drugs. The actions of these
criminal syndicates constitute a major threat not only
to the subregion's fledgling democratic structures, but
also to governance in general. Indeed, they constitute
serious impediments to subregional efforts to promote
human prosperity, wealth creation, economic
development, the rule of law and peacebuilding. Drug
trafficking has led directly to increased violent crimes,
small arms proliferation, human trafficking, corruption,
money-laundering and political instability.

Against this background, the States members of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have demonstrated appreciable political
will and commitment to fighting the scourge. In
December 2008, the ECOWAS Action Plan on illicit
drugs was adopted in Abuja by the heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS as a major legal framework
to complement existing mechanisms. The West Africa

Coast Initiative to support the implementation of the
Action Plan has also been launched in Vienna and in
New York. The Initiative recognizes the importance of
partnerships for leveraging resources and for building
national and regional capacities in the areas of law
enforcement, forensics, intelligence, border
management, the fight against money-laundering and
the strengthening of criminal justice systems. The
Initiative requires international support and gradual
expansion beyond the pilot countries.

At the national level, the Nigerian National Drug
Enforcement Agency has adopted a dual approach -
drug supply control and drug demand control - to
prevent the country from being used as a source, transit
and destination for narcotics. The Agency is
strengthening its institutional capacity, prosecutorial
capability and surveillance activities. Nigeria remains
firmly committed to achieving the ultimate goal of
ridding the country and the West African subregion of
the menace of drug trafficking. Nigeria is also
committed to strengthening ties with its development
partners and the international community, especially
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office for West
Africa.

Nigeria believes that the problem of drug
trafficking requires national, subregional and regional
approaches. Thus, we will continue to work closely
with the African Union, ECOWAS and the
Intergovernmental Action Group Against Money
Laundering in West Africa to tackle this problem. At
the bilateral level, Nigeria is strengthening its ties with
several countries, including the United Kingdom,
South Africa and China, on drug control.

In spite of these efforts, the international
community must continue to pay close attention to
developments in the West African region before the
situation there escalates into an emergency. In the sprit
of shared and common responsibility, Nigeria urges the
international community to provide necessary
assistance to States of the subregion to build their
capacities in order to respond more effectively to these
challenges.

Combating drug trafficking and related organized
crime must be situated in the wider context of poverty
eradication and human development, in line with the
commitments undertaken in the Millennium
Development Goals. Attention should also be paid to

conflict prevention in the subregion and to the role
played by the African diaspora in the chain. Efforts
should not be limited to cocaine and cannabis imported
mainly from outside the continent, but should extend to
drugs produced locally. An urgent area of focus and
capacity support should be the development of
mechanisms for gathering and sharing information on
organized criminal groups in the subregion.

Let me assure you, Mr. President, of Nigeria's
overwhelming support for the presidential statement
adopted by the Council today (S/PRST/2009/32). We
look forward to working closely with other delegations
to implement existing frameworks.

