Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank the
President for organizing today's meeting and for
Spain's devotion to discussing the working methods of
the Security Council.

Guided by the President's excellent concept note
(S/2015/793, annex), I would like to focus on just
two issues, especially on the relationship between
the Security Council and the General Assembly, with
special emphasis on the selection and the appointment
of the Secretary-General.

More transparency, inclusiveness and greater
interaction with the candidates should guide the
process of electing the next Secretary-General. We
were pleased to include these aspects in the recent
General Assembly resolution, 69/321, on revitalization
of the Assembly's work, negotiated under the very
able leadership of Ambassadors Vladimir Drobnjak of
Croatia and Wilfried Emvula of Namibia. 1 would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate them on their
reappointment to their positions.

Like Colombia, Poland is in favour of presenting
women candidates for the position of Secretary-
General and therefore welcomes the relevant provisions
in resolution 69/321. In our opinion, choosing a female
Secretary-General would constitute a significant step
towards achieving gender balance throughout the entire
United Nations system.

Yet another fundamental principle serving as a
cornerstone of our work within the United Nations is
geographical distribution. On this occasion, I would like
to recall that in the 70 -year history of our Organization,
the Secretary-General has never been appointed from
among candidates from the Eastern European Group. We
therefore believe that the Council should take regional
rotation duly into account in its recommendation of a
candidate to the General Assembly.

We are looking forward to an official start of the
process of selecting the next Secretary-General by the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, as envisaged in the Assembly resolution. We
also hope that the cooperation between the Council and
the Assembly during the upcoming election will set a
good example and standards for the future.

I would also take this opportunity to emphasize
that comprehensive Security Council reform is not
limited only to the Council's working methods. This
is a matter of great importance to my country. We
are looking forward to a swift resumption of the
intergovernmental negotiations, which were skilfully
conducted by the Permanent Representative of Jamaica,
Ambassador Courtenay Rattray, during the Assembly's
last session. While welcoming the progress reached
so far in improving the Council's working methods,
Poland believes that further increasing transparency in
the Council's activities would serve not only the wider
membership, but also the Council itself.

In my final 10 seconds, I would like to say that
it is remarkable how much more an organization can
achieve by making very simple adjustments to its
working methods. Small steps can be taken that will
hopefully lead us to more comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the United
Nations as a whole.
