Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I should like to thank President Meron,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Joensen and
Prosecutor Jallow for their respective briefings on
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Residual Mechanism.

During the reporting period, both Tribunals
continued to overcome difficulties, such as those in the
area of the retention of staff, and have made progress in
their work, which China duly recognizes. At the same
time, China takes note with concern of the fact that the
timetable for implementing the completion strategy
provided for in resolution 1966 (2010) can no longer be
met. For the ICTY it will be postponed to 2017 and for
the ICTR to 2015. China hopes that the two Tribunals
will continue to enhance their efficiency while ensuring
justice to avoid any further delay in their work.

The Residual Mechanism branch for the ICTR and
that for the ICTY began their work in July 2012 and
July 2013, respectively. We are pleased to see that the
transition from the ICTR to the Residual Mechanism is
close to completion and that the Residual Mechanism
will soon tender its first appeal judgement. The
transition ofthe ICTY to the Residual Mechanism is also
making progress smoothly. We appreciate all of these
developments. China hopes that the two Tribunals will
properly arrange their work according to the requests
made in the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and in particular strengthen their communication
and coordination with the Residual Mechanism so as
to ensure the successful completion of the transition
thereto.

The cooperation of States, particularly those in the
regions concerned, is crucial to the smooth functioning
of the two Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.
China appreciates the cooperation provided by the
relevant countries, including Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Rwanda, to the two Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism for its work.

At the same time, we call on the countries with
capacity to show political will and to provide assistance
in areas such as the enforcement of judgements
and the relocation of the acquitted. In that respect,
China welcomes the recent agreement of Belgium to
accommodate an individual acquitted by the ICTR.
Moreover, among those indicted by the ICTR, nine
are still at large. We hope that progress will be made
towards apprehending those fugitives.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
thank Chile, the Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, and the Office of Legal
Affairs for their work.

