Mr. Bencosme Castaiios (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we extend our condolences to the Government and the people of the Niger for the attack committed over the weekend. We would like to thank the briefers for their briefings today. The way forward for the authorities of Guinea- Bissau is not easy. The current landscape is full of challenges, including the need for greater political dialogue, accompanied by urgent reforms, such as a constitutional review, the fight against drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, a continuously deteriorating socioeconomic situation, worsening gender inequalities and the health effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The year 2020 is also acritical one for Guinea-Bissau as it faces four major transitions, namely, the drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the transfer of tasks of the United Nations country team, the transition to a new political leadership and the closure of the Economic Community of West African States mission. As such, as the international community's involvement on the ground gradually diminishes, the responsibility falls more heavily on the local authorities to be accountable to their citizens and improve their quality of life. As indicated in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/755), there was clear involvement of the military during the political crisis following the 2019 presidential elections. We deeply regret its actions, as they remind the Security Council that the army has not yet proved to be impartial or independent in an internal conflict. As a result, the humanitarian and security situation in the country has deteriorated, thus highlighting the essential role played by the armed forces and the direct negative impact on the population when they do not faithfully carry out their mandate. With regard to freedom of expression, we consider the recent acts of vandalism against the premises and equipment of Radio Capital FM to be reprehensible. Those acts, allegedly carried out by unidentified armedmen wearing uniforms of the Guinea-Bissau National Guard, constitute a clear violation of the freedom of expression and the right to information and directly attack a cornerstone of democratic States. In that connection, we urge the authorities to conduct thorough investigations into those and other human rights violations in order to bring those responsible to justice. Of particular concern are reports of police officers beating women and of the security forces engaging in excessive use of force and inhumane treatment, especially towards women and children, as they enforce confinement measures related to the pandemic. Nevertheless, the Dominican Republic, as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, applauds the commendable work the Commission is doing on the ground at this unprecedented time, especially to mobilize funds, prioritize peacebuilding objectives, foster the participation and inclusion of women and young people in the political process and promote internal reforms in the country that are crucially needed to achieve lasting stability. We would not wish to conclude without commending all of Guinea-Bissau's regional and _ international partners, especially the Economic Community of West African States, for their efforts and good offices and their vital ongoing support during the contentious 2019 electoral processes.
