Mr. Motomura (Japan): I would like to thank
you for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Kosovo. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his timely report.

Today, I shall focus my comments on the recent
municipal elections and various related issues. The
municipal elections on 26 October were the first to be
held since the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government were established. Recognizing the great
significance of the elections for the peace process, the
Japanese Government dispatched an elections expert to
the Kosovo Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which organized
the elections.

Japan welcomes the fact that, in general, the
elections were conducted in a free and fair manner,
with the participation of all ethnic groups. We believe
the elections represent an important step toward
realizing a democratic and multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo. Unlike the elections in 2000, there was no
Kosovo-wide boycott, although the low turnout among
Serbs and the boycott in Mitrovica were disappointing.
We call upon all the elected members of the municipal
assemblies to work together to develop democratic
local governments.

The international community must build upon the
outcome of the municipal elections and continue its
efforts for the construction of a democratic and multi-
ethnic society throughout Kosovo. For this purpose,
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the elected leaders should all
cooperate to achieve decentralization, as the Special
Representative, Michael Steiner, has urged them to do.
Dismantling the parallel structure in Mitrovica will be
a key to this endeavour.

Secondly, the construction of a democratic and
multi-ethnic society will depend upon the expeditious
return of the refugees and internally displaced persons
who were forced out of the area by the conflict. From
this viewpoint, we welcome the establishment of a task
force on the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and we support UNMIK's policy of organized,
sustainable returns based on respect for the rights of
individuals.

In addition, it is also important that the
international community extend assistance for ethnic
reconciliation. My Government has contributed almost
$100 million for various reconstruction-assistance
programmes in Kosovo. Hereafter, we intend to focus
on projects that facilitate confidence-building and
cooperation among the different communities.
Specifically, we will pursue possibilities to contribute
to small-arms control and human-resources
development projects.

Finally, let me take this opportunity to refer to the
issue of Security Council missions. The Council has
decided to send a third mission to Kosovo. My
delegation recognizes that while such missions can
play an important role in determining how the United
Nations should be engaged in efforts to settle a
regional conflict, it is important that their cost, and the
criteria for deciding when and where to dispatch them,
as well as their composition, be discussed in a
transparent manner.

In closing, let me assure you, Mr. President, that
my Government remains committed to the peace
implementation process in Kosovo. It does so in the
belief that the stability and prosperity of Kosovo are
also vitally important to South-East Europe as a whole.

