Mr. Nhleko (Swaziland): At the outset permit me
to express the pleasure of my delegation in seeing the
Minister of Angola, Mr. Miranda, in our midst. My
delegation joins previous speakers in thanking the
President of the Council for convening this important
open briefing to discuss the interim report of the
Monitoring Mechanism on Angola sanctions
established by the Security Council in accordance with
its resolution 1295 (2000) regarding violations of
sanctions against UNITA - an issue of critical
importance to my country and to the entire subregion
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC).

A little over a year ago, we welcomed with great
relief the report of the Council's sanctions Committee
on Angola in document S/2000/83, which gave a
detailed account of the situation in Angola and detailed
recommendations for addressing the sanctions-busting
activities of UNITA. Some of those recommendations
in that report have already been implemented, and my
delegation commends the Security Council for
continuing to vigorously pursue this matter.

It is common knowledge that UNITA and its
leader, Savimbi, have constantly refused to abide by
the peace initiatives they concluded with the Angolan
Government and, instead, have resorted to the use of
armed force. As a matter of fact, their continued
menace in the country has brought nothing but peril to
the Angolan people, leaving the international
community with no option but to find other means with
which to end the conflict, which remains an obstacle to
peace, reconciliation and reconstruction in that country.

Today, this distinguished body is yet again called
upon to review further sanction violations by UNITA
and its friends. In that regard, and through the
President of the Council, we extend our profound
appreciation to the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Ryan of Ireland, for the report
that further elaborates on the sanctions-busting
activities of UNITA. Our thanks also go to the
Monitoring Mechanism for maintaining the momentum
of pressure in further identifying the illicit activities of
UNITA and its collaborators, who seek to further
undermine the United Nations sanctions regime.

The current report of the sanctions Committee
contained in document S/2000/1225 is indicative of the
hard work the Committee is facing, which, as we all
are aware, borders on the cooperation of Member
States to realize the Committee's objectives. In this
regard, it is essential for each Member State to fully
comply with all Security Council resolutions on this
issue, including cooperation by those working with
UNITA to support the Monitoring Mechanism set up in
the terms of resolution 1295 (2000).

We are grateful to those Member States that have
adopted new measures against UNITA to strengthen the
Monitoring Mechanism. In order to ensure this, SADC,
among others, is considering the introduction of mobile
radar systems to be deployed in the region for the
purpose of detecting illegal flight activities across
national borders. We also look forward to the report of
the study commissioned by the Monitoring Mechanism
to locate and investigate the financial assets of UNITA.
To that endeavour, we further appeal to Member States
to cooperate fully with the Monitoring Mechanism to
ensure that it fulfils its mandate. It is our hope that
peace and stability will return in Angola. By the impact
they have had so far, the measures are proving to be a
success.

Like other countries, the Kingdom of Swaziland
believes that strengthening the sanctions regime against
UNITA is not an end in itself. Rather, it is a tool to
create the necessary conditions for a final political
solution to the Angolan question. The international
community can only do well by stepping up its support
for Angola and thereby ensuring that national
reconciliation until nation-building is achieved.

