Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and would like to make a few remarks
in its national capacity.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and Special Representative Jan Kubis and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) team for their dedicated work in carrying
out the tasks of the Mission. Although the concrete
modalities for post-2014 cooperation between
Afghanistan and international community are yet to
be defined, the United Nations will continue to play an
important role throughout the transition and during the
transformation decade.

I would like to focus Latvia's comments today on
two key areas, namely, regional cooperation and the
international community's long-term commitment to
Afghanistan.

Turning first to regional cooperation, we believe
that this is critical for achieving long-term stability and
economic development in Afghanistan. We welcome in
particular regional initiatives such as the Heart of Asia
process, including the outcome of its third Ministerial
Conference, held in Almaty in April. The adoption of
implementation plans on confidence-building measures
(CBMs) between Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries is a strong foundation for further cooperation
at the regional level. Latvia has also become an
active participant in the Heart of Asia process and is
currently exploring possibilities for supporting the
implementation of CBMS for regional infrastructure,
led by Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan.

Afghanistan and Central Asia are situated on
ancient trade routes. Their involvement in international
economic and trade processes is essential for the
security, stability and development of Afghanistan
and the whole region. In the light of that, on 11 and
12 June, Latvia hosted an annual high-level workshop
on the theme "Arteries connecting the Heart of Asia
to the global world", which brought together more than
220 Government officials, foreign policy experts and
representatives of transport and logistics companies
from countries in Central Asia and the South
Caucasus, Afghanistan, the United States, the Russian
Federation, India, Pakistan, Qatar and others, as well
as representatives of the United Nations, the European
Union, NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Participants concluded that
regional stability and improved trade relations were
mutually interconnected factors. Mutual economic ties
should be developed both within the region and with
global markets. Developing commercial transit routes,
for example, on the basis of experience acquired within
the Northern Distribution Network, as well as the
plans of some Central Asian States and Afghanistan
to seek membership in the World Trade Organization,
could be steps in the right direction. On behalf of my
Government, I would like to thank all the participants
for their contributions. We are ready to share the
conclusions of the workshop with all interested parties.

With 2014 approaching, the international
community must remain committed to Afghanistan's
long-term stability. We look forward to reviewing the
progress of mutual commitments undertaken at the
Tokyo Conference by the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community. The principles of
good governance, the rule of law and human rights,
in particular the rights of women, are the basis for
sustained economic growth and development.

With the gradual downsizing of International
Security Assisantance Force troops in Afghanistan
and with the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF)
assuming lead responsibility for security across the
country, building public confidence in their capacity
to protect the population is critical. While security
challenges remain considerable in the country,
international support to build up the capacities of the
ANSF after 2014 and beyond is essential. Latvia has
already committed to providing financial support to the
ANSF starting from 2015.

The support to Afghanistan in security sector should
be accompanied by support in areas that will facilitate
Afghanistan's integration into regional and global
processes. In order to achieve a sustainable solution in
Afghanistan and in the region, the role of Central Asian
countries should be recognized. High-level dialogue
and cooperation with Central Asian countries should
be developed at different international forums, and
Latvia will contribute in that regard, including during
its presidency in the European Union Council in 2015.
Regional cooperation is also crucial in tackling such
global threats as terrorism and drug trafficking. The
NATO-Russia Council Project on Counter-Narcotics
Training, implemented in close cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, shows where
common interests and common efforts pay off. Latvia
has provided a continuous financial contribution to the
project and is currently considering the possibilities for
technical assistance in Central Asian countries.

Integration into regional and global economic
processes will require specialists and experts. The
Latvian Government is currently looking for new ways
to step up development assistance. Latvia is already
contributing to the capacity-building of Afghan
aviation and railroad experts and is considering new
fields of cooperation where Latvia's specific advantage
stands out, such as customs, border guard and training
medical specialists.
With many challenges and opportunities ahead
during the transition and beyond, only our common
commitment, efforts and constructive engagement can
ensure the security, stability and sustained economic
development of Afghanistan and the wider region.
Let me reassure the Council of Latvia's continuous
involvement in that regard.

