Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this wrap-up meeting on the work of the
Security Council. Meetings on this item are an
excellent opportunity for States Members of the
Organization that are not represented on the Council to
share their vision with regard to the work of this body.
The innovation of proposing a specific theme for the
meeting seems to me a valid initiative that could give
added value to the exercise in reflection that these
meetings should be.

The chosen theme is very propitious. Today, we
are far from the time immediately following the end of
the cold war, when we all nurtured the hope that, once
the obstacles created by the bipolar reality had been
overcome, the Security Council would recover its unity
and would be able to exercise its role of global
leadership in the settlement of international conflicts. I
speak of a world system based on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
current period is marked by uncertainty and instability,
which serve to heighten the possibility of conflict and
which may thus lead to an increase in post-conflict
situations in which the United Nations may be called
upon to play its role. Post-conflict situations are, by
their very nature, complex, and they invariably have
tragic humanitarian effects.

It is also promising that dialogue is taking place
in the Security Council in accordance with the mandate
the Charter has established for it. As we are all aware,
ensuring an adequate resolution of the issues remaining
at the end of armed conflicts, such as those the
Secretary-General referred to this morning, is
necessary to guarantee that peace is built on solid
foundations. The situation in Timor-Leste, which was
the subject of an open meeting of the Council the day
before yesterday, is a very clear example of this.
Timor-Leste is frequently referred to as a success for
the United Nations. The case of Timor-Leste proves
that coordinated action on the multilateral level can be
effective and that the international community is
capable of acting through the Security Council.
However, we must recognize that the same attention
from the international community will also be required
in the new situation.

The role of the United Nations in post-conflict
periods is not limited to action coordinated within the
Council. Many of the tasks involved in post-conflict
stabilization processes entail creating conditions
favourable to economic and social development,
something that goes well beyond the Council's
mandate to maintain international peace and security. It
is therefore most appropriate that the Secretary-General
and the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council are present at this
meeting.

Efforts to ensure better coordination between the
actions of the main bodies of the United Nations, as
well as between other bodies and institutions, are not
new. When Brazil was last a member of the Security
Council, in 1998 and 1999, the Council held an open
debate devoted to the topic of the maintenance of
international peace and security and post-conflict
peace-building. That discussion underscored the need
for the bodies of the United Nations system - and in
particular those directly involved in post-conflict
peace-building - to cooperate closely and to maintain
a dialogue in accordance with their respective
responsibilities. Last year, that approach resulted in the
establishment of a coordinating mechanism between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council for African countries emerging from armed
conflict, of which the ad hoc advisory group on
Guinea-Bissau was the first manifestation.

Coordination with regional organizations is
another avenue that should be explored. The holding,
on 11 April this year, of a meeting with regional
organizations to discuss how to handle new challenges
to international peace and security is an initiative that
should be expanded.

In a world of expanding globalization, the nature
of the challenges we face today lends more truth to the
notion that we cannot legitimately aspire solely to
promoting a more peaceful world. At a time of
transition, such as the current period, multilateral
institutions are more necessary than ever. Because of
its political nature and legal standing, the Charter of
the United Nations continues to be the most suitable
tool for creating a climate of cooperation conducive to
preventing, insofar as possible, international conflicts
and to finding coherent solutions for the post-conflict
period.

