Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank Ambassador Nishida for
his first 90-day report as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I take this opportunity to hail his predecessor,
Ambassador Takasu, for his outstanding work as Chair
of the Committee.

The general context is known to all of us and is a
source of serious concerns for my country. These
concerns are confirmed by the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), dated 6 September (S/2010/465, annex, enclosure). Please allow me, as my British
colleague has done, to recall some elements of the
report.

First, the report stresses that Iran continues to
refuse to respect its international commitments and to
meet the requirements of the Security Council and of
the IAEA Board of Governors. In addition, Iran
continues its activities to enrich uranium to 3.5 per
cent and 20 per cent and its heavy water related
projects, in violation of repeated demands by the
international community and in the absence of any
credible civilian purpose. Today I wish to reiterate that
Iran's nuclear programme has no credible civilian
application.

Iran's cooperation with the Agency is insufficient
and is worsening, as the Director General recently
stressed at the opening of the IAEA Board of
Governors meeting. Inter alia, Iran has objected to the
appointment of two IAEA inspectors in June and it
continues not to cooperate in resolving pending issues,
including those linked to the military dimension of the
Iranian programme.

I also note that Iran has announced its intention to
begin construction of a third uranium enrichment
facility during the first half of 2011, without providing
the information requested by the Agency and counter to
its Safeguards Agreement; and it has done so after the
revelation of a clandestine enrichment facility in Qom.

France is also extremely concerned by Iran's
activities beyond the nuclear issue, in particular arms
exports and its ballistic missiles programme. Iran
continues activities related to ballistic missiles that
could deliver a nuclear weapon, including launches
making use of ballistic missile technology. Such
activities are contrary to resolution 1929 (2010), in
particular its paragraph 9.

Our response must be decisive. The Council and
the 1737 Committee must focus on these violations of
Security Council resolutions and provide an
appropriate response. Here, we hope that the panel of
experts which will be established will be able to
investigate these violations in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution.

Our aim, of course, is dialogue. But it must be
acknowledged that Iran has refused to respond to our
offers of dialogue and cooperation since 2006. The ball
is in Iran's court: Iran must regain the trust of the
international community.

The measures adopted by the Security Council
are clearly not an end in themselves. Their goal is to
convince Iran to negotiate in line with the dual-track
approach that the six countries have consistently
advocated. To be fully effective and attain their
objectives, these measures must be scrupulously
implemented by all and their application must be
strictly monitored. That is the responsibility of all
parties and of the 1737 Committee.

For its part, the European Union, by adopting
measures on 26 July to rigorously implement
resolution 1929 (2010), is fully playing its role; other
countries have decided to follow that example.

As Ambassador Nishida did in his briefing, my
country encourages all delegations that have not yet
done so to submit their national reports to the 1737
Committee on the implementation of resolution 1929
(2010).

It is also essential for the effectiveness of the
Council's work and for its credibility that the
international community ensure full respect for the
measures adopted by the Security Council. The 1737
Committee plays an essential role in that respect. The
Committee's activities reveal the scope and diversity of
Iran's practices to evade the sanctions and thus confirm
that we must maintain great vigilance. It is important
10-53435
for the 1737 Committee to know that Member States
are properly implementing these measures. It must
continue to investigate alleged cases of violations
submitted to it and continue its assistance and outreach
activities.

My country welcomes the fact that at the end of
July the 1737 Committee was able to adopt a complete
work programme for the coming year. We encourage
all States to cooperate with the 1737 Committee and
with the future panel of experts established by
resolution 1929 (2010), which should enhance the
effectiveness of the Committee's actions. In that
context, my country fully endorses the desire expressed
by the Permanent Representative of Japan that the
panel of experts be rapidly constituted.

