Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Government of Mexico, I express our
condemnation of the cowardly terrorist act which has
taken the lives of so many and has injured even more in
Turkey. We express the solidarity of the people and
Government of Mexico to the families of the victims
and to the Governments of Turkey and the United
Kingdom on these events. I should like also to
welcome our guests, Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Mr. Abdulkader Shareef, Mr. Keli Walubita, and Mr.
Ibrahima Fall and to express thanks for their statements
and the statement of the Ambassador of Italy, Mr.
Spatafora, as well as for his participation at this
meeting.

I also wish to recognize the fact that you included
on the Security Council's agenda for this month the
subject of an international conference on the Great
Lakes region. It could not have been otherwise, since
Angola has the sensitivity and insight to determine that
an initiative of that nature deserves the Council's
unreserved support. Mexico recognizes the relevance
of an international conference given the regional
dimensions of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the economic, social and cultural links
uniting the peoples of the region, and therefore the
need to provide a regional solution to that conflict.

We congratulate the Secretary-General on his
recent decision to appoint Mr. Fall to his current post
so that he can continue to pursue issues related to such
an international conference. We are sure that the joint
efforts of Mr. Fall and the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union
will be fruitful, since they are channelled towards
achieving a single objective.

Given the nature and dimensions of the conflict in
the region, there is a need, in our opinion, to also
involve the General Assembly and other organs and
programmes of the United Nations system, including
the Bretton Woods institutions. Coordinated action is
urgent in order to define a regional strategy that
includes measures in areas such as peace and security,
democracy, regional integration and humanitarian and
social issues.

Above all, from our perspective, special attention
needs to be devoted to resolving the problems at the
roots of the conflict. The first of those - noted from
Mr. Shareef's statement - is the fact that one of the
major causes of the political and social instability in
the region is, to a great extent, underdevelopment and
poverty, which needs to be contemplated and
considered at the conference. From our point of view,
the conference needs to arrive at some solution or
initiative to resolve the problem of underdevelopment.
The second problem, from our perspective, is to
recommend some kind of system to halt the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and explosive
ordnance, which are also at the root of the region's
problem.

My country welcomes the resolve of the region's
countries to work on the preparatory process of the
conference. We trust that the goal can be attained
within the time-frame established by the national
coordinators at the Nairobi meeting in June. With that
conviction, my Government offers its full support for
the conference's objectives and programme of work.
The goal is ambitious, but it has indisputable merits
nevertheless. The challenges are many, but they can be
overcome with the necessary political will to do so and
with the Security Council's commitment to shouldering
its responsibility in promoting a lasting peace in the
Great Lakes region.

