The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, contained in document S/2003/231.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statements of its
President of 13 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/35)
and of 28 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/8), and
welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
26 February 2003 (S/2003/231), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of the country,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council reiterates its firm
support for the Somali National Reconciliation
Process and the ongoing Somali National
Reconciliation Conference in Kenya, launched
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and led by the
Government of Kenya. The Council strongly
encourages all parties throughout Somalia to
participate in the process, which offers a unique
opportunity for all Somalis to end the suffering of
their people and to restore peace and stability to
their country. The Council demands that the
Somalia parties abide by and implement
expeditiously the decisions adopted throughout

the process, including the Declaration on
Cessation of Hostilities and the Structures and
Principles of the Somali National Reconciliation
Process, on 27 October 2002, hereafter referred to
as the 'Eldoret Declaration' (S/2002/l359), as
well as the December 2002 agreement reached by
five Mogadishu faction leaders and the
Transitional National Government regarding the
restoration of peace and security in Mogadishu
and a subsequent agreement among the five
faction leaders which included a commitment to
make efforts to reopen the international airport
and seaport in Mogadishu, as mentioned in
paragraph 26 of the report of the Secretary-
General of 26 February 2003 (S/2003/23l).

"The Security Council commends the
Government of Kenya for its crucial role in
facilitating the Somali National Reconciliation
Process, and calls on the IGAD Technical
Committee comprised of the three Frontline States
(Djibouti, Ethiopia and Kenya) to continue their
active role in promoting the Process. The Council
welcomes the appointment of Ambassador Bethuel
Kiplagat as the Special Envoy of Kenya to the
Process. The Council also welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Muhammad Ali Foum as the
Special Envoy of the African Union for Somalia,
the generous financial contribution of the
European Union, Norway and the United States,
and the sustained engagement of their envoys, as
well as those of the IGAD Partners Forum and the
League of Arab States. The Council strongly
encourages their continued active and positive role
in support of the reconciliation process.

"The Security Council notes that the six
reconciliation committees of the Somali National
Reconciliation Process have continued their work
despite difficulties faced by the Somali
participants regarding representation. The
Council urges all parties involved to fully
participate in the six reconciliation committees
and to resolve the representation issue, and
welcomes the establishment of an arbitration
committee in this regard. The Council supports
the Secretary-General's commitment to assist in
the work of the six reconciliation committees
with technical support and relevant expertise.

"The Security Council expresses its strong

regret that even after the signing of the 'Eldoret
Declaration', fighting continued to break out in
Somalia, in particular in Mogadishu and Baidoa.
The Council condemns all those involved in the
fighting and calls for an immediate end to all acts
of violence in Somalia. The Council shares the
Secretary-General's conclusion that it is those
that have weapons of war who continue to hold
the people of Somalia hostage to the cycle of
violence. The Council also shares the Secretary-
General's view that these people will be held
accountable by the Somali people and the
international community for their actions if they
persist on the path of confrontation and conflict.
In this regard, the Security Council welcomes the
establishment of a mechanism by the IGAD
Frontline States to monitor compliance with the
'Eldoret Declaration' and their intention to
consider appropriate measures against all
individuals and groups violating the 'Eldoret
Declaration' and December 2002 agreements.

"The Security Council notes with serious
concern the continued flow of weapons and
ammunition supplies to Somalia, as well as
allegations of the role of some of the
neighbouring States in breach of the arms
embargo established by resolution 733 (1992) of
23 January 1992, and calls on all States and other
actors to comply scrupulously with the arms
embargo. The Council welcomes the work of the
Panel of Experts, established pursuant to
resolution 1425 (2002) of 22 July 2002, and
expresses its intention to give full consideration
to and take appropriate action regarding the
Panel's report as a step towards reinforcing the
arms embargo and disarmament.

"The Security Council, insisting that
persons and entities must not be allowed to take
advantage of the situation in Somalia to finance,
plan, facilitate, support or commit terrorist acts
from the country, emphasizes that efforts to
combat terrorism in Somalia are inseparable from
the establishment of peace and governance in the
country. In this spirit, the Council urges the
international community to provide assistance to
Somalia for the further and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern regarding the humanitarian situation in
Somalia, in particular the internally displaced

persons, especially in the area of Mogadishu. The
Council urges the Somalia leaders to live up to
their commitments under the 'Eldoret
Declaration', to facilitate the delivery of much-
needed humanitarian assistance, to assure the
safety of all international and national aid
workers, to provide immediate safe access for all
humanitarian personnel and to support the return
and reintegration of refugees. The Council calls
on Member States to respond urgently and
generously to the United Nations Consolidated
Inter-Agency Appeal for 2003.

"The Security Council notes that while some
parts of Somalia remain unstable, relative stability
continues to prevail in significant portions of the
country. The Council welcomes the evolution of
the community-based peace-building activities and
calls for the acceleration of comprehensive peace-
building activities. The Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue putting in place, in a
coherent manner, preparatory activities on the
ground for a comprehensive post-conflict peace-
building mission in Somalia once security
conditions permit, as stipulated in the statement by
the President of the Council of 28 March 2002
(S/PRST/2002/8), which should take into account
combating poverty and strengthening public
institutions.

"The Security Council stresses that a
comprehensive post-conflict peace-building
programme with special emphasis on
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration will be an important contribution
towards the restoration of peace and stability in
Somalia. The Council welcomes the contribution
of Ireland, Italy and Norway to the Trust Fund for
Peace-building in Somalia and calls on other
donors to do so without delay.

"The Security Council commends the work
done by the United Nations Country Team, the
Red Cross and Red Crescent movements and non-
governmental organizations in support of peace
and reconciliation in Somalia. The Council
encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
support actively the IGAD-sponsored Somalia
National Reconciliation Process and to continue
to implement and enhance ongoing humanitarian
and peace-building activities on the ground.

"The Security Council reiterates its This statement will be issued as a document of
commitment to assist the Somali parties and the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/2.
support the IGAD mediation in the implementation
of the steps and conclusions for peace, as adopted
throughout the Somalia National Reconciliation
Process."

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
