Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you personally,
Mr. President, as well as the Chinese Government, on
your accession ofthe presidency ofthe Security Council
for the month of July. I also welcome the organization
of this debate, which your country, the People's
Republic of China, has decided to devote to the theme
"Enhancing African capacities in the areas ofpeace and
security". Senegal welcomes the prominent role played
by China and its contribution to building peace and
security in the world, especially in Africa. This is an
issue to which Senegal attaches great importance, and
it was highlighted in the discussions during the debate
(see S/PV.7816) that Senegal organized last November
on the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.

Allow me as well to express my gratitude for the
important briefing by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, to whom we reiterate our support for his
firm determination to work for the promotion of peace
and security in the world, in particular in Africa, and,
above all, for the stress that he has placed on prevention
issues, which are very important questions. We also
thank the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, His Excellency Mr. Ismail Chergui, for
his important briefing, which has also shed light on
our debate.

Today's debate is certainly part of a move to
maximize the enormous potential of the African Union
and the African regional economic communities in
the area of peace and security, a potential that, if used
wisely, could make it possible to effectively tackle the
immense challenges that the continent faces in this
sphere. Senegal is convinced of the importance of a
strategic partnership in the efforts aimed at maintaining
peace and security in Africa. We therefore believe that
strengthening African capabilities in this area must be
approached as part of the current discussions on how to
intensify the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union and the continent's regional
economic communities. From that point of view, my
delegation welcomes the positive trend to strengthen

partnerships in the area of peace and security between
the two organizations.
In that regard, the visit of Secretary-General
Guterres to African Union headquarters in Addis
Ababa this past January and the visit made by the
Chair of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, to United Nations Headquarters in New
York in April 2017, in the framework of the first United
Nations-African Union annual conference, reflects a
renewed dynamic that must be welcomed. It was during
that periodic meeting that the joint Framework for a
Strengthened Partnership in the Peace and Security
was signed.

With the experience of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, under African leadership, deployed by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, or of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
to just mention a few, the African Union and its
regional organizations were able to show their ability
to provide front-line responses to the conflicts erupting
on the continent.

At the subregional level, the tangible results
of operations carried out by ECOWAS in resolving
several crisis, namely, with the deployment of its
Ceasefire Monitoring Group, in numerous theatres of
operations, including in Liberia at the time, as well as
its missions in Guinea-Bissau and recently its mission
in The Gambia, reflect the crucial role that African
subregional organizations can play in promoting
peace on the continent. However, the lessons learned,
specifically in the transition from African Union peace
operations towards United Nations peacekeeping
operations, shows the limits that African organizations
have from the point of view oflogistics, operations and
capabilities. To that we must add the complexity of the
new challenges within the area of peace and security,
in particular in Africa, with the increase in violent
extremism, the proliferation of terrorist groups, which
feed on all kinds of criminal activities, while using
sophisticated tools and techniques, not to mention
cybercrime, which threatens both the sovereignty of
States and the safety of its populations.

With more than 20,000 registered attacks a year
in Africa, cybersecurity is one of the major challenges
that has sorely tested our capabilities to tackle the
artful and sophisticated tactics of its perpetrators.
Mindful of the seriousness of the problem, Senegal
and Spain co-organized in December 2016 an Arria
Formula meeting on the subject with the participation
of the business community, legal experts and national
and international security agencies.

Maritime security is another major challenge that
must command the Council's attention - an issue
that was in fact widely discussed in October 2016 in
Lome' at the first African Union Summit devoted to the
topic, after which the Charter on Maritime Security
and Safety and Development in Africa was adopted. It
will be included in the African Union's 2050 Integrated
Maritime Strategy.

As we can see with the several initiatives under
way, the African States concerned have, fortunately,
strengthened their mobilization and their cooperation to
tackle these threats to peace and security despite their
very limited capabilities. I would also like to welcome,
by way of example, the efforts of the countries that
participated in the Joint Multinational Force, which
made it possible to reduce the operational means and
the advance of Boko Haram.

I also welcome efforts at inter-African coordination,
supported by the relevant United Nations agencies, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, to develop holistic and strategic approaches
to better tackle threats, including terrorist threats, and
to favour the development of synergies between the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa and the Sahel, on the one
hand, and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa, on the
other, in particular in implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. I would also like to
mention the establishment of the Group of Five States
for the Sahel Joint Force, whose deployment was
welcome by the Security Council through resolution
2359 (2017).

Beyond those very commendable efforts, we must
nevertheless strengthen international mobilization and
adopt an approach that would favour an analysis of the
root causes of conflicts. In that way, we can forever
avert violence and wars, which seriously jeopardize
the future of many African countries. That is the spirit
behind the Dakar International Forum on Peace and
Security in Africa, which Mr. Macky Sall, President of
the Republic of Senegal, committed to continue since
it was first organized in 2014. The first three Forums
experienced great international success, bringing
together approximately 500 high-level participants
from around the globe. That provided an opportunity
for a fruitful exchange and to better identify the security
and strategic challenges faced by Africa. It also made
it possible to bring out new approaches in defence,
security and development policies and to strengthen
African partnerships with international authorities.

I would like to invite you, Mr. President, and
Secretary-General Guterres to the fourth Forum,
planned for Dakar on 13 and 14 November, which
will be devoted to the new strategic challenges of the
continent. The theme will be entitled "Current security
challenges in Africa - towards integrated solutions".
It goes without saying that strengthening African
capabilities in the area of peace and security will be
at the heart of the discussions. The establishment of
the African Union Peace and Security Architecture is
an expression of the African Union's desire to tackle
head-on issues that are linked to peace and security on
the continent despite the number of challenges and the
scope of the difficulties.

In that regard, I would like personally to welcome
the role of Mr. Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, in this initiative. We also
note the adoption of the African Peace and Security
Architecture road map for the period 2016-2020, which
aims, among other things, to prevent and to lift obstacles
to the full functionality of the Peace and Security
Architecture, something we should work towards in
order to qualitatively strengthen the capabilities of
the African Union in the area of peace and security.
Strengthening the current partnership with the United
Nations at the strategic and operational levels should
allow the African Union to acquire the appropriate
tools for effective action given the evolving security
challenges that Africa faces, and which require the
taking on board of the dimension of sustaining peace,
in accordance with the spirit of the idential resolutions
on peacebuilding adopted in 2016 by the General
Assembly and the Security Council (respectively, resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016)).

At a time when the African Union is assuming
greater responsibility in the area of peace and
security on the continent - which, let us remember,
hosts 10 of the 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations - it is disturbing to note that the lack
of predictable and sustainable financing limits the
potential of the pan-African organization in this
area. My delegation welcomes the efforts carried out
thus far in the search for predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing mechanisms for African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council. The adoption, in November 2016 during
Senegal's presidency of the Council, of resolution 2320
(2016) ushered in an important stage for real prospects
to deepen our discussion on the best way of ensuring
sustainable and predictable financing for African
Union peace operations.

The four financing options identified by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/454) on the
possible modalities to authorize African Union peace
operations and the provision of support to those
operations are robust, realistic and could help the Council
take appropriate measures in this area. We therefore
hope that the Council will demonstrate all ofthe political
will required to appropriately address this important
issue, by working collectively in a constructive spirit
to adopt a substantive draft resolution that establishes
the principle that peacekeeping operations mandated or
authorized by the African Union and with the consent
of the Security Council must be financed through
assessed contributions from the United Nations budget,
with decisions on the funding of specific missions to be
undertaken made on a case by case basis.

