Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to join others in thanking the briefers - Mr. Feltman,
Ms. Bokova, Mr. Fedotov and Brigadier General
Parrulli - for their insight on this important topic. I
welcome the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) and
commend the leadership of Italy and France in that
regard. The resolution is a significant step forward on
this subject leading to concrete actions.

We are witnessing tragic instances in which cultural
heritage is targeted to be deliberately destroyed, looted
and smuggled by terrorist groups for the purpose of
achieving or advancing their nefarious goals. Japan
shares the widespread concern about the situation
and strongly condemns those acts. The international
community should promptly and collectively respond to
that challenge, and I would like to state several insights
that Japan emphasizes in that regard.

First, the universalization of the international
frameworks to protect cultural heritage is crucial.
Japan is a State party to the Second Protocol to the
Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,
the Operational Guidelines for the Implementation
of the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property of 1970, and other
related conventions. Under those legal frameworks,
Japan introduced various domestic measures to prevent
the illicit trafficking of cultural heritage. I would like
to call on other States that are not yet party to those
conventions to join us in our efforts.

Secondly, we should support the meaningful
activities of UNESCO in the area. Accordingly,
Japan established the Japanese Funds-in-trust for the
Preservation of World Cultural Heritage, and we have
thus far contributed $68 million to that fund. Through
UNESCO, we have supported many projects in conflict
areas, including Afghanistan, Cambodia and Iraq.
Furthermore, I would like to underline the importance
of the documentation and archiving of data related
to cultural heritage. That would help minimize the
potential damage by terrorist groups as well as facilitate
criminal justice procedures.

Moreover, we should focus on capacity-building
efforts. It is vital to foster human resources in targeted
countries for the protection and restoration of cultural
heritage. Training in such areas as theft prevention,
early warning and the relocation of cultural heritage
in armed conflict must be carried out for the sake
of preparedness. Sharing best practices and lessons
learned among intelligence organizations such as
UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and INTERPOL is particularly relevant in
that respect. I am convinced that implementing such
measures would contribute to preventing terrorist
groups from achieving their goals.

Japan has been actively engaged in international
cooperation since the early post-war period. The
Japanese people understand how cultural heritage
enriches our minds and lives through teaching us about
our past. To steal or destroy cultural heritage is to steal
or destroy our past and future. It is therefore clear that
such actions seriously undermine international peace
and stability.

Japan stands ready to continue working together
with the other Member States and international
organizations to preventing such atrocities.

