Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to begin by expressing our appreciation for
the initiative of the Mexican presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this debate, and to congratulate
it on its work on and commitment to this issue as Chair
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Argentina recently presented its report to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, specifically
including its implementation of the pertinent Optional
Protocol ratified by our country in 2002. We join in the
call for the prompt ratification of the Protocol with a
view to its universalization.

We wish to underline that there are no children
under 18 years of age among the members of the armed
forces of the Argentine Republic. Since 1994, military
service has been voluntary. The law establishes a
minimum age of 18 years of age and stipulates that the
rights safeguarding human dignity, recognized, adhered
to and practiced by our country, constitute the
foundation of the drafting and enacting of specific
norms of procedure, which must be complied with and
demanded by all citizens if omitted. Laws, military
rules and regulations and international conventions that
govern human activities and behaviours within the
armed forces must include and guarantee the necessary
safeguards to citizens working for the national defence
system, as well as its goals and ends, which must be in
accordance with the paramount interests of the nation.

Armed forces educational institutions are
dependent from the Ministry of Defence and impart
education at the starting, primary and secondary levels.
Their curriculums are analogous to those of other
centres for public education in the country and
governed by national laws and the resolutions of the
Federal Council for Education. A review has been
initiated of all the disciplinary regimes and rules and
regulations of conduct currently in force at military
secondary education institutions in order to align them
with the full protection of rights.

Regarding the recruitment of underage girls and
boys, until 2009 graduates from military secondary
schools who had received military training became part
of the country's military reserves. Since the decision to
receive such an education and become part of the
reserves falls to parents, the Ministry of Defence will
implement, starting this year, an instance for the
ratification or revocation of such a decision by the
young persons involved, which will be enforced upon
their turning 18 years old.

Reports from the field indicate important
progress in the implementation of resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009), such as the conclusion of
action plans by States and parties to conflicts, and
other concrete measures, such as the liberation of
children and programmes for psychosocial treatment,
reintegration and the re-establishment of rights. On the
other hand, the global situation remains devastating,
and cases of child recruitment and extreme forms of
violence against children, including mutilation and
sexual violence, persist. These call for the maintenance
and strengthening of mechanisms to work actively on
this issue. The parties must pursue their dialogue with
the mechanisms of the United Nations and progress in
the adoption and full implementation of action plans to
that end.

No argument can be validly made to justify
abhorrent attacks against the most vulnerable boys and
girls, who are not safe even inside their schools.
Governments and the various instances of the United
Nations system must fully cooperate with the Special
Representative in her work to implement the mandates
of the 2005 and 2008 resolutions through the provision
of necessary information, cooperation and access. On
the other hand, we believe that the Security Council
must continue to include a specific mandate on this
issue in all peacekeeping, peacebuilding or political
missions, and to incorporate specific advisers.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
efforts made to date by the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, the Special Representative,
UNICEF, the monitoring and reporting mechanism, and
the child protection advisers. The international
community cannot stand idle in the face of practices
and abuses as grave as those identified in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 181), and we must work
on the important recommendations put forward in that
document to strengthen the system and to bring
perpetrators to justice.

We recognize that the protection of children in all
its aspects is an issue falling primarily to the General
Assembly, and in this regard we support efforts to
strengthen the mandates of existing mechanisms and
the coordination of efforts. Argentina reiterates its
ongoing commitment to the protection of children from
all forms of violence and its readiness to continue
cooperating with the Working Group and all
mechanisms that strive to promote and protect the
rights of children and to allow them to be just what
they are - boys and girls.

