Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Ambassador Motoc for his report
to us on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Thanks to his
efforts, the Committee has now been able to establish
itself and take all the administrative decisions it needed
to ensure that its substantive work can proceed well.

Recent proliferation crises have highlighted the
need for coordinated action by the international
community. They have also shown that there is a need
to supplement the international commitments of States
with domestic legislative and regulatory measures and
also by effective control mechanisms.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), which
my country co-sponsored, was an important milestone
in the efforts of the international community. The
Committee is now going to be able to start considering
the national reports. As we know, half of the Member
States have already submitted their reports, and we
must encourage those countries that have not yet done
so to submit their national reports as soon as possible.
It is also important that countries that have technical
difficulties be able to get assistance they might need to
draft their reports. Reading the reports that have
already been submitted shows that overall, in our
opinion, they are of good quality. There are some
indications of requests for assistance in order to
implement the measures to meet the obligations in the
resolution.

I believe it is our duty to provide rapid follow-up
to the reports. When States have taken measures or
indicated that they are about to take measures to be in
compliance with the resolution, they should be
recognized as soon as possible. When they have
requested assistance, the Committee should help them
obtain such assistance from other Members of the
United Nations. France believes the Committee should
start work quickly, in a spirit of cooperation, in order
to attain its goals. To that end, we have begun
considering the reports that have been received,
particularly those to be considered by Subcommittee
III, of which we are a member.

As the reports are translated into the official
languages of the United Nations, and their substantive
consideration can begin, we will be submitting our
observations to members of the Committee and to the
experts for their information. We trust our contribution
will facilitate the effective and transparent work of the
Committee.

