Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Annabi for his very
clear briefing, which perfectly reflects the outstanding
job being done by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) under the
effective leadership of Mr. Vieira de Mello.

I wish to welcome Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr.
Jose Ramos-Horta. Their statements bear witness to
their courage and conviction and give a precise idea of
the tremendous challenges that have already been
faced. They indicate the steps that remain to be taken
in order to attain our common objective - the
establishment of an independent, democratic and viable
East Timor - in the best possible circumstances and as
soon as possible. We wish them every success in their
courageous endeavour.

A statement will be made later by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union and I shall therefore confine myself to making a
few comments.

I wish first to welcome the progress that has been
made since our meeting of 5 April. It is broad and is
helping to make UNTAET a success.

The main piece of good news is the fact that the
process of preparing the elections to the Constituent
Assembly is going smoothly. As noted by the
Secretariat, the timetable is definitely tight if
registration is to be completed by 20 June and the
elections are to be held on the symbolic date of 30
August. Trying to respect these deadlines is, however,
essential if momentum is not to be lost and if the aims
of adopting a constitution in the following three
months and achieving independence later are to be met.
The transition should be as speedy as possible.
Speed is a prerequisite for success. Several examples
of transitional authorities that have achieved their
objectives testify to this, such as the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia, which lasted 18
months, and the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium,
which lasted barely two years.

A speedy transition should certainly not,
however, be synonymous with disengagement. The
tremendous investment that the international
community has quite rightly made in Timor should not
be wasted. More than $1 billion in multilateral
assistance has been mobilized since October 1999.
Today, one quarter of active Blue Helmets are deployed
in UNTAET.

The transition must be flexible in order to
respond as closely as possible to the needs of the
Timorese. That is why we must answer the following
questions: Is it, for instance, desirable for the
expenditure linked to the cost of maintaining the
military component to be 100 times greater than that of
training of Timorese police? Is it desirable for the
civilian police component, the utility of which is
recognized by all, to be only one fifth the size of the
military component? Is it necessary to maintain a
military component of approximately 8,200 men, while
barely 2,500 of these are stationed in the western part
of East Timor to address the very real threat of militias
active in West Timor? Are the UNTAET Blue Helmets
in a better position than the civilian police units to
maintain law and order?

These are all questions that we must ask if we are
to undertake the necessary adaptations at the right time.
The interim report that has just been issued contains
sensible recommendations on UNTAET's desirable
actions, maintaining the status quo, until the elections
of 30 August. Clearly, there is no question of changing
the international presence in the electoral context. As
the Secretary-General rightly notes in his interim
report, the electoral period will require particular
vigilance.

It would be useful, however, if the next report,
due in July, were to contain fresh recommendations on
the possible ways in which UNTAET can be adapted
after the elections but before independence. These
recommendations should take account first and
foremost of security conditions, needs on the ground
and the wishes of the Timorese. There can be no
compromise, for instance, where the security needs of
personnel are concerned. In this respect, the verdict
rendered by the Indonesian trial court in the case of the
murder of three workers of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
very disappointing, to say the least. France welcomes
the decision of the Indonesian prosecutor to appeal the
sentences.

Particular attention must also be paid to the
crucial question of the return of refugees. We note the
intention of the Indonesian Government to organize the
registration of refugees in West Timor, in principle on
6 June. This registration is supposed to be preceded by
an information campaign in the camps from 25 to 27
May. Where do the preparations for this stand? What
will be the roles of UNHCR and UNTAET? Will the
security assessment mission of the Office of the United
Nations Security Coordinator, announced in the report
for the month of May, actually take place? Is it likely
to lead to a revised classification to level 5, which
would authorize the return of United Nations personnel
to the camps of West Timor?

We must consider the process of registering
refugees in West Timor in conjunction with the
electoral timetable in East Timor. Merging these
processes is no easy task. The Indonesian authorities
are indicating that, on the basis of registration on 6
June, they will be unable to undertake the first return
operations until 28 June. For its part, UNTAET expects
to complete the electoral rolls by 20 June. How can we
reconcile these two timetables? Are special procedures
envisaged? We must avoid creating a time bomb for the
new Timorese democracy by Virtue of a group of
refugees not having been able to participate in the
voting.

Equally careful preparation must go into the post-
independence period. The first stage of those
preparations has begun with the setting up of planning
structures, namely, a post-UNTAET working group in
Dili and an integrated mission task force in New York.
These two structures will serve as valuable tools in the
preparation of the recommendations to be presented to
donors at Canberra in mid-June and, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1338 (2001), to the
Council itself by 31 July.

It would be interesting if, under the presidency of
China, in July our Council were able to carry out its
discussions in the presence of representatives of the
United Nations Development Programme, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, as
was the case last January. None of the players who will
have a major part to play in the international presence
during the post-independence period should be left out
of the deliberation process.

