Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, the head of the Office of Military
Affairs, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, and the
Force Commanders for their informative statements
this morning.

We welcome the Force Commanders who have
joined us today in the Council. New York is indeed far
from the battlefield, so the opportunity to hear
firsthand from the military leadership from the field is
indeed valuable. We see merit in convening such
engagements on a regular basis, and we thank the
German delegation for this initiative.

The Security Council has stated clearly in the
past - and South Africa fully endorses this view -
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
deployed only as an accompaniment and not as an
alternative to political strategies for the resolution of
conflicts.

Over the years, peacekeeping has become a
complex and multifaceted undertaking due to the
changing nature of conflicts. We are mindful of the
compounding effects and challenges prevailing in the
era of intra-State conflicts. In most cases, belligerents
are increasingly well resourced and equipped, often
wield great influence and do not conform to the rules
of engagement. No longer are conflict-affected areas
only failed States; they possess strong military
capacities and robust political leadership.

In response to these challenges, the United
Nations has to act with the necessary dynamism and
agility. It is therefore critical, for us in the Council and
the United Nations political and military leadership on
the ground, to be continuously concerned with
mobilizing and maintaining the political support of all
stakeholders, especially of those nations in which the
Council mandates peacekeeping missions, and to
respect the sovereignty of all States.

The Council also has a particularly important role
throughout a mission's lifespan to support efforts to
improve cooperation and coordination with regional
and subregional organizations and other partners. The
Security Council's responses to the crises on the
African continent are a constant reminder of the
ongoing need for greater cooperation and coordination
with regional organizations, especially the African
Union. Nothing will replace African leadership and
solutions for African problems.

Today we should reflect on, inter alia, our ability
to optimally leverage the security umbrella provided by
peacekeeping operations in the field and to find
political solutions to conflicts. The Council should
adopt coherent, comprehensive strategies that
effectively translate the mandates of peacekeeping
operations into clear, credible and achievable
outcomes. We should reflect on ensuring that
operations are sufficiently matched with appropriate
resources and that they are adequately prepared and
deployed in a timely manner at the desired operational
strength and capacity. We should make sure that the
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for
peacekeeping operations are adequate and that the
Council is sufficiently aware of the resource and field
support implications of its decisions.

These are just some of the important issues that
could help our collective efforts to understand the
challenges that we face at a military level across the
spectrum of peacekeeping operations. We believe that
by collectively addressing these issues we will make a
significant contribution to improving the overall
performance of United Nations peacekeeping.

Protecting the lives of ordinary civilians, who are
all too often the innocent victims of instability and
strife in conflict zones, is paramount. International law
provides that the primary responsibility to protect
civilians rests with the States. The protection of
civilians is by its nature politically very sensitive, yet it
is a critical and vital mandated task. Given the nature
of recent conflicts, the protection of civilians becomes
a necessity, and the role of regional organizations and
the international community is even more important.

We are encouraged by ongoing efforts to address
the shortage of military assets such as helicopters. We
cannot afford to deploy troops in foreign territories and
then expect them to be everywhere at once without the
necessary resources or, in some cases, when not
operating at full strength. We owe it to our troops on
the ground to ensure that they receive the desired level
of support.

However, we must always emphasize the
importance of United Nations peacekeeping operations
always acting in accordance with the principles of
impartiality, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and in accordance with international law and
human rights law.

In conclusion, my delegation pays tribute to all
the men and women in uniform who have served and
who continue to serve in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we commend their dedication and
courage. We pay special tribute to those who have paid
the ultimate price in the service of peace and humanity.

