Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): My delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).

The negotiations are still beset by difficulties. The
conditions set by resolution 971 (1995) for an extended
presence of UNOMIG in Georgia have been only partially
met. Nevertheless, we believe that a strong commitment to
a political settlement of the crisis should be confirmed at
two different levels. First, there should be support for the
negotiations, under the auspices of the United Nations and
with the contribution of the Russian Federation as a
facilitator and of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which should participate
in every stage of the negotiations and of the reconciliation
process. Secondly, there should be an active UNOMIG
presence in the field and constructive collaboration
between the United Nations Observer Mission and the
Commonwealth of Independent States peace-keeping
force. UNOMIG's presence will foster complete
compliance with the cease-fire, respect for the
disarmament measures provided for by the Agreement on
a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces, signed almost
exactly one year ago in Moscow, and the creation of the
conditions needed to guarantee the safe return of refugees,
particularly to the Gali region.

We continue to be concerned by the attitude taken
mainly by one of the parties towards the institutional
negotiations. This attitude may not be totally compatible
with the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
that have been reaffirmed in all the Council's resolutions
and presidential statements on this matter and reflected in
the OSCE's Paris Charter.

The above-mentioned difficulties also seem to lead
to a cycle in which the dim prospect of a political
settlement is compounded by the failure of the
Quadripartite Commission on refugees to meet for three
months. This encourages retaliation and violence by
militias against the refugees who have already returned.
In the Secretary-General's recent report, a different level
of responsibility seems to emerge from the episodes of
violence recorded. Serious concerns are raised by the
many murders, arrests and episodes of torture. These
incidents can, in fact, be considered a continuation of the
"ethnic cleansing" that raised concerns in the decisions of
the Budapest summit of the CSCE.

My delegation believes that significant aspects of the
process that must lead to a political settlement of the
crisis are defined more clearly in today's draft resolution
than in texts previously adopted by the Council. I refer,
in particular, to the following elements: mention of the
new constitution on which the Government of the
Republic of Georgia is actively working; the priority
given to the return of all refugees to their places of
origin, starting with the Gali region; inclusion of the
principles of the decision on Georgia taken at the CSCE's
Budapest summit; and emphasis of the UNOMIG
operation's need to contribute, realistically and within the
framework of its current mandate, to full respect for
human rights.

 

In our opinion these contents send a clear signal that
the Council has a well-defined orientation to the course of
the crisis and show that recourse to violence does not pay.

