Mr. Pyvovarov (Ukraine): With over 300 deaths
and disappearances ofjournalists since 1993 in Russia,
where in most cases the perpetrators have not been
brought to justice, the Russian Federation remains
one of the most dangerous places for journalists in the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and European region, with the highest number
of journalists brutally attacked and killed in the past
15 years.

The few Russian journalists and media outlets
that attempt to object to the reporting on events in
eastern Ukraine are attacked, harassed and threatened.
Moreover, the Russian authorities continue to
impose severe legislative restrictions that negatively
affect media plurality and threaten the free flow of
information, despite numerous warnings of the OSCE
Representative on Freedom of the Media. Among
those are amendments to Russia's criminal code that
further increase Government control of the Internet,
amendments to the law on advertising that lead to undue
media concentration in the hands of a few monopolies,
and amendments to the law on mass media, lowering
foreign ownership shares in media outlets to 20 per cent.
We invite the Security Council to pay due attention to
those issues threatening the freedom of the media in
Russia and beyond.

This Chamber, in which more than 30 meetings
have been dedicated to the situation in eastern Ukraine,
has heard a lot of Soviet-style propaganda cliches from
Russian representatives. Some have been pure lies;
some have even been funny. But all of them have been
unreal and taken, as we see it, from a parallel reality. I
should simply like to ask my Russian colleague whether
he himselfbelieves in what he says. For all the civilized
world, Russia's direct participation in fuelling and
creating the Ukrainian crisis is a fact - a proven, pure
and obvious fact.

I will not comment on all that we have heard from
our Russian colleague, because we hear the same thing
at every single meeting on Ukraine. We are of the
impression that the Russian delegation thinks that the
more it repeats its lies about the crisis in Donbas that
Russia has created, the greater will be its opportunities
to convince the world that all Russian tanks, weapons,
and militants, as well as the hundreds of dead and living,
captured soldiers from the Russian army, are nothing
more than the kind of fiction produced by Russia-24 or
Russia Today.

In this case, I would tell the Russian representative,

"Do not waste your time. You should direct your
massive, vibrant energy into resolving the huge
number of problems in your own country. Simply
get out of my land and let us and all of Europe live
in peace."

The meeting rose at 7.30 pm.
