Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see presiding over the
Security Council the Foreign Minister of Norway, a
State that is not only a neighbour here in the Council,
but also a geographical neighbour of Russia with which
we have the friendliest of relations in the political,
trade, economic and other areas.

We join in the sincere condolences that have been
expressed to the people and Government of
Afghanistan over the earthquake in the northern parts
of that country, which took a great toll in human life.

We are grateful to Deputy Secretary-General
Louise Frechette for her participation in today's
meeting and for the report she introduced on the
situation in Afghanistan, which provides a good basis
for our discussion.

For many years, the Council considered the
situation in Afghanistan from the perspective of
confronting the Taliban regime, which supported
international terrorism, encouraged the production of
and illicit trade in narcotic drugs, destroyed the
historical and cultural landmarks of Afghanistan,
flagrantly violated human rights and unleashed an open
civil war against its own people. Fortunately, those
dark days in the lives of Afghans are over. Thanks to
the collective efforts of the international community,
including the United Nations, the power of the Taliban
movement has crumbled and the country has entered a
new era in its life.

Like many Members of the United Nations, we
eagerly looked forward to the proposals on the new
role to be played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan's post-conflict recovery. We agree with the
assessment made in the Secretary-General's report of
the current situation in the country and the stress
placed on the various fields in which the United
Nations is to play a leadership role.

We support the recommendation on the
establishment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which, under the
guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, will be
responsible for ensuring that all forms of United

Nations assistance - political, human rights, law
enforcement, gender equality, emergency assistance,
economic rehabilitation and reconstruction - are

designed to restore a peaceful existence for the Afghan
people. The proposed structure and size of the Mission
is, on the one hand, to ensure effective international
participation in the recovery of Afghanistan and, on the
other, to provide first and foremost for the active
participation of Afghans themselves in the rebirth of
their country.

During the course of the recent visit to Moscow
of the head of the Interim Administration, Mr. Karzai,
and his negotiations with President Putin and Foreign
Minister Ivanov of Russia, we expressed our support
for the efforts of the Afghan authorities, under United
Nations auspices, to normalize the situation in the
country, to establish Government institutions at the
central and local levels and to restore social and
economic infrastructure. Emphasis was placed on the
importance of consistent compliance with the
provisions of the Bonn Agreement, which has become
the starting point for the formation of a stable Afghan
State and civil society. Following Mr. Karzai's visit to
Moscow, 17 memorandums were signed on cooperation
between ministries and agencies, representatives of
Russian business circles and the Afghan side. These
memorandums relate fundamentally to the construction
and restoration of petroleum and gas infrastructure,
energy installations and the delivery of Russian
agricultural vehicles, industrial equipment and various
other types of machinery to Afghanistan.

We value the important role of the international
community and of Norway, heading the Afghanistan
Assistance Coordination Authority, in providing
humanitarian assistance to that country. In the course
of the first phase of humanitarian operations, Russia
has also made its own contribution, providing direct
assistance of over $12 million to Afghanistan. We are
now preparing a project for providing assistance during
the second phase.

We are pleased that peaceful life in Afghanistan
is gradually being established. Afghans have begun to
go to the movies and museums; girls and boys are
attending schools; hospitals are opening.

The political process is also gaining momentum.
Active preparations are under way for the pan-Afghan
Loya Jirga in June, which will elect a Transitional
Authority. We believe it important to emphasize once
again that, in preparing for convening the Loya Jirga, it
is essential to ensure that the representatives of the
Taliban and their followers have no place in future
State institutions.

The most serious problem today is the problem of
ensuring security in Afghanistan. We regularly receive
reports on emerging hotbeds of conflict, in which the
remnants of the Taliban and Al Qaeda terrorist groups
are active. We are especially concerned by the presence
of a large number of foreign mercenaries, including
Chechens, among the terrorists.

We attach great importance to the activities of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), in
compliance with the mandate adopted by the Security
Council in resolution 1386 (2001). We believe that
ISAF is playing an important role in ensuring calm in
Kabul, allowing the Interim Administration to work
effectively. Obviously, questions relating to the
activities of the Force under resolution 1386 (2001)
must be coordinated with the Afghan authorities. If its
mandate must be prolonged or expanded, the Security
Council must be willing to consider doing so, bearing
in mind the requests of the acting authorities in
Afghanistan.

In the long term, as we see it, we must emphasize
the establishment of a strictly Afghan army. In this
connection, we would point to the onset of training,
with the active participation of ISAF, for the first
battalion of the National Guard. We welcome
Germany's readiness to lead the training of the Afghan
police force. In the course of the visits of the Ministers
of Defence and Internal Affairs of Afghanistan to
Moscow in February and March, the Russian side
expressed its readiness to develop military and
technical cooperation, with participation in the building
of national armed forces and the establishment of law
enforcement bodies.

Clearly, the establishment of armed forces and
issues pertaining to the recovery and reconstruction of
Afghanistan - as well as all other areas of
international cooperation in helping that country-
require the most serious coordination of effort. It
would be absolutely unacceptable for the territory of
Afghanistan to become the arena of rivalry,
competition or struggle among the various interests. If
that should occur, the opportunity for a peaceful
settlement in Afghanistan may once again be
squandered.

We trust that the United Nations will assume a
central role in establishing broad international
cooperation in post-conflict Afghanistan and in
coordinating all international efforts to assist that
country.

In this connection, we attach great significance to
UNAMA's work. Russian specialists who have the
necessary experience are prepared to take a most active
part in the Mission's activities. We have given our
concrete proposals relating to this area to the
Secretariat, and we expect operative replies to them.

