Ms. Lee (Singapore): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the President to New York and to thank her
for presiding over this high-level meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, particularly on
this special day celebrating world human rights. We
also appreciate the time that the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) have taken from their busy
schedules to be with us today. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his very useful report, and to
Mr. Oshima and the Director-General of the ICRC for
the comprehensive briefings they have given us.

We found the Secretary-General's report - with
its focus on the three key areas of humanitarian access,
the separation of combatants from civilians and the rule
of law, as well its recommendations on how to tackle
those issues - to be a very useful document. We
particularly appreciate the identification of the three
emerging challenges and the preview of the road map
for the protection of civilians. From the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Oshima, we now have a
clearer picture of the practical implementation of the
road map and of the laudable efforts undertaken by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). What we have seen is a good start and we
look forward to it being further refined.

In the First World War, nine soldiers died in
battle, for every civilian death. But in the twenty-four
conflicts currently taking place in the world, ten
civilians die for every soldier who perishes. How do
we explain this drastic reversal in the short space of
less than a century? The answer is simply that we live
in a world today where civilians have become the
legitimate targets of violence. Parties in conflict turn to
the civilian population as resources for waging further
war, and men, women and children are characterized in
stark binary terms.

How then, can we protect civilians from undue
military violence or threats of violence? The United
Nations, of course has always taken a key role on this
issue. In this regard, the Aide Memoire adopted by the
Security Council in March 2002, in S/PRST/2002/6, is
an important contribution by the Council. But as we
have said many times in the past, the Council will not
be judged by the amount of paper it produces, but by
the impact of its decisions.

In this regard I would like to make three points.
First, there needs to be less talk and more action. The
Council has often been accused of not responding to
situations which demand a fast and effective response.
It has been said that while civilians perish in the field,
we sit here in New York debating the issue. But the
idea of humanitarian intervention is a complex issue, as
ongoing debates have shown. Is there a right of
intervention? If so, how and when should it be
exercised? Who might authorize such an action? These
questions have been debated ad infinitum, ad nauseam,
and still, there is no agreement.
While that debate continues, what the Council
can at least do now is to include a component on the
plight of civilians in all of its relevant resolutions. The
March 2002 Aide Memoire is particularly important in
this regard. The Council can use its provisions to
assess whether current missions have been effective in
protecting civilians or if we need to adjust the
mandates. The Aide Memoire is also a continuous
reminder that we need to incorporate this aspect into
new missions.

Like other speakers, we also feel that the seminar
on the Mano River Union, held by the United Kingdom
Council Presidency in July 2002, and the stop-taking
that we made on the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone with regard to the protection
of civilians, was a good first step. We should build on
this, perhaps by setting up a structured mechanism to
ensure that we also take stock of the other mission
mandates periodically.

My second point relates to a familiar and often
used phrase to the effect that prevention is better than
cure. Clearly civilians would be in a far better position
if there were no armed conflict at all. However, while
this utopian world is beyond our grasp, there are
certain factors that are generally acknowledged as root
causes of conflict. Indeed, the European Commission
has come up with a checklist of factors which include
the legitimacy of the state, rule of law, sound economic
management and the geopolitical situation. With such
checklists, it is hoped that all United Nations bodies,
together with regional organizations and national
Governments, would be able to work together to nip
potential conflicts in the bud.

At the same time, the Council should react
proactively and act collectively to prevent conflict.
Unfortunately, the culture of prevention has yet to take
hold. Furthermore, the Council lacks a structured
mechanism that could be implemented to deal with
conflict prevention. In future, the Council needs to
consider whether such a mechanism could be
established. This would allow the Council to respond
promptly when it receives reports of a potential conflict
brewing.

My third and final point relates to the emerging
challenges identified in the Secretary-General's reports.
We support wholeheartedly the proposed actions that
could be taken to combat sexual exploitation and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.

As for the issue of terrorism, we agree that it has
wide ranging implications for the protection of
civilians. Increasingly, civilians are not only the
usual - if this word can be used in such an unhappy
context - victims of terrorist attacks, some will also
and unavoidably be the victims of pre-emptive and
retaliatory actions. In this regard we welcome the
Secretary-General's intention to further study this issue
and to formulate clear guidelines for future work for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, where
terrorist organizations are involved.

We think the logical next step would be for the
Aide Memoire, which is a living document, to be
revised, where relevant, to include inputs on all three
emerging challenges. This could also be included in the
roadmap once it is finalized. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General's point in the statement he made
earlier this morning, that what is now needed is
practical action.

