Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Nicholas Haysom for his briefing, and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal, for his statement.

As Afghanistan completes the first year of the
transformation decade, Malaysia is pleased to witness
the steadfast commitment and ongoing efforts of
the Afghan Government in implementing its reform
agenda, particularly in the areas of security, economy,
governance and development, as outlined in the
document "Realizing self-realization: commitments
to reform and renewed partnership". We are also
pleased to note the increasingly positive atmosphere in
the region in support of the Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace and reconciliation process. In that
context, Malaysia welcomes the establishment of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process, and its adoption of
a road map outlining steps towards a peace process.
We reiterate that a peaceful political settlement is the
only way to achieve sustainable peace and stability in
the country, and hope for the early holding of direct
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban.

Malaysia has always maintained the importance
of the international community's ongoing support,
encouragement and assistance to the Government
of Afghanistan during these challenging times. In
that respect, we are encouraged to note the various
international and regional initiatives, such as the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul process and the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference for Afghanistan. We also look
forward to the Warsaw summit and the ministerial-level
development conference in Brussels, to be held in
July and October, respectively. We are hopeful that
this initiative will complement and assist the Afghan
Government's reconstruction and development efforts.
Nonetheless, we recognize that the Government
continues to face significant challenges in its efforts
to rebuild the country. Of particular concern is the
dire security condition and its devastating impact on
Afghan civilians.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/218), the 11,000 civilian casualties recorded last
year represent the highest number of civilian casualties
recorded since 2009. Unsurprisingly, children continue
to suffer disproportionately as a result of the ongoing
conflict, accounting for almost one-third of all civilian
casualties in Afghanistan. The Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict recently adopted its
conclusions on the situation in Afghanistan, which
delivered clear messages to all parties to the conflict
and the international community on measures needed
to safeguard the security and well-being of children in
Afghanistan. Malaysia commends the Government's
firm commitment to children's rights and protection,
including by ending and preventing the recruitment of
children within the Afghan National Police through the
full implementation of its action plan and road map.
We also commend the many positive measures already
taken and strongly encourage continued progress on its
implementation, especially with regard to the Afghan
local police.

Yet many challenges and dangers remain for the
country's youngest citizens, not least the grave threat
to their lives. As many as 144 children were killed
and 418 injured in the three months from November
2015 to January 2016. Schools and hospitals continue
to be targets for attack, preventing crucial safe access
to education and medical facilities. Non-State armed
groups, including violent extremist groups, continue to
recruit children into their ranks through manipulation or
coercion due to poverty. We are deeply concerned about
this phenomenon and the resultant detention of children
associated with such armed groups. In our view, it
would be worthwhile considering alternative measures,
such as rehabilitation and reintegration programmes,
that would allow for the reinsertion of those children
as productive members of the community, thereby
reducing stigmatization.
The future of Afghanistan will one day rest in
the hands of its children. Therefore, focusing on child
protection during the ongoing conflict is a sound
investment. The support of the international community
is vital to this long-term endeavour, and we encourage
continued cooperation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations, including the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
as well as with bilateral and other multilateral partners
in this regard.

Finally, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to
Mr. Haysom and the entire UNAMA team for their
tireless efforts under challenging circumstances. We
are convinced that the United Nations, in full respect
for the principle of the country's sovereignty, will
continue to play a decisive and contributing role towards
realizing Afghanistan's transformation decade. I also
wish to welcome the work of the Tripartite Review
Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan,
which has provided us with valuable insights to further
enhance the United Nations engagement with the
Government of Afghanistan.

Given the critical moment that Afghanistan is
going through and the importance of UNAMA's role,
we favour the extension of the UNAMA mandate for 12
months. We are confident that, under its refocused and
consolidated mandate, UNAMA will be able to assist the
Afghan Government in meeting its aspirations towards
achieving national unity and lasting stability. We also
thank Spain for all its hard work that contributed to the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2274 (2016) today.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating Malaysia's
firm support for the reconciliation and reintegration
efforts undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan
in the context of respect for the country's democracy
and Constitution, non-violence and the rights of
all Afghans.

