The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.

At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his comprehensive briefing on the
security, humanitarian, human rights and social and
economic situations in the Lake Chad basin. We also
thank Ms. Fatima Imam forjoining us via teleconference
from Maiduguri, Nigeria.

We welcome the first six-month report of the
Secretary-General on the Lake Chad basin (S/2017/764),
pursuant to resolution 2349 (2017). In that regard, we
take note of the progress that countries of the region
have made in the fight against Boko Haram, and we
commend the crucial role played by the Multinational
Joint Task Force. However, it is only by addressing the
root causes of the conflict in the subregion, including
challenges resulting from climate change, under-
development and unemployment, among other things,
that long-term solutions to the crises in the region can
be found.

That was indeed strongly underscored during the
discussion we had with the African Union Peace and
Security Council in Addis Ababa on the situation of
the Lake Chad basin. We welcome the plan by the
Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) and the African
Union to organize the first regional conference in
N'Djamena next month, with a View to developing
a regional strategy. The regional dimension of the
security threats in the subregion and their cross-cutting
nature no doubt require an integrated approach, and the
initiative of the LCBC and the African Union is a step
in the right direction.

In spite of the progress seen in scaling up
international support, the increasing humanitarian
needs in the Lake Chad basin require continued
mobilization and support. The plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons is a matter of particular
concern. We hope that the United Nations and the
international community will redouble efforts in
that regard.

I will conclude by underlining the importance
of further coordination of the efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as their
respective regional mechanisms, to meet the needs of
the countries of the Lake Chad basin. Developing a
regional strategy to address the root causes ofthe crises,
encouraging international support for the Multinational
Joint Task Force and urging donors to fulfil pledges for
humanitarian needs are some of the priorities before the
Council. We hope to see progress along those lines over
the coming six months.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.

