Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra
and the Chair of the Senior Advisory Group, Mr. J ean-
Marie Guehenno, for their briefings on the findings in
the report of the independent review on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (S/2011/85) and
for their views on the way ahead for the
implementation of the suggested recommendations. I
also thank Ambassador Gasana for his useful
contribution to this debate.

Portugal is very supportive of the approach and
of the major findings of the report of the Senior
Advisory Group. The report should, in our view,
become a reference document for the planning and
management of peacebuilding activities, not just by the
United Nations, but also by other multilateral and
bilateral actors. Allow me to underline some elements
related not only to the report but also to the wider topic
of civilian capabilities that, in our view, deserve
particular attention.

First, I would like to underline the importance of
fostering national ownership in initiatives aimed at
State-building backed by the international community.
There is certainly a long way to go to increase levels of
ownership, but the report is very clear in identifying, as
the first priority of post-conflict assistance, the
strengthening of national capacities for fulfilling core
functions of the State. Choices always have to be
made. Thus, international efforts should be directed to
ensure that decisions on policy objectives and priorities
are taken by national actors and that international
efforts are there mainly to assist, and not to replace,
those of State authorities.

Secondly, we should view civilian assistance
tasks as requiring attention from the early stages of
post-conflict reconstruction. Mandates should be clear
in identifying the role and functions of peacekeepers as
early peacebuilders in such areas as the
multidimensional tasks of rule of law and security
sector reform. The United Nations must ensure a
comprehensive and integrated approach to its presence
in a given country, and work on concrete measures to
improve the linkage between civilian and political
tasks and those tasks traditionally performed by
peacekeepers. In many situations, this articulation is
crucial to preventing a relapse into conflict.

Thirdly, we are very encouraged by the
recommendations regarding the capacity of the United
Nations to provide the kind of civilian expertise that is
needed in a particular post-conflict situation. Our
understanding is that the United Nations must show
greater flexibility and adaptability to changing
situations. If certain tasks are no longer necessary,
resources allocated to those tasks should be transferred
to others requiring more attention. The reallocation of
resources should be conducted in close consultation
with national authorities, identifying and filling
existing capacity gaps.

Finally, and in connection with the previous
point, I would underline the need for coordination with
international actors, which in the report is presented as
the establishment of partnerships for ensuring that
technical expertise is readily available when needed.
Articulation is therefore a central concern in the other
stages of post-conflict assistance because it would be
much more difficult to adapt and to accommodate
different actors at a later stage. However, we should
ensure that there is clarity as to who is leading each
particular international assistance process in order to
avoid duplication of efforts.

