Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over today's
public meeting. I also wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen, for his comprehensive briefing. We
highly commend Mr. Jessen-Petersen and the staff of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for their proactive and tireless
efforts for the future of Kosovo.

Japan recognizes the importance of the "standards
before status" policy, endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 1244 (1999), and believes that
progress in the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan
by the parties, with support from the international
community, is essential. The commencement of the
comprehensive review will be a significant milestone
for the "standards before status" policy.

The Government of Japan highly appreciates the
clear commitment and tangible efforts to date on the
part of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
for the achievement of the standards, which have
included cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the resumption
of direct dialogue with Belgrade at the working group
level. We welcome recent proposals to hold high-level
meetings between Pristina and Belgrade as a step
forward and hope that they will contribute to
confidence-building between the two parties.

Notwithstanding those indications of good faith,
my Government does not believe that any of the
standards has been sufficiently fulfilled. Instances of
harassment of minorities continue to be reported, and a
Kosovo Force (KFOR) escort is still required for the
movement of those minorities in some areas. The
fragile security situation, combined with high
unemployment, has kept the rate of returns of
internally displaced persons low. Much remains to be
done, especially with regard to the protection of
minorities. We welcome the adoption of the Reform of
Local Government Working Programme 2005, and call
upon all parties to make further efforts for the
implementation of that essential project.

We believe that the comprehensive review will
foster further progress in achieving the standards by
the parties and will crystallise the progress made to
date with regard to each standard. From that point of
view, we consider it appropriate to begin the review at
this time, and we would like to express our support for
the Secretary-General's recommendation that a
comprehensive review should be initiated this summer.
At the same time, Japan would like to underscore that
significant progress on all standards, including in
addressing the aforementioned problems, must be
recognized in the comprehensive review in order for
the review to result in a positive evaluation and for the
status talks to begin.

Japan has been providing its support to the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan through
assistance for the independent media and schools for
ethnic minorities, among other areas. Our total
contribution to Kosovo to date in the fields of
reconstruction, humanitarian assistance,
democratization and human resources development
amounts to approximately $188 million. Projects
focusing on medical care, education and human
resources development will continue to be undertaken
in a proactive manner. Japan intends to continue to
play an energetic role in the efforts to shape the future
of Kosovo and to contribute to the consolidation of
peace and economic development in South-Eastern
Europe.

