Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): Afghan
leaders who were once united have turned against each
other. That civil war continues even today, seven years
later, with Afghans still fighting Afghans. Although some
of the players have changed and alliances have shifted,
the outcome is the same: military stalemate. And the real
victims have been the Afghan people, who continue to
suffer unending devastation and violence.

The United States supports the peace efforts of
United Nations special envoy Mahmoud Mestiri, who is
now back in the region seeking reconciliation between the
major factions. We understand Ambassador Mestiri is
moving his mission to Jalalabad. We view this as a very
positive step. It should help facilitate closer and more
frequent contacts with the various groups.

We believe that the vast majority of Afghans want
moderation and do not support extremism. They, and we,
want a broadly supported, capable central government in
Kabul that will begin the task of rebuilding the country,
the economy and commerce, the infrastructure, and the
educational and judicial systems.

The United States favours none of the factions,
movements or individuals currently vying for power in
Afghanistan. Let me be very clear on this matter,
particularly because there are many erroneous media
reports about it. We do not supply weapons or other
military or financial support to any of these factions or
movements.

 

Although the United States does not support any
particular group, we have continued to provide the people
of Afghanistan with humanitarian assistance that is largely
channelled through United Nations agencies and private
voluntary organizations. This aid mainly has been targeted
for refugee care and repatriation and to support demining
operations. Some very limited funding goes for
anti-narcotics efforts. Since 1989 the United States has
provided some $700 million in humanitarian assistance. The
aid figure for last year alone was nearly $50 million.

Today the Security Council has the opportunity to
explore what actions it might take to further encourage this
process of reconciliation and to achieve progress towards a
peaceful political settlement. But neither the Security
Council, the United Nations nor the international
community can create peace in Afghanistan. Only when the
parties have the political will to make peace, to end this
war of all against all, will Afghanistan be able to build its
way to stability and reconciliation.

We call upon all the Afghan factions and the outside
parties that support them with funds and weapons to realize
the futility of continuing the conflict in Afghanistan. A
military solution will not and cannot provide a lasting
peace. In Afghanistan, where the economy has been totally
shattered, many Afghan men take up arms only because
they have no other way to earn a living to support their
families. It is imperative, therefore, that the armed factions
make a serious commitment to speak directly to their
enemies.

We understand that efforts have been under way for
months to achieve reconciliation among the groups. The
United States, like many Western, Islamic and other
nations, stands ready to contribute to that task. However,
rebuilding cannot begin until there is a true peace. We want
an immediate end to the fighting. There needs to be a
cease-fire and progress towards a comprehensive peace
plan.

There are a number of ideas which have been floated
as means to achieve the desired end in Afghanistan. I repeat
that each one requires the political will of the various
factions. The United States wishes to work closely with
other concerned countries to explore what more the United
Nations can do at this critical juncture to bring about a
lasting peace. We renew our call that all outside parties
desist from providing weapons or any other assistance to
the armed factions.

We are aware that several countries are considering
an arms embargo against Afghanistan. The United States
believes this is worth exploring further, if it could be
effectively implemented. We should also discuss the
prospects for convening a conference on Afghanistan that
could help accelerate the peace process. It is essential to
create a forum in which the legitimate aspirations of the
vast majority of the Afghan people can be expressed and
where a mechanism for governing can be established.

The United Nations will do what it can to bring the
Afghan parties together, but in the end it is up to those
parties who are waging war to choose the other road, the
one that will bring peace and reconciliation, at last, to
Afghanistan.

