Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to echo the words of previous
speakers in condemning the attack in Mogadishu.

Natural resources are above all a major factor of
sustainable development. They often underpin the
economies ofmany developed and developing countries.
States possess inalienable sovereign rights over their
natural resources and, rightfully, autonomously
determine their approach to the management of those
resources based on their priorities, needs and capacities
and in line with their national legislation and pursuant
to their international legal commitments.

In line with the principle of inalienable sovereignty
over natural resources, the combat against illegal
activities in the mining sector is also the prerogative and
responsibility first and foremost of the Governments
and the countries that possess such resources. Armed
conflicts, whether internal or international, can
exacerbate problems related to the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, which may become the target of
seizure by foreign States or be appropriated by illegal
armed groups. However, in both cases the source of
the conflict is not natural resources as such but the
aggressive acts committed by one or the other force.

In individual cases of armed conflict, following
a serious analysis and a detailed discussion of the
prevailing circumstances, the question might arise of
introducing international sanctions. However, such
mechanisms can be adopted by the Security Council
only in the case of specific violators whose actions
fuel hotspots of instability. Such measures should be
introduced on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, be targeted in nature and take account of the
negative humanitarian consequences thereof for the
population as a whole.

We View as dangerous attempts to introduce
automaticity in the sanctions mechanisms or to
introduce, through the Security Council and not in
line with its mandate, quasi-sanction instruments by
broadening the practice of the certification of raw
materials. It would be even more dangerous to do so
on the basis of superficial, rash conclusions and broad
generalizations, without taking account of the particular
nature of the situation in a given country, which can
play a critical role in a specific context.

With reference to conflicts, we must point out that
the root cause is not natural resources per se but the
social tensions that give rise to poverty and inequality,
as well as the often unfavourable economic climate
resulting from the imprudent, irresponsible financial
and trade policies of influential countries. However,
United Nations specialized agencies are seeking to
address those problems. They are giving countries, at
their request, targeted policy and expert support as well
as support in strengthening State structures.

With regard to the illegal trade in natural resources,
we would stress that there are always two parties
involved and that buyers must bear their own share of
responsibility. A blatant example of fuelling a conflict
through the illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources is the decision taken by many countries to
buy oil from areas in Syria that are controlled by illegal
armed groups.

