Mr. Grant (Canada): I have four main points to
make today on the challenges that we face in countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery.

First, on Security Council resolution 1540 (2004),
the resolution has contributed greatly to international
peace and security over the past 12 years. However, more
must be done to ensure that it is fully implemented by
all Member States and adapted to emerging challenges.
As part of the 31-member Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction, Canada has helped partner countries meet
their resolution 1540 (2004) obligations, including by
providing more than $1.2 billion over the past decade to
prevent the proliferation of WMDs and related materials.

Unfortunately, as we underscored during the open
consultation on the comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004) in June, assistance requests received
through the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) almost always
lack the specificity required for willing countries to
provide assistance. If resolution 1540 (2004) is to be
fully implemented, the Committee should establish
an implementation support unit dedicated to helping
Member States develop detailed and actionable
assistance requests.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, with respect to enhancing nuclear
security, Canada is strongly committed to maintaining
our own robust domestic regime and providing
international assistance. At the 2016 Nuclear Security
Summit, Canada committed $42 million for nuclear and
radiological security worldwide, and, along with Spain
and the Republic of Korea, spearheaded the adoption of
the joint statement on promoting the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). To continue
implementing those nuclear-security commitments,
Canada is proud to be convening the first meeting of
the Nuclear Security Contact Group on the margins
of the International Atomic Energy Agency General
Conference to be held in September.

Thirdly, the full implementation of the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention and the Chemical
Weapons Convention will greatly help to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring chemical and
biological weapons. All Member States should ensure
effective national control of chemical and life-science
research to prevent its use for terrorist purposes, while
realizing its important peaceful benefits. We call on
all Member States to join those important conventions
and demonstrate their commitment to preventing the
proliferation of biological and chemical weapons.

(spoke in English)

Finally, let me underline Canada's commitment
to progressive and pragmatic efforts to halt the spread
of nuclear weapons, draw down existing stockpiles
and eliminate them verifiably and irreversibly. Such
a step-by-step approach includes the negotiation of a
fissile material cut-off treaty that bans the production
of nuclear explosive materials - which is the next
logical step in advancing non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament goals. Ending fissile material production
will clearly help counter WMD proliferation. We
strongly believe that the negotiation of a fissile material
cut-off treaty should commence as soon as possible,
and we will continue to work towards that goal.

