Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate the members of the Security
Council that were elected this morning to the Human
Rights Council and to wish them well in that important
endeavour.

I will deliver my statement in Portuguese, which,
as members know, is a very beautiful language.

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation)

I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste and thank him for his important
statement. In this historic year, in which Timor-Leste is
seeing a decisive cycle in its history come to a positive
conclusion, the presence of the Minister is particularly
symbolic and auspicious as regards future cooperation
between the United Nations and Timor-Leste.

Portugal naturally subscribes to the views expressed
in the statements to be made by the Ambassador
of Mozambique on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and by the observer of
the European Union.

I thank in particular the Acting Special
Representative, Mr. Reske-Nielsen, not only for his
assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste, but also for
the important work carried out by the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) during
the past six years to bring about democracy, stability,
security and development in Timor-Leste.

In that regard, our well-deserved appreciation goes
to all those who have worked and continue to work
with such dedication within UNMIT, as well as to
those who have headed the mission in the past, namely,
Special Representatives Atul Khare and Ameerah Haq,
as well as United Nations police commanders, whose
personal commitment, perceptiveness and professional
experience were so often decisive in overcoming
the most complicated challenges. All deserve our
recognition for their achievements.

Timor-Leste is a success story in terms of its
people, its authorities, its democracy and human rights.
It is also a success on the part of the United Nations, as
should be duly noted, as well as the successful outcome
of an international cooperation based on solidarity,
clearly understood and well carried out.

The parliamentary and presidential elections of
2012 marked the end ofa decisive cycle in the history of
Timor-Leste. As has typically been the case in Timor-
Leste, the elections took place in an environment of
democratic normality and transparency, in keeping
with internationally accepted standards. The Timorese
people once again demonstrated their high level of
civic responsibility and their political parties' maturity.
Together with the process of the formation of the
new Government, the elections clearly showed that
parliamentary democracy has taken root in Timor-
Leste and that the country's representative institutions
have been consolidated.

Timor-Leste has also made significant progress in
capacity-building and State responsibility in the areas
of security, justice, education, health and the protection
and promotion of human rights and a true democratic
culture.

Timor-Leste's relevance in the international arena
has also increased as a result of its participation in
peacekeeping missions; its preparations for its accession
to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which
we hope will come about very soon; the strengthening
of its actions in several international forums; and the
development of its bilateral relations with a growing
number of States, with a constant reaffirmation of its
commitment to peace, progress and multilateralism.

It is time for the Timorese to dedicate themselves,
with that same strength and capacity, to the challenges
remaining on the country's path towards social and
economic development. The road map and objectives
set out in the Strategic Development Plan are already
a clear indication of that goal, which Timor-Leste, on
the basis of the political stability that the country has
already shown, will be able to achieve.

Now that the goals mutually agreed between the
United Nations and Timor-Leste for the last year of
UNMIT's mandate have been achieved, according to the
Joint Transition Plan, it is time to look to the future. In
that context, the mission that the Security Council sent
to Timor-Leste last week was particularly timely and
contributed to the verification of the progress already
made and to the identification of the role that the United
Nations will play in supporting the initiatives of the
Timorese Government.

The transfer of responsibilities and capacities
from UNMIT to the Timorese authorities is taking
place at a steady pace, and as a result UNMIT'S main
tasks may now, to a large extent, be undertaken by the
Timorese authorities or by the latter in coordination
with international partners.

In addition to in-depth strategic planning, the
application of policies and effective coordination with
the United Nations and bilateral partners, the national
ownership and leadership of the transition process
assumed by the Timorese authorities are the elements
underlying the success of this process.

In that regard, Timor-Leste has shown its capacity
to discharge on its own the fundamental mandates
of the State, as well as to cooperate productively in
those areas where national capacities are not yet fully
developed.

For all ofthose reasons, the decision ofthe Timorese
Government conveyed to the Secretary-General in the
letter dated 20 September 2012 (S/2012/736, annex)
deserves our full support.

Allow me nonetheless to underline the fact that
the reconfiguration of the presence and activity of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste, concentrating efforts
and resources on the United Nations country team and
the United Nations Development Programme, should
not and must not translate into a reduction of the
international community's involvement with Timor-
Leste. On the contrary, this will be an opportunity
to intensify the work already carried out in different
formats, to consolidate the progress achieved and to
find new modalities for the international cooperation
that Timor-Leste may still need.

For our part, I wish to reaffirm to the Minister that
Portugal will continue to do everything in its power
to support Timor-Leste on its path towards progress,
stability, peace and democracy. We will do so, as
always, with complete respect for the priorities defined
by the Timorese Government and by remaining true to
the solidarity and fraternity that binds us together.

Timor-Leste and Portugal share centuries of
common history - a history that, as any other, is made
up of darker and brighter moments, of good and bad
times. We share a common language that, for Timor-
Leste, is also an element of national identity and unity,
as was frequently mentioned by the Timorese authorities
during the recent mission of the Security Council.

The new cycle that is beginning now will not
jeopardize Portugal's commitment to Timor-Leste,
which has always been characterized by a refusal to
remain silent before, and therefore an accomplice to,
oppression and the violation of human rights.

Today is a time to highlight the brighter moments
in the history of Timor-Leste. In concluding, I would
recall, with deepest respect, the difficult path that has
brought the Timorese people to independence, freedom,
justice and democracy.

