Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus is grateful to you, Sir,
for holding today's open debate on the role of the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflicts.

Today the universality of local conflicts and the
vulnerability of the international community to any outbreak
of aggression or violence require the establishment of a
reliable mechanism for preventive diplomacy.

The delegation of the Republic of Belarus agrees with
the conclusions contained on this in the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization. The
place and role devoted to this problem in Mr. Annan's
report are commensurate with the urgency and magnitude
of the item, moving from a culture of reaction to a culture
of prevention. Defined as a priority goal for the future
development of the United Nations, this should be the basis
for our subsequent work.

Although at the present time the number of armed
conflicts has gone down, the nature of the conflicts is
becoming ever more complex, moving away from classic
stereotypes and traditional models. However, we feel that
a serious analysis of recent confrontations makes it possible
to collate the reasons and motives of why they arose thus
making it possible to create the basis for working out a
systematic approach to the preventive processes.

In our View, serious deliberation on the nature of
modern armed conflicts should be the basic element in the
programme for preventing wars. This will make possible
the early identification of the main areas of danger in the
world which could become focal points of conflict and the
devising of special actions by the international community
to suspend, localize and then fully halt confrontation.

An important element in preventing emerging crises is
early warning. The role of the peacekeeping potential of the
United Nations in this area is hard to overestimate. The
peacekeeping contingents of the United Nations, military
and civilian observers, United Nations missions and special
representatives of the Secretary-General should become
central links in this prevention. Other United Nations
organs should also be involved. We believe that the
interaction between the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council is very important.

Of great importance in the context of a
comprehensive strategy for conflict prevention are
measures to combat the illegal spread of small arms and
weapons and to bring about demobilization and the
reintegration of combatants into a peaceful life, as well as
post-conflict peace-building.

Last year was particularly complicated for the
Security Council from the point of view of its function in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Conflicts in Kosovo, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
East Timor, Sierra Leone and other hot spots have
significantly stepped up the Council's search for new
ways to prevent violence and armed confrontation.
However, in order to enhance the speed in reaction to a
situation, the members of the Council, together with all
other States Members of the United Nations, must
continue their intensive search for new diplomatic
measures for early warning of conflicts, based on strict
compliance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Belarus supports the concept of preventive
diplomacy, whose central point is the human person.
People's security is the basis of the security of the entire
nation and of the world as a whole. However, the concept
of preserving the individual human right to security and
making it an absolute principle lying beyond the
sovereign borders of States cannot guarantee the required
peace and security.

The history of human society is intrinsically linked
with the emergence and existence of nations and States,
with their inalienable attributes - their sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In this context, the world community
must take as a basis the primary respect for the
sovereignty of a State as the only mechanism which can
most effectively guarantee within the confines of its
borders protection of the rights of its citizens. This is the
thrust of the existing system of international law and
international relations.

A new approach to questions of interference in the
internal affairs of other States and attempts to bring in
humanitarian principles, the defence of human rights,
affecting the sovereignty of a State, in my Government's
view should be carefully considered and studied by the
entire world community. A proactive approach is
impermissible when one State or a group of States can
unilaterally, and particularly in circumvention of existing
mechanisms for the maintenance of international peace
and security, decide on this question.

 

Today, the generally recognized legal basis for the use
of force is the United Nations Charter and the appropriate
decisions taken by the Security Council.

The Republic of Belarus supports the proposal made
by many States during the general debate at this session of
the General Assembly regarding the need to discuss within
the General Assembly questions of humanitarian
intervention. We believe in the need for a just, fair,
collective discussion, which is the fundamental basis for the
work of the United Nations. In our view, the General
Assembly should set up a special open-ended working
group, which could institutionalize discussion and possibly
work out general conclusions and recommendations on this
matter.

One cannot quarrel with the axiom that prevention is
better than cure. Today's discussion in the Council is an
important link in the chain of building the concept of
United Nations preventive diplomacy. Our job is seriously
to analyse its outcome and to determine ways for moving
further forward in this direction. For our part, the Republic
of Belarus is prepared to take an active part in this work.

