Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I warmly thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her
very informative briefing and acknowledge her
outstanding work and that of her teams in responding
to the humanitarian emergency in Syria. I especially
welcome the presence of Nujeen Mustapha among us,
and thank her most sincerely for having travelled here
to give testimony before the Council. Her courage is
a source of inspiration and admiration to us all, and
her briefing reminds us of the need to take fully into
account both the situation of persons with disabilities
and the absolute urgency to end eight years of conflict.

More than ever, we must remain fully ready to act
on three key priority areas: maintaining the ceasefire in
Idlib, about which Ursula Mueller spoke; guaranteeing
humanitarian access; and achieving a lasting political
solution in Syria.

With regard to the first priority of preserving
the ceasefire in Idlib and respecting the front lines
throughout the country, an offensive in Idlib would
have disastrous humanitarian, migratory and security
consequences throughout the region and beyond.
We therefore call on Turkey and Russia to intensify
their efforts to preserve the ceasefire agreement, in
accordance with the commitments reiterated at the
quadripartite summit in Istanbul. At the same time,
we should work jointly to come up with a coordinated
response to the threat posed by the presence of terrorist
groups in that region. In the north-west, as in the rest
of the country, the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an
absolute priority for all stakeholders. It is unacceptable
that hospitals and schools are still being targeted, and
we cannot say often enough that attacks on hospitals
and health workers amount to war crimes and that the
perpetrators will be held accountable for their actions.
A military intervention in the north-east, wherever it
might come from, would have terrible humanitarian
consequences. All actors must therefore refrain from
taking such action and all the parties must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
is not a negotiable requirement.

Secondly, humanitarian access must be guaranteed.
Here I should point out the shocking fact that of the
338 requests for access made to the Syrian regime in
February and March, only half were granted. That is
simply unacceptable. We once again call on the actors
with influence on the regime to ensure immediate,
safe, comprehensive, unhindered and sustainable
humanitarian access throughout Syrian territory,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law. In that
context, the Whole of Syria humanitarian architecture
put in place by the United Nations to meet the needs of
the most vulnerable Syrians is more relevant than ever
and must be maintained.

It is especially vital to ensure that a new aid convoy
is allowed to deploy to Rukban camp immediately. We
must also ensure that the return of displaced persons
from Rukban is voluntary, safe and dignified, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
in close coordination with the United Nations. It is
also important to increase the humanitarian response
in the north-east to cope with the influx of displaced
persons. France will continue to do its part in that
regard. We have made emergency funding available to
support the humanitarian response in the region. We
must also do everything possible to ensure that safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to the Al-Hol camp is
fully guaranteed.

Thirdly, a sustainable political process must be
launched under the auspices of the United Nations in
Geneva. We will continue to support the implementation
of a political solution, in line with all the elements of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), and to lend our steadfast support
to the Special Envoy's efforts in that regard. Provided
that a balanced agreement on its composition and
operating rules can be reached, the constitutional
committee could help to implement such a solution. It
will be up to Geir Pedersen to tell us when the time
comes if that is the case. Only the implementation of
a credible political process will make it be possible for
refugees to return to Syria, which must take place in
safe and dignified conditions and under United Nations
auspices. The low numbers of returnees show clearly
that so far those conditions, especially on the political
and security fronts, have not been met. It is essential
that the United Nations be given free access to Syrian
territory in order to ensure that returns take place in a
transparent manner.

After all these years of the Council's failures in
Syria, it would be a new and terrible political and moral
mistake to turn the page today and direct our attention
elsewhere, whether out of indifference or cowardice.
That is first and foremost because it would be a serious
lapse of judgment to think that the tragedy of Syria is
behind us, and also because we believe that today, for
perhaps the first time in eight years, there is a small but
real window of opportunity to end the conflict. That is
the role that we, the members of the Security Council,
must play collectively on this existential issue for the
United Nations.

