Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
welcomes today's briefing on the International Criminal
Tribunals, organized by the French presidency of the
Security Council.

I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and Prosecutor ofthe International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I especially the
judges for their respective reports (S/2016/453, annex and S/20l6/454, annex) and for their comprehensive
briefings on the work of the Tribunals and on their
completion strategies. I also wish to congratulate
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative
of Uruguay, and his team for their outstanding
work at the helm of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

In order to adjudicate the most serious crimes
committed in Rwanda and the Balkans, the Security
Council established the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The two courts,
guided by the principles of fairness, impartiality and
independence, have upheld respect for the rule of
law, supported capacity-building at the national level,
and made contributions to the processes of justice
and reconciliation that have been essential for the
achievement of peace.

We are pleased at the ICTY's fundamental role
in strengthening the rule of law and in promoting
long-term stability and reconciliation in the Western
Balkans. In addition, its jurisprudence has contributed
to the development of international criminal law in
such areas as individual criminal responsibility and
sexual Violence. Similarly, we welcome the crucial
work of the ICTR, which has helped to bring justice to
the victims of the genocide in Rwanda by having the
main perpetrators of these atrocities answer for their
actions.

The substantial contributions of both Tribunals
to the development of international criminal justice,
the assignment of responsibility and the restoration of
the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
are beyond a shadow of a doubt. That is also the case
with respect to the Tribunals' strong commitment
to fighting impunity for all those responsible for the
serious Violations of international humanitarian law
that occurred in those two genocides. The International
Mechanism, called to perform the residual functions
of the Tribunals when it was established by resolution
1966 (2010), inherited that commitment. This unique
entity, which was intended to be small and efficient
and with a temporary mission, has also given us many
reasons to be satisfied.

We acknowledge the crucial role played by these
institutions and the work of the authorities who lead
them. We reiterate our support for them as we call
for greater efficiency, performance and streamlining
in their activities. While we are aware of its heavy
workload and significant efforts made to reduce delay,
we nevertheless encourage the ICTY to take the steps
needed to complete its work within the agreed time. We
therefore share Prosecutor Brammertz's concern about
staff attrition and congratulate him on the steps taken
by his Office to strengthen the capacity of judicial
institutions. I am thinking in particular of the training
of prosecutors for national jurisdictions.

We reaffirm that the International Criminal
Tribunals have played a historic role in the fight
against impunity. We are convinced that there can be
no lasting peace without justice, which is why the case
of the remaining fugitives is of particular concern. We
therefore call on States, particularly those in which the

fugitives might be found, to intensify their efforts to
arrest them so that they can be prosecuted. In addition,
the issue of relocating the eight persons who have been
acquitted and the three others who have been released
after serving their sentences and who remain in Arusha
is challenging, and therefore deserves our full attention.

I would like to conclude by saying a few words on
the issue of the enforcement of sentences, which was
raised by Judge Meron. Senegal has recovered control
of eight jail cells refurbished by the ICTR in a facility
that meets international prison standards, and we are
committed to making them fully operational as soon
as possible.

