Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having made this
meeting rather livelier than those in the past. There is
still a great deal to be done, but you have definitely set
the course.

I would like to thank Hedi Annabi for the
information on the positive developments. It seems that
things are going slowly but well for the setting up of
the structures of a State that will be able to stand on its
own feet. France will contribute its share, in particular
in providing the training for the diplomats that the
young State will need.

The next important stage is the election of the 88
members of the Constituent Assembly on 30 August. In
that connection, I wish to associate myself with the
questions that have been asked concerning the situation
of the refugees who are still in West Timor. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) estimates that there are 80,000 to 100,000 of
them. Out of a total East Timorese population
estimated at 800,000, one can easily see that the
inclusion or not of this number of people will make a
difference in the election results.

I would like to ask Mr. Annabi, in this
connection, whether the Secretariat feels it would be
possible to accelerate the return of these refugees in
such a manner as to enable them to participate in the
electoral process. If, as seems probable, all the refugees
cannot be resettled before the elections are held,
perhaps, as the Indonesian Government has proposed,
we might consider a return of United Nations personnel
to West Timor, with sufficient security conditions. In
that scenario, what conditions have yet to be met?

Finally, I have a question about the possibility of
resorting to a procedure that Mr. Annabi is very
familiar with and that we used in Cambodia. In
Cambodia, if I remember correctly, we used an on-site
registration procedure for refugees who had not yet
been able to return so that they could participate in
what was also a historic election at that time. So, these
are my questions concerning the refugees presently in
West Timor.

My second line of questioning relates to the
future, the post-election period. Obviously, everyone
will have to remain there until 30 August, but
preparing for the future is a matter of planning. As Sir
Jeremy Greenstock has told us, there will be a report
on 30 April, and Security Council resolution 1338
(2001) asks the Secretariat to look beyond the date of
30 August as regards the size, structure and manner of
deployment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

I would like to underscore how important it
seems to us that the Secretariat should start now with
preparation for the post-election period, so that after
the Constituent Assembly is elected the international
presence can be scaled down when that is possible, in a
phased and gradual manner. On the one hand, it is clear
that we already have the police sector, and a United
Nations presence will be necessary for a relatively long
period. The recent incidents bear witness to this fact.
On the other hand - and I would like to hear what Mr.
Annabi has to say in this connection - when it comes
to the armed forces I think that we could start planning
for a gradual withdrawal after the Constituent
Assembly is elected and as the date of independence
draws near. I think that it is very important that the
beneficial presence of the United Nations not gradually
become some sort of occupying force. I took note of
what Mr. Annabi said a moment ago; it is easy to
perceive the path from being helpful to being
frustrating, a gradual slipping which could be a
concern for the whole international presence.

As my final point, going beyond the United
Nations force, beyond UNTAET, I would like to talk
about the participation of the entire international
community in the effort that will be required to help
the Timorese. We had an interesting meeting here in
this room with the participation of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). I think that
following the useful exercise in Dili on 29 March, it is
in this spirit that we have to prepare for the Canberra
meeting on 14 and 15 June, making sure that the World
Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the IMF and the
UNDP not only attend, but also fully carry out their
share of the effort now and in the months and years to
come. I would be happy to hear what Mr. Annabi has to
say in this connection.

