Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): From the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude to you, Sir, and the
Security Council for allowing me to participate in this
public meeting on Timor-Leste.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste, and to thank him for his detailed briefing.

My delegation wishes to commend Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, for his working
accomplishments in Timor-Leste and for his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to the Council.

Thailand is encouraged to learn that much
progress has been made steadily to achieve the
prosperity of Timor-Leste and the well-being of the
Timorese people. That is due to the valuable
contributions of UNOTIL, agencies of the United
Nations system, international organizations, non-
governmental organizations and international donors.
A tribute should also be paid to the Government of
Timor-Leste for its strong determination and strenuous
efforts. All parties concerned have played crucial roles
in moving forward the nation-building process in
Timor-Leste.

Although developments in Timor-Leste - be
they political, economic or social - have been
achieved on many levels, the work is not yet complete.
Timor-Leste remains in a phase of trials and
tribulations. There are challenges that the country is
meeting, and more that it will have to face in the
future. My delegation believes that Timor-Leste, as an
emerging country, has a long way to go. As an
emerging democracy, Timor-Leste is a small plant that
needs all the care and tending of us all to help it grow
into a big tree and for its roots of democracy to grow
stronger and deeper.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of the development dimension of
assistance, an area to which less attention has been
paid. Its long-term benefits to Timor-Leste are equally
as important as those of the security and justice
dimensions. While there is a need to create a safe and
secure environment for the Timorese people, there is
also a need to improve their livelihoods and quality of
life. That is the human face of assistance. Capacity-
building, training and education, we believe, will bring
out the greater and the better from Timor-Leste in the
long run. International assistance - any assistance -
would be meaningless without lasting security, stability
and prosperity in the country.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Thailand's firm commitment to continuing
its economic and technical cooperation with Timor-
Leste in order to further support the Timorese national
development process, especially in the field of human
resource development. In 2003, the Foreign Ministers
of Thailand and Timor-Leste signed a memorandum of
understanding on economic and technical cooperation.
Ten areas of technical cooperation between the two
countries have been pursued for the past three years,
including in capacity-building in internal security,
agriculture, tourism, geographical information
technology, and sufficiency economy. Recently,
Thailand and Timor-Leste have agreed to extend the
memorandum of understanding to cover two more
years in 2006 and 2007.

Also, we wish to reaffirm Thailand's readiness
and willingness to cooperate in rendering assistance to
and building the capacities of Timor-Leste with the
United Nations agencies, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and international
donors. In partnership with donor countries and
international organizations, Thailand has cooperated
with the United Nations Development Programme, the
Japan International Cooperation Agency and UNICEF
in organizing capacity-building programmes for Timor-
Leste, especially in the fields of agriculture, HIV/AIDS
and family health.

Different views have been expressed concerning
the role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste after the
end of UNOTIL's mandate. Thailand could not agree
more that the United Nations and the international
community will soon have to phase out their
participation, but that time has not yet come. Indeed,
while we are gradually withdrawing from Timor-Leste,
it will be some time before Timor-Leste can stand on
its own and before we can leave Timor-Leste to stand
on its own. In fact, we need to approach the phase-out
step by step.

The recent tensions in Timor-Leste have already
demonstrated that the country is fragile and its political
environment volatile. We would have failed to achieve
anything were we to leave Timor-Leste now and run
the risk of losing all the gains we have helped make
thus far in the country. The success of the presidential
and general elections in 2007 will be a crucial
milestone of democracy in Timor-Leste.

In that connection, my delegation wishes to
express Thailand's support for the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General that a reduced-size
office be set up in Timor-Leste to continue the work of
the United Nations in rendering assistance to the
Timorese Government and its people so that we can
ensure that the gains made thus far will be protected
and consolidated. My delegation is of the view that this
is one of the steps of the phase-out process out and that
we should not completely withdraw from Timor-Leste.

My delegation believes that Timor-Leste is a
country with great potential. However, its promising
future can be further guaranteed only if we all help to
guarantee it. The international community needs to
actively help nurture and thereby increase the country's
potential so that it can eventually stand firmly on its
own and prosper alongside the community of nations.

