Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank the
Secretary-General for his two reports (S/2009/ 132 and S/2009/146) which focus respectively on the security
and piracy situations in Somalia. I also thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his detailed briefing. I
welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, and thank him for his statement. I
also welcome and thank the representatives of the
African Union and the League of Arab States for their
participation in this important meeting of the Security
Council.

The past few months witnessed some significant
progress in the political process in Somalia, including
the election of a new President, the establishment of a
newly expanded parliament and the formation of an
inclusive Government. We reaffirm our belief that, as
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia said, peace and security in Somalia can only
be achieved through dialogue, negotiation, a
willingness to compromise and reconciliation. We
welcome the efforts of President Ahmed to make the
political process more inclusive by reaching out to
various groups in the country.

Despite those encouraging political developments,
strengthened by the determination of the people and the
leaders of Somalia to promote the implementation of a
comprehensive ceasefire, we remain concerned about
the volatile security situation, as reflected in a series of
attacks against the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which led to the death or injury of many
peacekeepers. We are also concerned about the
humanitarian situation, with more than 3 million
Somalis in need of humanitarian assistance and many
civilians fleeing their homes to escape the fighting. We
strongly condemn all such attacks against AMISOM,
humanitarian personnel and civilians, and we call for
an immediate end to them.

Having taken stock of the current piracy situation
off the coast of Somalia and the complexity of the
political and security scene throughout that war-torn
country, and while commending the operational efforts
of Member States within the framework of the Contact
Group on Piracy, we wish to emphasize the need for
the implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Djibouti peace process. We share
the Secretary-General's view that the scourge of piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia can
be resolved through an integrated approach that
addresses the conflict, the lack of governance and the
absence of sustainable livelihoods on land in Somalia.
We support his appeal to the international community
to provide the resources necessary to help bring
durable peace and stability to Somalia. We stress the
importance of providing assistance in order to build the
capacity of local and regional stakeholders.
We commend AMISOM. for its enduring efforts in
Somalia under very difficult circumstances. We are
mindful that the resources available to AMISOM. still
fall far short of the requirements for its full deployment
and for sustaining its operations. My delegation
supports the Secretary-General's intention to convene
an international donor conference to solicit
contributions to the trust fund for AMISOM.

