Mrs. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei for the detailed and careful reports that
they presented to the Council this morning on the
progress of the inspection teams of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in Iraq. The reports reflect the
professional integrity that has characterized the work
of the inspectors and the honesty with which the truth
has been uncovered and reported in a situation that is
not free of complexities and obstacles. We listened
attentively to their reports, in the constructive spirit of
a country that sincerely believes in the value of the
multilateral system, in the binding nature of Security
Council resolutions and in the correctness of the
decision to explore all possible ways to maintain peace.

My Government will study these reports over the
coming days with the care that is needed for us to
participate responsibly in the debates in which the
Council will consider the evolution of this process,
seeking to adopt decisions that are based on facts and
not on mere hypotheses.

However, what we have heard this morning
shows that the regime which governs Iraq still has an
ambivalent attitude towards the inspection process.
While there are indications of progress that could still
raise some hopes for a decisive change in attitude on
the part of the Iraqi regime towards the demands of the
international community, negative and dilatory
attitudes remain, revealing an intention not to
cooperate and giving rise to suspicions about the
presence of weapons of mass destruction in the
territory of Iraq.

In the light of the information given us by the
head of UNMOVIC and by the Director General of
IAEA this morning, it is our hope that the Government
of Iraq will step up its cooperation without delay by
providing the information required by the inspectors in
order to allow the effective implementation of the
resolutions of this Council.

Given this situation, I wish to reiterate today the
points upon which Chile has based its position since
this debate began.

First, the resolutions of the Security Council must
be fully implemented without a selective approach to
their provisions. That is not what Iraq is doing. We
therefore recognize that maintaining pressure on the
regime of Saddam Hussain has proven to be the only
mechanism capable of bringing about a certain
openness and respect for the decisions of the Council.
That pressure must therefore be maintained relentlessly
and without relaxation. We reiterate that, in accordance
with paragraphs 4 and 11 of resolution 1441 (2002),
failure by Iraq to comply or any interference by Iraq
with inspection activities that is reported to the Council
by the head of UNMOVIC shall be considered by the
Council with a view to determining whether all of its
resolutions on the matter are being fully respected and
to ensuring international peace and security. The
resolution clearly states that Iraq will face serious
consequences as a result of its violation of its
obligations.

Secondly, my country believes that, in keeping
with the categorical and urgent tone of resolution 1441
(2002), the inspection process must be continued,
strengthened and expanded to make it accurate,
intrusive and capable of thwarting any effort at
deception or evasion that the Iraqi regime might
attempt. In this connection, we await with interest the
opinions of the inspectors on the usefulness and
applicability of the proposals put forward by France. It
is evident, however, that the time available to us is not
infinite. The gravity of the situation requires immediate
and definitive responses from the Iraqi regime to the
inspectors.

Thirdly, Chile considers that the United Nations
and the Security Council have a key role to play in this
crisis. We believe that careful thought must be given to
this issue. We wish clearly to affirm that we have noted
with dismay over the past month a growing division
within the Council. This alarming development, while
rooted in positions towards the crisis that are
legitimately different, has been fuelled by a lack of
willingness to listen and to propose. We wish to
contribute to the effort to return to the path of debate
and to a method of work that combines conviction with
respect for the concerns of others, the capacity of
persuasion with tolerance and, above all, patience.

As the Secretary-General recently stated in his
review of the current situation,

"The Council should proceed in a determined,
reflective and deliberate manner. Its measures
must be seen as firm, effective, credible and
reasonable not only by the Council members, but
by the public at large."

We therefore agree with the Secretary-General that
unity of the Council is the basis of any international
action that seeks to be both legitimate and effective.
Only a united Council could credibly adopt the
appropriate decisions for achieving the objective of the
disarmament of the Iraqi regime.

We therefore wholeheartedly accept the
Secretary-General's invitation to us to take the
necessary time to continue to seek the broadest
possible consensus for achieving a comprehensive
solution that would restore to the Iraqi people, who
have suffered for so long, the opportunity to participate
fully in the international community. It is only in this
spirit that we can turn the affirmation on which we all
agree into a reality: that of exhausting all means to
settle this conflict peacefully and reserving the use of
force until the moment when it becomes clear to all
that peaceful means have failed.

