Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation highly
appreciates the fact that you, Sir, are presiding over
this important meeting. My delegation joins the others
in welcoming President Kagame to this meeting and
wishes to thank him for his important statement.
Norway has closely followed the developments in
Rwanda after the genocide in 1994 and we remain
committed to supporting democracy-building and
humanitarian efforts in the country through the United
Nations and other organizations. Norway has supported
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda since it
was established and we firmly believe that those
responsible for the genocide should be held
accountable.

The current situation in the Great Lakes region is
closely linked with what happened in 1994, and I
appreciate the opportunity for the Security Council to
meet with President Kagame to discuss the way
forward in the context of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. The Lusaka Agreement continues to be the
path towards a peaceful solution to the complex
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. Recent statements from
African leaders have created a new situation, which
must be utilized to further facilitate peace. There is
now, as has been stated, a window of opportunity. The
meeting later this month between the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and the
Security Council is a timely and an important
opportunity in this regard. We urge the parties to
explore thoroughly, through regional consultations
prior to that meeting, any political avenues that might
be available for further consideration at the meeting. In
this light we note with interest the contact in
Washington last week between President Kagame and
President Joseph Kabila.

Last Friday, President Kabila addressed the
Security Council, and we noted his desire to pursue a
policy of reconciliation. We believe that full
commitment to peaceful negotiations remains
indispensable in the search for a lasting solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region.

I would like to reiterate the support of the
Government of Norway for the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. The Agreement states that nothing in the
Agreement shall in any way undermine the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It further states that the parties to the
Agreement must commit themselves to immediately
addressing the security concerns of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbouring countries.
This means that all foreign forces must withdraw from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo according to
schedules drawn up by the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity and the Joint Military
Commission. It also means that there are legitimate
security concerns that have to be addressed jointly by
the parties and the international community.
At the same time, while expressing understanding
for the precarious security situation that Rwanda is
facing, my Government is of the opinion that this
cannot justify deploying Rwandan troops - or
Ugandan troops, for that matter - several hundred
kilometres inside the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Full deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) as soon as the
security situation allows will be an important step in
safeguarding Rwanda's and other countries' security
concerns. Any support provided to the "negative
forces", which the former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex- FAR) and Interahamwe represent, must cease
immediately in order to facilitate the peace process.

Furthermore, the efforts to rebuild peaceful
relations in the Great Lakes region must take due
account of the ongoing illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other forms of wealth in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We urge all parties to the
conflict to cooperate constructively with the United
Nations Expert Panel established for this purpose.

The high-level diplomatic activity during the last
few months is an indication of the willingness of
African leaders and leaders from other countries to
support the peace efforts in the Great Lakes region. In
conclusion, permit me to urge the parties to exercise
the necessary flexibility in the search for a political
solution to the conflict. The United Nations must stand
ready to facilitate this important process.

