Mr. Casimiro (Angola): We, too, take this
opportunity to join other Security Council members in
expressing our sincere condolences to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and to the Brazilian
Government and its people for the demise of the
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

Allow me, at the outset, to commend the delegation
of Nigeria for an efficient and productive presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August. We
continued to face significant challenges this month,
and I wish to commend you, Mrs. ngu, for your poise
and professionalism in guiding the work of the Council
during August 2015.

I would like to focus my remarks for today's wrap-
up session on the open debate on regional organizations
and on contemporary challenges to global security and
the subsequent briefing on security sector reforms. As
we mentioned during the debate on the role of regional
organizations (see S/PV.7505), it is certain that global,
continental and subregional cooperation are critical to
the achievement of international peace and security and
sustainable development. We are all aware that security
issues cannot be tackled by one organization alone,
particularly in Africa. Somalia represents an example
of productive collaboration, while in South Sudan much
more has to be done.

The ability of a united Security Council to
meet its heavy responsibilities would be greatly
improved if we had better arrangements with regional
organizations. Therefore, continuous and increased
engagement, interaction and consultation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, such as
the African Union, are crucial to developing a shared
understanding of the root causes of conflicts, and to
establishing appropriate prevention and response
mechanisms. Efforts to strengthen both long-term and
quick-reaction capacity to address emerging threats in
Africa are essential, including the operationalization
of the African Union's African Standby Force. That
would enable the reinforcement of conflict-resolution
capacities on the continent and further support the
operations of the United Nations.

In 2013 the African Union launched the process
for establishing an implementation mechanism for the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises.
While the technical aspects of that are not yet fully
defined, we believe that, with the support of African
States and United Nations States Members, that
mechanism would add much value to efforts to deal
with current and future threats to international peace
and security. To date, the threats of foreign terrorist
fighters, maritime insecurity, organized crime, illegal
migration, climate change and energy issues, among
others, have shown us that our primary objective must
remain strengthening regional bodies that can address
those issues.

Key elements for sustainable development include
security sector reform based on national ownership,
and the prerequisite that a legal framework for national
capacity be built through cooperation with the United
Nations. While there have been cases of successful
security sector reform, such as in Timor-Leste, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, too many States still have fragile
security structures, which can threaten the security and
stability of their neighbours.

In that regard, we applaud the signing of the
agreement on 26 August by South Sudan President
Salva Kiir to resolve the conflict in that country. We are
of the view that the Security Council needs to quickly
update the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan in order to support the implementation of
some of the key tasks in the agreement. We commend
the work done by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as the recently expanded
efforts of the IGAD-plus arrangement, including
the United Nations and the friends of South Sudan
from Africa and abroad, to develop and achieve a
comprehensive solution that establishes conditions for
delivering peace to South Sudan.

Last but not least, we must address the situation
in the Middle East, which continues to be plagued
by an escalation of conflicts. Groups associated with
Al-Qaida, such as Daesh, continue to spread their
violent extremist ideology and actions across the region.
In Syria, for example, the Council has not succeeded in
influencing the parties at war to agree on the elements
of a political solution. With the destruction of the
education and health systems and other basic services,
we have to wonder how many traumatized children will
be recruited by radical groups. It is therefore important
that we continue to support humanitarian efforts, which
aim to deliver aid to the millions of people in need, but
we must also push for a political solution to the fractious
conflict. We reiterate our willingness to work with
international partners on devising new strategies for
dealing with violent extremism, which has an impact
on so many civilians, including women and children as
well as religious and ethnic minorities, throughout the
region.
Finally, let us continue to work for unity within the
Council in order to promote real and lasting political
solutions to the many current conflicts threatening our
collective peace and security.

