Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish at the outset to thank
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins for her presentation on recent
developments to further the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda.
Brazil associates itself with the statement made
by Ambassador Sylvie Lucas on behalf of the Chairs of
the country-specific configurations.

We welcome the discussion of the critical role of
the United Nations in ensuring stability and sustainable
peace in countries emerging from conflict. The Council
has already recognized the interdependence between
security and development, but we have yet to perfect a
truly comprehensive approach that takes into account
the underlying causes of conflict that helps countries
rebuild institutions and supports their efforts to address
the basic needs of their populations.

A stronger relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
crucial for the greater effectiveness of peacebuilding
activities. We should find ways to enable the Security
Council to draw further on the PBC in order to enhance
the system's capacity to implement peacebuilding
strategies at the early stages of United Nations
involvement in a conflict country.

Early peacebuilding activities are relevant to the
success of peacekeeping operations, through integrated
missions that associate civilian capacities with the
military and police component. Such integrated
missions should ensure that the stability space created
by a peacekeeping force can be sustained through a
simultaneous effort to help the country strengthen its
institutional capacity and restore basic services.

We welcome the efforts being undertaken to
strengthen a regional approach to some of the problems
common to countries on the PBC agenda. Such is the
case of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which brings
together the countries of West Africa in the fight
against drug trafficking. We must pursue more
effective resource mobilization for the implementation
of this important initiative.

We are glad to see that women's participation in
peacebuilding has gained more attention. Women
should play a central role in post-conflict situations.
There is a greater awareness of their potential
contribution to furthering reconciliation, preventing
conflicts and bolstering economic revitalization. This
potential should be fully tapped into.

This is particularly true for the countries that are
on the PBC agenda. In Guinea-Bissau, for instance,
women make a fundamental contribution to all sectors
of the country's life, from agriculture, especially as
smallholder farmers, to law enforcement and
policymaking.

We commend the actions taken by the Secretariat
and the relevant United Nations entities, including
UN-Women, to foster the role of women in
peacebuilding, and strongly support the continuation of
such efforts.

We encourage the Secretariat to continue to look
into creative ways of enhancing the United Nations
response to the peacebuilding needs of post-conflict
countries. Brazil will continue to be a strong supporter
of peacebuilding at the United Nations. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Chair of the
country-specific configuration for Guinea-Bissau, we
reaffirm our commitment to working together with
other interested members in helping bring sustainable
peace and development to the countries on the
Commission's agenda.

