Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to welcome Special
Representative Brahimi back to New York and to thank
him for the very comprehensive and thorough briefing
he has given us on the current situation in Afghanistan.

In very difficult circumstances during the past
several months, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the leadership of
Ambassador Brahimi, actively cooperated with the
Interim Administration and the Transitional Authority
to realize the goals set forth in the Bonn Agreement. In
particular, UNAMA has made an outstanding
contribution to the successful convening of the
Emergency Loya Jirga. The Chinese delegation would
like to express its admiration and appreciation of the
professionalism and dedication shown by Ambassador
Brahimi and UNAMA. We remain committed to
supporting their efforts.

The situation in Afghanistan has undergone a
fundamental change since the holding of the Bonn
Conference. The Emergency Loya Jirga constitutes a
milestone that illustrates that the Afghan people have
once again taken control of the fate of their country and
that they are making an effort to turn Afghanistan into
a stable and peaceful country. It should be said that,
with the vigorous help of the international community,
the political and economic life of Afghanistan is
steadily heading towards normalcy. On the whole, the
situation in Afghanistan is developing positively.

On the other hand, we should be aware that it is
impossible for Afghanistan to heal overnight the
wounds of decades of war, and that it is no easy matter
to attain lasting peace and sustainable development.
Deep-rooted problems have accumulated in
Afghanistan over the years, including the
contradictions that exist between the central
Government and local forces, the conflicts of interests
among ethnic groups, and the competition over power
among the political parties. These problems have not
been fundamentally resolved.

The current security situation in Afghanistan is of
special concern: we recently witnessed the most
unfortunate assassination of Vice-President Qadir. We
strongly condemn such terrorist acts. The assassination
pointedly demonstrated the fragility of the security
situation in Afghanistan: without an environment of
peace and safety, it is impossible to begin economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction. We sincerely hope
that the Afghan parties and factions can proceed on the
basis of the overall interest of the country, that they
will bury the hatchet and work together in the great
cause of national reinvigoration. Only in that way can a
better situation come about. At the same time, the
international community should also think seriously
about ways to help the Transitional Authority of
Afghanistan maintain stability, and should make sure
that the huge investment made by the United Nations
so far in Afghanistan will not be lost.

Another pending problem in Afghanistan is the
humanitarian crisis. After the Bonn Conference, a large
number of refugees returned to Afghanistan. This
shows that they are fully confident about the future of
Afghanistan, but at the same time it has created a very
heavy financial burden for the Afghan Government as a
result of a lack of funds. International humanitarian
agencies have been forced to streamline or even
suspend their activities in Afghanistan. We call on the
donor countries, especially those that made pledges at
the Tokyo Conference, to honour their commitments as
soon as possible in order to ease the humanitarian crisis
in Afghanistan. Otherwise, the worsening humanitarian
crisis is very likely to trigger new disorders.

As a close neighbour of Afghanistan, China has
always followed very closely the development of the
Afghan situation and has tried its best to provide
assistance to Afghanistan, including help for the
restructuring of the Afghan army and police. China has
also sent personnel to work with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We will continue to
try our best to support the peace process in
Afghanistan, and to contribute to economic
reconstruction there.

