Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to welcome
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Djibouti, who
has been kind enough to meet with us this afternoon,
illustrating his belief in the importance of the matter
we are addressing today.

Before I begin my statement, I should like to
thank Mr. Honwana for the briefing he has just given
us on the dispute pitting Djibouti against Eritrea.

In its presidential statement of 12 June, to which
Ambassador Ripert referred a few moments ago, the
Security Council expressed its concern about the
serious incidents that have taken place on the border
between Djibouti and Eritrea, which resulted in
casualties to the Djiboutian army. The Council also
called on the two parties, and on Eritrea in particular,
to exercise restraint, withdraw their respective forces
and return to the status quo ante. It also called for
negotiations to begin without delay in order to put an
end to the conflict.

My country categorically condemns the use of
force and reiterates that there exists an obligation on
States to demonstrate mutual respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

We continue to be concerned about the ongoing
tension between the two countries. It therefore seems
to us that it is the duty of the Security Council to urge
them to refrain from any action that could lead to an
escalation of the conflict. It is also crucial that it
emphasize dialogue over military action. It is therefore
essential that Djibouti and Eritrea agree to the offers of
mediation made to them, notably by the African Union,
the League of Arab States and other friendly countries.
It goes without saying that Burkina Faso, out of a
desire for peace, welcomes these initiatives and these
efforts, which we hope will continue.

With regard to the rather disturbing situation in
the Horn of Africa, everything should be done to help
these two States to overcome their dispute because it is
crucial to spare their respective populations from the
agony of a new confrontation with unpredictable
consequences. Therefore, we hope that the two
countries will agree to cooperate fully with the
subregional and regional organizations and agree to the
assistance of friendly countries with a view to finding a
final solution to their dispute. We also urge the
international community to assist in this endeavour.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the French
delegation for the draft of a statement to the press that
it submitted to us. We would like to say that we fully
support it.

