Mr. Bande (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
commends the presidency of Uruguay for organizing
this important debate on the protection of civilians and
medical care in armed, and for the detailed concept
note (S/2017/365, annex) to guide our discussion.

We support the Secretary-General's call upon
Member States and parties to conflict to develop,
implement and share operational policies and practical
measures to enhance respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law and to avoid
harm to civilians. We also commend the briefers for
their perspectives.

It is widely acknowledged that the existence
of health facilities and activities of health workers
are vital to save lives and provide assistance to the
wounded and the sick in situations of armed conflict.
Health workers and other civilian personnel carry out
their duties at great risk to their lives. They have been
kidnapped, tortured and killed while performing their
life-saving duties.

Today's debate is taking place at a time of great
crisis in some parts of the world, a time when attacks
on humanitarian workers have hindered the delivery
of much-needed medical assistance and supplies
to millions of people in many theatres of conflict.
Undoubtedly, the United Nations has a pivotal role to
play in the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
in preventing the emergence of situations of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Nigeria believes that the critical element in
preventing violations of international humanitarian law
in armed conflict is the respect for international human
rights and humanitarian law.

The fact that attacks are being carried out
against medical personnel and humanitarian workers
exclusively engaged in medical duties and their means
of transport and equipment demonstrates the level of
vulnerability to which they are exposed. The existence
of such threats is due not to a lack of international
mechanisms, but rather to the lack of political will to
implement existing norms.

We recall in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, which established the standards
of international law for humanitarian treatment
in conflict situations. It provides not only for the
protection of the wounded and sick and of medical and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties, but also places obligations on parties to armed
conflict to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances.

My delegation therefore sees today's debate as a
significant step towards realizing that commitment.
That is an urgent and priority task that the Council must
deal with in the face of several conflict situations across
the globe. We acknowledge the work already done in
that regard and recall the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) - the first ofits kind, dedicated to the protection
of medical care in armed conflict. We must continue to
work in concert to build upon that laudable initiative.

As a first step, there must be unanimity in strongly
condemning acts of violence, attacks and threats
against the wounded and the sick and medical and
humanitarian personnel, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, wherever such acts occur. Failure
to do so will result in long-term consequences for
the civilian population in conflict situations and for
the health-care systems of the countries concerned.
Concrete steps must be taken to ensure that health-care
workers and facilities are protected. All parties to armed
conflicts must fully comply with their obligations under
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, particularly
their obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.

In the fulfilment of its obligations, the Nigerian
Government has set up the Presidential Committee
on the North East Initiative to serve as the primary
national body to, inter alia, see to the enhancement
of the security conditions in the north-eastern part of
the country, facilitate the work of health personnel and
ease the movement of medical equipment and supplies.
We recognize and commend the assistance received
from international partners and humanitarian agencies
in the setting up of permanent and mobile clinics, as
well as support for infrastructure rehabilitation in
affected communities.

Nigeria stands ready, as called for in resolution 2286
(2016), to join efforts with all those concerned to protect
civilians in armed conflict, especially the prevention of
acts ofviolence, attacks and threats against medical and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties and their means of transport and equipment.

