Mr. Mayr-Harting: The High Representative
of the European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, has asked
me to convey the following message to the Security
Council:

"The agreement reached in Vienna on 14 July
2015 between Iran and China, France, Germany,
Russia, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America, with the support of the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign and
Security Policy, on a Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action is historic in nature.

"The agreement, once implemented, marks a
conclusion to the long-running diplomatic efforts
to reach a comprehensive, long-lasting and peaceful
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue that will
provide the necessary assurances on the exclusively
peaceful nature ofIran's nuclear programme, on the
one hand, and the lifting of sanctions, on the other.
As such, it represents a significant achievement

and a tribute to the merits of patient diplomacy on
all sides.
"It is appropriate that the deal was struck in
Vienna, where all this began 12 years ago, when
the International Atomic Energy Agency started
to look into possible undeclared Iranian nuclear
activities. Since then, there have been many months
and years of at times difficult negotiations. A key
milestone in that process was the interim Geneva
agreement of 2013, the smooth implementation of
which provided the time and space necessary for
the complex negotiation process that followed. This
resulted in the Lausanne agreement in April 2015,
which set the parameters for the final deal.

"The E-3/EU+3 format was especially
effective. We feel that the European Union, in
particular through the High Representative, was
able to play a crucial facilitation role. Throughout
the whole process, the EU was the facilitator,
moderator and, in the final stages, penholder for
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action text and
its annexes. It is hard to imagine another actor that
could have done this. A key element of success was
maintaining the unity of the group and focus on
a shared goal. It is to the credit of all those who
participated that we stayed committed to reaching
a mutually beneficial deal. The fact that the self-
imposed deadline was overrun several times bears
witness to the shared view that a quality agreement
was vastly superior to a quick one.

"The agreement is good, durable and verifiable.
Iran has agreed to make changes to its nuclear
programme. The International Atomic Energy
Agency will have the access it needs to determine
when Iran has completed those actions and to
detect any future violation of the agreement. Iran
will receive phased sanctions-lifting in return. The
Plan of Action annexes set out in detail what is
required by all sides, providing clarity to facilitate
the implementation of the agreement. Together
with the conclusion to be made by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in that regard, the full
implementation by Iran of its commitments under
the Plan of Action will contribute to building
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme.

"It will be necessary for all sides to work now
towards implementing the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. The resolution adopted today
by the Security Council is a key element in this
process. As agreed in Vienna, the European Union
will endorse the resolution in conclusions of the
Foreign Affairs Council, which is in session as we
speak. The European Union will also endorse the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and commits
to abiding by its terms and to follow the agreed
implementation plan."

In effect, European Union actions and commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action related to
the lifting sanctions will be carried out in accordance
with the timeline and modalities specified in the
Plan. As stipulated in the Plan, the termination of the
implementation of economic and financial sanctions
would come into effect once the International Atomic
Energy Agency has verified that Iran has implemented
all of its nuclear-related commitments. For the time
being, the provisions of the Joint Plan of Action agreed
in Geneva in 2013 have been extended for a further
six months, to cover the period until the International
Atomic Energy Agency has verified that Iran has
carried out its commitments.

The High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy will continue her supporting
and coordinating role during the entire implementation
phase of the Plan of Action. The High Representative
hopes and expects that this positive development will
open the door to a steady improvement in relations
between the European Union, its member States
and Iran, as well as improved Iranian regional and
international relations, and that it will constitute the
basis of a more stable and secure region in the longer
term. It is essential that this opportunity be seized by
all.

