Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I too thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General
Bordyuzha, Secretary-General Alimov and Vice-Chair
Ivanov for their briefings.

New Zealand strongly supports active and regular
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations in preventing and
resolving conflict. The past 70 years have provided
numerous demonstrations of the value of regional
organizations and of their effectiveness as partners with
the United Nations. The peace and stability currently
enjoyed in much of Latin America, Europe and South-
East Asia owe a great deal to the regional architecture
that has been put in place there. In Africa, we have also
seen welcome growth in the tempo and effectiveness of
regional and subregional cooperation to address peace
and security challenges over the past 20 years. That
has also been the experience in my own region, the
Pacific, where regional cooperation has been essential
for meeting both security and sustainable development
challenges for the past 40 years.

The reasons for that are clear. Regional organizations
are able to draw on local knowledge and perspectives
that are essential for addressing the security challenges
faced by their members. They provide a mechanism
for mobilizing and sustaining the political will of their
members behind conflict prevention and resolution
efforts. They also provide a means for regions to interact
with the United Nations and to leverage the capabilities
that the global organization can bring to the table.

As today's briefers have made clear, the peace
and security challenges facing Central Asian
countries cannot be met effectively without close
cooperation among the countries of the region and
strong partnerships with the international community.
Ongoing tensions among Central Asian countries
stemming from disputed borders, the management of
cross-border resources, such as water, and the region's
complex ethnic makeup will require sustained and
patient management, as will increases in the cross-
border flow of peoples, including refugees.

As we are all so aware in the Council, Afghanistan
has been involved in a succession of external and
internal conflicts for many decades. Despite the
immense investments of the international community
following the Council-endorsed action to free the
country from the grip of Al-Qaida and the Taliban after
the events of 9/11, peace and stability remain almost as
elusive as ever there. Enduring instability will further
exacerbate tensions, with cross-border implications for
the wider region.

As was again underlined to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) yesterday
in the briefing by the Secretary-General of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Taliban-controlled
narcotics trade remains a serious threat to the stability
of Afghanistan and its neighbours. We encourage
regional players to continue coordinated efforts,
including cooperation with United Nations bodies such
as the 1988 Committee. It is Central Asia that will
benefit most from a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Regional cooperation is clearly also essential for
combating transnational criminal networks, including
drug traffickers and the transborder flow of illicit
money and arms. Effective cross-border cooperation
will be vital for addressing terrorism and Violent
extremism, the threat of which has been significantly
exacerbated by the more than 2,000 foreign terrorist
fighters thought to have travelled from Central Asia to
battlefields in Iraq and Syria.

As the Permanent Representative of Malaysia said,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia can play an important part
in facilitating international support for tackling those
threats. The Centre's support in facilitating dialogue,
promoting cooperation on early warning and analysis,
and helping to mobilize and coordinate the political
will and resources necessary to take effective action
should be greatly valued.

History also teaches us that countries that trade
together are less likely to take up arms against each
other. Levels of intraregional trade in Central Asia
remain very low. Increasing connectivity through
economic linkages, the strengthening of cultural
ties and greater mobility can be the building blocks
for stronger diplomatic bonds. In the Asia-Pacific,
for example, we have seen the growth of trade go
hand-in-hand with closer regional cooperation led by
regional organizations. Promoting greater regional
economic integration could both enhance Central
Asia's prosperity and help maintain peace and stability
over the longer term.

There is obviously no one-size-fits-all approach
to cooperation with regional organizations, but it
is clear that it is in all our interests to encourage
effective regional cooperation and to help regional and
subregional organizations fulfil their potential.

Before I conclude, I want to note an important
positive development in another regional organization
devoted to maintaining international peace and
security, namely, the Antarctic Treaty System, which is
of Vital importance to my country and other members
of the Organization. Earlier today in Hobarh, Australia,
the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Living Resources agreed to establish the world's largest
marine protected area. That was the culmination of
over six years of dedicated diplomatic effort led by New
Zealand and the United States, and involving difficult
and intense negotiations with other Commission
members, including, I would note, members of the
Council: Russia, China, Japan, the United Kingdom,
France, Spain, Ukraine and Uruguay.

As my Minister observed when welcoming that
achievement, "This is a great result for quiet diplomacy
and honest toil". He added that it was particularly
pleasing that this agreement could be reached when
there are so many difficulties and so many differences
happening elsewhere. I have little doubt that he was
thinking of the challenges we face in the Council
and hoping that we might strive for similar positive
results here.

