Mr. Ja Song-Nam (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Allow me first to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for having convened today's open
debate of the Security Council in a timely manner on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. My delegation fully believes that under
your able leadership, the current debate will give
significant momentum to the search for a solution for
the Middle East.

Furthermore, my delegation highly appreciates and
fully supports the statement delivered by Ambassador
Samuel Moncada, Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The resolution of the question of Palestine is one
of the highest priorities for securing peace and security
in the Middle East. The Middle East question, which
resulted from the Israeli occupation of Arab territories
in 1948, remains stalemated, despite the various
United Nations resolutions that have been adopted
and numerous proposals, including the Arab Peace
Initiative, that have been brought to the negotiating
table. That is entirely due to Israel's anti-peace stance
and occupation policy, as well as the United States
policy of double standards in the Middle East in an
effort to always protect Israel.

The international community has consistently
demanded the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
During the resumed tenth emergency special session
in December, the General Assembly overwhelmingly
adopted resolution ES-10/ 19, on the status of Jerusalem,
which opposed the decision of the United States
President to recognize Al-Quds as the capital of Israel
and move the United States Embassy there. It was
another opportunity to showcase the unified will of
the international community. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea delegation believes that the decision
of United States President Trump deserves our global
condemnation and public rejection, as it constitutes
an open defiance of and insult to the legitimacy and
unanimous will of the international community.

The status of Al-Quds should be fairly addressed
by means of restoring the national right of the
Palestinian people and reaching a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Middle East question. The
United States and Israel should pay due attention to
the efforts of the international community to resolve
the issue of the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, in conformity with international law and
other relevant Security Council resolutions for the
benefit of the Palestinian and Arab people. They must
also honestly and diligently address the peace process
in the Middle East.

The establishment of an independent State of
Palestine is the inalienable and sovereign right of the
Palestinian people. The Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has recognized Palestine as an official State
since 1988, and has ever since extended unwavering
support for and solidarity with the struggle of the
Palestinian people to establish an independent State. My
delegation avails itself of this opportunity to reiterate
its firm support and encouragement for the struggle of
the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate right
to establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and the struggle of the Arab people in
its quest for justice. My delegation emphasizes that
we must put an end to the Israeli military occupation
and discrimination against human rights in Palestine
at the earliest date and allow the Palestinian people to
exercise its full right to national self-determination.

In conclusion, my delegation clarifies once again
the principled position of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea that all disputes, including the
Syrian issue, should be resolved peacefully through
dialogue and negotiations between the parties, without
any foreign intervention, in conformity with the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations of respect for sovereignty and non-interference.

