Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): Since this is the last time that we will have the pleasure to sit next to our dear colleague Ambassador Pierce, allow me to also express our appreciation to Her Excellency for her important contributions to the work of the Security Council. We wish her every success in her future responsibilities in Washington, D.C.. (spoke in Arabic) At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. Yemen has witnessed a relatively calm situation recently, signalling the start of a positive breakthrough. However, military operations have resumed in a number of areas in a trend of escalation that gives cause for concern, further complicating the crisis and threatening the political settlement while obstructing the implementation of current agreements. The continued escalation has further exacerbated the humanitarian situation and increased the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people. In the light of the latest developments, my country's delegation stresses the need to reach an immediate ceasefire. We also call for continued efforts to advance a political settlement, which is the only solution to the crisis in Yemen, and support the call of the Special Envoy for Yemen for an immediate and unconditional end to military operations and the start of a comprehensive and inclusive de-escalation process. We also renew our support for the legitimate leadership of Yemen and for international and United Nations efforts to advance a political settlement in that brotherly country. My delegation also calls on the parties to continue building on the outcome of the consultative meeting held in Amman and efforts to build mutual trust in order to start a transitional process in line with the terms of reference established by the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation mechanisms, the outcomes of the comprehensive national dialogue and relevant Security Council resolutions. That would end the current crisis and restore security and stability in Yemen, while maintaining its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. The Yemeni people are still suffering from an unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The continued fighting has exacerbated and increased the extent of the crisis, including by displacing tens of thousands of people, putting at risk their safety, livelihood and well-being. Tunisia renews its call for relief efforts to be intensified and obstructions to the work of the humanitarian organizations to be removed in order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need. We also commend donors and welcome the convening of a pledging conference to finance the Humanitarian Response Plan in Yemen, which will be held in Riyadh next month in cooperation between the United Nations and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. To conclude, my delegation stresses once again the utmost importance of securing the access of United Nations personnel and experts to the FSO SAFER oil tanker to undertake the necessary maintenance. That would mitigate the huge environmental risks that threaten the region.
