Mr. Valle (Brazil): At the outset, let me congratulate
you, Ambassador Lavrov, on this very last day of the
month of June, on your presidency of the Security Council.
Under your able and wise guidance the work of the
Security Council has once again been conducted in a
highly effective way. I am pleased to express appreciation
to your predecessor, Ambassador Park, for the skill and
competence with which he led the Council during the
month of May.

We take this opportunity to renew our tribute to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Maitre
Blondin Beye. He has played, as we have constantly
recognized, a very active role in bridging the differences
between the parties, as well as in consolidating the peace
process. Again, the endeavours by the troika of observer
States in helping the peace process have constituted a key
factor in this process.

The United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), a major United Nations peacekeeping
operation, has come to an end. Since February 1995, men
and women from various countries have worked hard to
consolidate the peace process in Angola. The United
Nations invested a considerable amount of money and
energy to help Angolans on the path to peace and
reconciliation. In general terms, undoubtedly, UNAVEM
III can be considered a successful peacekeeping operation.
Its fragility notwithstanding, there is peace in Angola.
UNITA has been largely demobilized. Since April, the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation has
been ruling in Angola.

Brazil is proud of its involvement in the peace
process since the very beginning. In UNAVEM. III, Brazil
was, for most of the time, the largest United Nations
troop contributor. One infantry battalion, one engineering
company, two dressing units and military and police
observers were sent by Brazil to Angola. This effort
represented a considerable investment that Brazil was glad
to make for the cause of peace and stability in Angola.
The cost cannot be measured in terms of financial
resources only: five Brazilian soldiers lost their lives
while serving in UNAVEM. III.

In spite of all the achievements of UNAVEM. III,
there are still various tasks that remain to be completed.
On the political side, the main challenge is the
normalization of the State administration throughout the
entire country. After an encouraging start, the exercise has
encountered delays. It is now clear that this process will
face serious logistical and psychological problems.

On the military side, the selection of UNITA
members for incorporation into the Angolan National

 

Police, the incorporation of selected UNITA military
personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces, the provision of
information on the strength of Mr. Savimbi's security
detachment and the demobilization and disarmament of the
civilian population are unfulfilled tasks that have to be
addressed seriously and promptly.
More recently, there were reports of serious clashes
which resulted in casualties in the Lunda Norte region. This
is a cause for concern for the international community
regarding the prospects for lasting peace.

The situation clearly shows that the involvement of the
United Nations should not cease with the end of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III. A comprehensive new mission
is indispensable. In this context, Brazil warmly welcomes
the creation of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA). The United Nations should spare no
effort in order to ensure that the progress obtained by
UNAVEM. III will not suffer serious setbacks. The
international community should continue to assist the
Angolan people in reconstructing a country ravaged by
more than three decades of war.

We remain committed, in the expectation that peace
and reconstruction will prevail, that the efforts of the
international community will be rewarded, and that the
aspirations of the Angolan people will be fulfilled.

