Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Since this is the first official meeting of the
Security Council in May, we would like to start by
thanking the delegation of China for its skilful and
effective leadership as President during the month of
April. We would also like to congratulate our Egyptian
colleagues on the start of their presidency, and wish
them every success this month.

We welcome the initiative to convene this meeting
and wish to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Peter Maurer, and the International President of
Medecins Sans Frontieres, Ms. Joanne Liu, for their
participation in this meeting and their contribution to
this discussion.

Protecting humanitarian personnel, including
medical personnel, is one of the most important aspects
of the whole issue ofprotecting civilians. The provision
of medical assistance to those affected by armed
conflict has become not only one of the most sorely
needed activities, but also one of the most dangerous.
The Security Council has more than once called on
parties to armed conflict to comply strictly with the
provisions of international humanitarian law and to
take all necessary steps to ensure the security of those
who provide humanitarian and medical assistance
to affected populations. This idea is also invoked in
resolution 2286 (2016), which we have just adopted.
There is no doubt that we need to consider this issue
in the broader context of conflict resolution and of the
tasks facing the Security Council in this area.

In examining the issue of the security of medical
facilities and personnel, all United Nations bodies,
including, of course, the Security Council, must be
guided by fully verified, reliable information. In this
context, it is particularly important that the reports of
the Secretary-General to be submitted in accordance
with the resolution we have just adopted include only
verified and reliable information. It is unacceptable
that unverified reports of attacks against hospitals
taken from unreliable sources are fed to the media
and then used for political pressure for short-term
objectives. In particular, we are not able to corroborate
the accusations levelled against the Russian air force of
violations of international humanitarian law in Syria.

The key responsibility for protecting humanitarian
personnel and other individuals entitled to special
protection under the Geneva Convention of 1949 lies
with the parties to armed conflict, which have the
primary responsibility for ensuring the protection of the
civilian population. However, we occasionally witness
brutal disregard for the norms of international law,
which stipulate that hospitals that provide assistance to
those who are suffering can under no circumstances be
the targets of attacks. To this can be added the dispiriting
numbers of murders, attacks and abductions against
medical workers carried out by terrorist organizations,
especially the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

What is particularly unacceptable is when medical
personnel suffer at the hands of those who are supposed
to protect them. Late last year, for example, owing to the
indiscriminate use of force, Medecins Sans Frontieres
hospitals were damaged in different cities of Yemen. In
October 2015, there was an air strike against a Medecins

Sans Frontieres hospital in Kunduz, in Afghanistan,
and similar attacks have occurred in other countries.

So far we have not been able to significantly
improve the security of humanitarian and medical
personnel, including doctors, who are working in
dangerous conditions. Against this backdrop, additional
efforts must be made by States Members of the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations to strengthen
mechanisms aimed at ensuring the protection of
such personnel.

We must also remember the high degree of
responsibility that medical personnel bear vis-a-vis
society. Often people's lives depend on their
work. An important precondition for the effective
protection of humanitarian organizations and medical
staff is compliance with the guiding principles of
international humanitarian cooperation, as enshrined
in the resolutions of the General Assembly. These
include respect for sovereignty, neutrality, humanity,
impartiality and independence. There is no doubt that
medical workers who find themselves in conflict areas
must respect the laws and customs of the host country
and strictly adhere to the ethics and standards of the
medical profession. Abiding by these rules will help
ensure that medical workers are able to carry out their
tasks in a well-defined, effective and safe manner.

