Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating the South
African presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

I fully associate myself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union.

The efforts of the United Nations in the service of
the rule of law are indispensable to international peace
and security. During and after conflicts, it is important
to assist countries to re-establish the rule of law by
upholding the principle of accountability, providing
assistance to victims, strengthening the normative
framework of transitional justice and restoring citizens'
confidence in their justice and security institutions.

The Secretary-General's October 2011 report
(S/2011/634*) on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies illustrates
the wide range of activities undertaken by the United
Nations and its Member States to promote the rule of
law at the global level. We encourage the Secretary-
General to continue his efforts to address rule of law
initiatives in a comprehensive and multidimensional
manner. In that regard, the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, scheduled for 24 September,
will be an important milestone.

The Security Council is undeniably playing an
increasingly active role in promoting the rule of law.
Since 2004, it has referred to the rule of law and
transitional justice in more than 160 resolutions. More
important, it has included support for the rule of law in
the mandates of many special political and
peacekeeping missions. The increasingly frequent
participation of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the meetings and deliberations of the Council
serves as further testimony to this growing
commitment. We can only encourage the Council to
continue on this path and to take full advantage of the
available tools, including special procedures.

In order to maintain the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the Council's action in this field, it is
all the more important for the Security Council itself to
adhere to the fundamental principles of the rule of law
in the conduct of its work. The expansion of the
mandate of the Ombudsman under the Al-Qaeda
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1989 (2011)
and the growing use of the International Court of
Justice to clarify the legal elements of international
disputes are examples of measures that strengthen the
legitimacy of actions undertaken by the Council. The
Court's role in maintaining international peace and
security is further strengthened when Member States
recognize its compulsory jurisdiction, as Luxembourg
has done since the Court's establishment.

Allow me also to highlight the importance that
we attach to combating impunity, as well as to the
International Criminal Court in that regard. The
International Criminal Court is a classic example of the

interaction between the national and international
levels with respect to the rule of law. The Court is
complementary to national jurisdictions, and its
permanent character allows it to help prevent the most
serious crimes and to fulfil a critical role in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

Luxembourg's commitment to the rule of law
further manifests itself through our engagement with
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The experience of the PBC shows that lasting peace
cannot be achieved without the implementation of the
principles underlying the rule of law - universal
access to justice and equality before the law, the
maintenance and protection of the rights and freedoms
of each individual, the primacy of law and the fight
against corruption. It is therefore only right that the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law is a
priority for each of the six country-specific
configurations of the PBC.

Finally, I would like to highlight the support that
for a number of years Luxembourg has provided to the
activities of the International Center for Transitional
Justice and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, as well as our support for the proposed
United Nations rule of law indicators, implemented
jointly by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

It is by working together that we will succeed in
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

