At the outset, I would like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's meeting to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2020/946) and the briefers for their updates. The year 2020 is a time to reflect on the achievements made on this agenda since the Security Council recognized its importance back in 2000. The hallmark resolution recognized for the first time the importance of the participation of women in peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts. The resolution also paved the way for an additional nine resolutions that further recognized the crucial roles of women in conflict prevention and resolution, while addressing different dimensions of conflict affecting them. If implemented seriously, these resolutions have the transformative potential to bring about women's empowerment and equality without leaving them behind. The current pandemic has disproportionately affected women and girls, particularly those in fragile and conflict-affected areas. In addition, a hidden pandemic of gender-based violence is also growing, and women are being excluded and marginalized from all areas of decision-making, including in the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) response and recovery efforts. Together, these issues have threatened the decades of progress made in women's rights and equality. As our President stated at the high-level event on Beijing+25 last month, "Tw]e should not let the pandemic stall our progress. Ensuring timely medical care, equal access to vaccines and robust recovery plans that take care of the economic and social needs of women and girls are necessary." Nepal appreciates the exemplary strength shown by women from various walks of life in combating COVID-19 within their communities. In particular, we commend the selfless service of women peacebuilders and peacekeepers in educating local communities about containing and preventing the spread of COVID-19 while delivering on their peacekeeping mandate. This has proved that, during the crisis, we need more women leaders, peacebuilders and peacekeepers. From the days of the Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Nepal has been a proactive supporter of the cause of women and peace and security. As the first country in South Asia and the second in Asia overall to do so, Nepal adopted its national action plan in 2011 to implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). We have made explicit efforts to localize our plan and mainstream the women and peace and security agenda in Government institutions. Nepal's national action plan has been an example of a transparent, inclusive and participatory process with the close involvement of conflict victims and civil society organizations. This experience has been widely shared with countries in the region and beyond. Nepal has finalized a draft three-year national action plan for a second phase. The draft of the plan builds on the experiences and lessons learned from the implementation of the first-phase national action plan. The draft includes a framework for monitoring, reporting and evaluation as well as a budget breakdown for different components, strategies and activities. It fits well with national and sectoral policies outlining a localization plan. After its adoption, the second national action plan will also be localized at the provincial and local levels. In conclusion, I want to express Nepal's readiness to share its experience and lessons learned through the constructive engagement of women in conflict- prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
