Mr. Wittig (Germany): We welcome Pakistan's
initiative to hold an open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping and its multidimensional nature.
International peace and security lie at the heart of the
United Nations, and peacekeeping is surely the most
visible instrument of the United Nations in that regard.
It therefore deserves our constant attention.

At the outset, I would like to reiterate Germany's
longstanding support for United Nations peacekeeping.
It is our goal to strengthen the United Nations system
and the missions on the ground. It is in that spirit that
we call for a fresh look on how to overcome current
gaps and deficiencies. Close cohesion between
mandates and required capacities is crucial for the
success ofpeacekeeping missions. At the same time, we
believe that an increased use of modern equipment and
technologies is necessary to improve the operational
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to take this opportunity to introduce
before the Council an initiative that Germany,
together with a number of partners, has developed
over recent years. If implemented, the initiative could
make a substantial contribution to realizing truly
multidimensional United Nations peacekeeping. I am
talking about the creation of a group of friends of
United Nations police.

Sustainable peace can only be achieved through
justice and security and by the re-establishing the
rule of law. The police segment of United Nations
peacekeeping has proven crucial in assisting host
countries in developing critical peacebuilding priorities
and strategies. It is also key in national programmes on
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

United Nations police are mastering their
wide-ranging and complex tasks with commitment
and professionalism. They need our support and
appreciation. Our initiative to establish a group of
friends aims at fostering political support for the United
Nations police. We want to strengthen the capacity
and the impact of United Nations police. Such a group
should include all main stakeholders involved in United
Nations police missions and facilitate the informal
exchange of ideas. It shall create a sense of common
purpose and be a place to launch concrete initiatives.
It shall provide a bridge between United Nations
Headquarters in New York and capitals.

The idea of creating a group of friends of United
Nations police was introduced at the October 2012 High-
Level Conference on International Police Peacekeeping
in the 21st Century, held in Berlin, and has since
evolved further. Such a group would be complementary
to the existing Strategic Police Advisory Group in order
to advance sustained political engagement in support of
United Nations police.

We would expect the group of friends to consist
of dedicated Member States that are actively engaged
and interested in developing United Nations police
peacekeeping, as well as partners from the Secretariat.
Other key partners and supporters could be invited to
join. The constitutive meeting of the group of friends is
planned for this spring.

Together, we can further strengthen the role of
United Nations peacekeeping, its capacities and its
impact on the ground. This is ajoint endeavour, and the
support of all Member States is key.

