Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to start
by thanking the briefers - Assistant Secretary-
General Zouev, Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni and
Mr. Liberty - for their very informative briefings. I
think that the picture that Mr. Liberty painted before
our eyes of the children in their school uniforms
shows them as a real symbol of not only the hope and
but also the opportunities that lie ahead for Liberia.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif, who is here with us today, the preceding Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Liberia for
their leadership and all the staff of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for their outstanding work
in the country and for bringing it to where it is today.

The essence of today's briefing is to reflect on the
successes and lessons learned from UNMIL and to
look forward to a peaceful and inclusive Liberia. We
can be proud that UNMIL has left a Liberia that looks
very different to where it started. Allow me to focus on
three important aspects with regard to the departure of
UNMIL and the situation in Liberia: first, the successes
of UNMIL and the progress in Liberia; secondly, the
remaining challenges; and, thirdly, the lessons learned
from UNMIL.

UNMIL was present in Liberia for 14 years. In those
14 years, the country made significant progress leading
up to the elections in 2017 and 2018 and the peaceful
transfer of power from President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf
to President George Weah. We hope that President
Weah continues to build on the work of the previous
Administration, working towards a Liberia that is
both peaceful and inclusive. Entrepreneurs and young
professionals are the future of Liberia. Mr. Liberty,
who addressed the Security Council today, is a part ofa
new generation and of the engine that will be essential
to Liberia's future. Although we all acknowledge that it
has come a long way, Liberia still has a few hurdles to
overcome on the way ahead.

That brings me to my second point: addressing
the root causes of the conflict and sustaining peace.
We must consider that Liberia is a country that has
seen violence. It is still a new democracy with young
institutions. While the situation in Liberia is relatively
stable, a stagnant economy, youth unemployment,
human rights violations and a lack of land reform and
reconciliation policies could pose threats to peace
in the country, particularly now that UNMIL is no
longer present.

In the light of the high-level event on sustaining
peace next week, I want to highlight that the departure
of UNMIL and the situation in Liberia provide an
opportunity for the whole United Nations system to put
the sustaining peace agenda into practice. We must seize
that opportunity. Moving forward, the role of the United
Nations country team and the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission will be crucial. In the light
of that, the Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
necessary strengthening of the United Nations country
team and the Office of the Resident Coordinator.

Those offices will be crucial to guaranteeing the active
engagement of the United Nations in protecting human
rights, ensuring the full and meaningful participation
of women and girls, addressing the root causes of
the initial conflict and building strong institutions to
sustain peace in Liberia.

Moving on to my third point, the lessons learned
from UNMIL and the importance of building on those
lessons when considering exit strategies in other
contexts are essential. The Liberia peacebuilding plan
is the first ofits kind requested by the Security Council.
We consider such longer-term planning crucial when
looking at exit strategies. The Liberia peacebuilding
plan provides a solid basis for a common vision and
direction for the country, which in turn makes it easier
to determine the priorities of a United Nations country
team. In addition to the preparation of a peacebuilding
plan, we also learned that we must carefully time the
exit of peacekeeping and special political missions.

Lastly, in the case of Liberia, we learned more
with regard to the important interlinkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. One cannot occur
without the other. We have to ensure that the host
country's Government has the capacity and the authority
to support both the peacekeeping and the peacebuilding
process. And, as I said, it is important to reflect upon
the lessons learned. In that light, we welcome today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/8), and would also
welcome a broader report on the lessons learned in
that regard.

Today will hopefully be the last time that we
discuss the situation in Liberia on the agenda of the
Council in this context. In conclusion, I would like to
stress the importance of the good offices role of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in
Liberia and the role of a strengthened country team in
Liberia in view of the sustaining peace agenda.

Additionally, I would like to highlight once again
that the Liberian Government can count on the continued
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission country-
specific configuration for Liberia as a tool to support
the transition from UNMIL to a United Nations country
team and beyond.

Let me reiterate our thanks to Special Representative
Zarif, UNMIL and the United Nations country team
for their great effort and leadership. I would also like
to reiterate our support to the Government of Liberia
along its path towards a peaceful and inclusive Liberia
that offers plenty of opportunities for its people, in
particular the children in their school uniforms that
Mr. Liberty spoke about.

