Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We listened with
interest to the briefing given to the Security Council by
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by Ambassador Maged
Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People recently heard a
statement from Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, an outstanding
representative of that people, in which she told the
Committee that the window for building a Palestinian-
Israeli peace based on a two-State solution was rapidly
closing owing to the voracity of the State of Israel,
which chooses expansionism and repression over
respect for human rights and international law.

The State of Israel engages in a regime of
exclusion. Discriminatory laws proliferate.
Communication channels reserved for the exclusive use
of settlers, different rules for settlements on the one
hand and Palestinian villages on the other, deliberate
policies to abandon the Palestinian people to violent
attacks by settlers, segregationist controls and
checkpoints and arbitrary arrests of children, the
elderly and women - all of those are inhuman
practices on the part of a State that, paradoxically, calls
itself a democracy. There is no democracy when laws,
policies and the use of force privilege one group over
another, enforcing religious and ethnic separatism, and
when a people is subjected to oppression, exploitation
and discrimination, as is the heroic Palestinian people.

It is imperative to put an end to the Palestinian
tragedy by effectuating a peace that is comprehensive,
lasting and, above all, fair. Unfortunately, we currently
have a global power structure that, by abusive use of
imperialist military force, transgresses the principles of
the United Nations Charter and international law.

Israel, the occupying Power, means to impose
perpetual humiliation on the Palestinian people. The
whole world calls out to the Security Council to
implement the relevant resolutions on the Palestinian
situation. Venezuela also reiterates the importance of
convening, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, a conference of the high contracting parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention, with a view to
identifying ways to ensure compliance with the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.
The Security Council remains indifferent to the
systemic violations by the State of Israel of international
law, particularly international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Why such impunity? Why such
inaction by the Council? We deplore the fact that,
because of the complicity of one political and military
Power, all resolutions on the Palestinian question are
ignored.

In that context, the urgent need is clear to move
towards a new international order, genuinely based on
the legal equality of States, and in which the
fundamental principles of international law prevail.
Venezuela reiterates its support for recognizing the
Palestinian State as a full Member of the United
Nations.

Current attempts to violate the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic are causes
for concern. Syria's legitimate aspirations to regain
control of the Golan Heights are eclipsed in favour of
Israel's expansionist agenda in the Middle East. It is
painful and regrettable to see the deplorable conflict
afflicting the Syrian people - a people who love peace
and nobly defend their sovereignty and right to
self-determination. We are optimistic about the
facilitating work of the Joint Special Envoy for the
United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan. The Council must contribute
unambiguously to the implementation of the six-point
plan he has proposed, which was welcomed by the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.

We support a ceasefire and a political and
peaceful solution, through dialogue, to the conflict in
Syria, in order to move towards democratic reforms
without interventions imposed by imperialist interests.
My country recognizes the efforts made by the Syrian
Government to promote such reforms.

We hope that resolution 2043 (2012), adopted on
21 April, establishing the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria - which is to be composed of
unarmed military observers and which has been
welcomed by the Syrian Government - will contribute
to overcoming the crisis. The quest for peace must
never be abandoned. However, it is troubling that Kofi
Annan's facilitation work and peace efforts by some
countries are intentionally being undermined. The
warmongers do not want peace in Syria; rather, they
want regime change, which, if it were to materialize,
would destabilize the Middle East and encourage the
State of Israel's aggression against the Palestinian
people. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms that the Syrian people has the right to decide
its destiny democratically and without intervention. We
believe that the Government of President Bashar
Al-Assad is the legitimate representative of its people.

We also condemn the ongoing violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and the recurring violations of
resolution 1701 (2006).

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of all nations and to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

