Major General Iqbal Asi: At the outset, I wish
to thank all of representatives for their very kind
remarks and expressions of support for troops in the
field. Questions were asked with regard to three areas,
including inter-mission cooperation, my subject.
Secondly, there was one question regarding cooperation
between United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) and the Forces republicaines de C6te d'Ivoire?
And thirdly, I will make a short comment on training
based on my experience in the field. I will handle the
questions in reverse order.

A joint analysis centre, covering two or more
missions, is very much a possibility and, in fact,
desirable. But to achieve that, we must first agree
that there has to be a regional approach to conflict
management by the United Nations, a common threat
perception and a common mechanism for initiating
responses. These things have to be agreed upon first.
There could be no better examples than those provided
by the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. The three Missions are
so contiguous that resources can be placed centrally
and utilized in all of the Missions. We have to work at
that. In the light of the continuing implications of the
current financial crunch, we should seriously consider
such options. They are bound to be useful.

The representative of the Republic of Korea
mentioned that troop transfers should be dealt with
carefully. I could not agree with him more, but I
have also spoken about status-of-forces agreements,
status-of-mission agreements and memorandums of
understanding. We need to formalize this practice for
proper sanction. Without that, such transfers will not
be possible.

The representative mentioned that there was no
movement of troops between UNOCI and UNMIL. I
would just like to make the clarification that troops
have moved twice - three companies in 2010 and
one company in 2011, which was significant. We have
definitely utilized helicopters more than once for
security and reconnaissance sorties, which was useful.

The representative of the United States spoke about
inter-mission cooperation viability. There is no doubt
that such cooperation is an extremely viable option.
The only issue is the need to sort out the approach to
conflict resolution taken by the United Nations.

I would also like to deal with the training question
that was raised. Regarding training gaps among troops
working in the field, my opinion is that such gaps will
continue to exist, and we will not be able to remove
them on a permanent basis. That is not possible. The
military contingents come from very different national
backgrounds. There are very wide gaps in their training

standards. We cannot do much about that, although we
must try to reduce these gaps as far as possible.

However, it is my personal observation that the
collective attitude of the contingent and the ability of
the battalion commander and the officers to inspire
performance make all the difference on the ground. If
that can be done - if somehow or other the national
authorities and the local commanders on the ground
can make that much difference - I am sure that troops'
performance in the field will improve.

In response to the representative of Rwanda,
inter-mission cooperation as a short-term solution
cannot replace a permanent solution. I agree that there
is absolutely no doubt about that, but a permanent
solution needs resources. We actually talk in the
context of a lack of resources. A lack of resources can
be dealt with only by multiplying resources through the
use of those available in other missions. That is how
one can take care of the shortage of resources that we
are experiencing in the field in one form or another.

The representative of Azerbaijan spoke about
particular logical and administrative problems in
inter-mission cooperation. There is no doubt about it.
These problems are there, but we have the mechanisms
of status-of-forces agreements, status-of-mission
agreements and memorandums of understanding, of
which I have already spoken. We can reduce or even
eliminate these problems through this legal framework.

The representative of Luxembourg asked about the
creation of border-control units. There is no doubt that
they can be very useful, but they have to be subordinated
to the inter-mission cooperation framework. We have
to agree that this framework is acceptable to all of us
in all missions around the globe before we can think
of establishing border-control units, although this
too will not be without its challenges. Who controls
and commands the battalion? Where is the battalion
deployed? What are the terms of reference of operation
of this battalion across different missions? All that will
have to be sorted out.

I now come to some of the more challenging
questions. The French and Australian representatives
had questions regarding inter-mission cooperation
within the context of Mali. I remember that when the
crisis in Mali started, I was in the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). We actually
started working the logistics support part ourselves,
without any clear direction from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, because we thought that a
mission in Mali would certainly require some initial
support from UNOCI to help it settle in, because there
was such natural logistical support available from Cote
d'Ivoire. We have broad infrastructure; we just brought
it to Bamako and there was no problem.

That support is there; it is very possible. There
is the use of helicopters. I have learned here that the
MI-24s are being transferred to UNOCI. That is very
much the central point of the three missions in Cote
d'Ivoire, Mali and Liberia. We may have to work out
some of the logistical aspects of refuelling in-between,
but otherwise operationally there should be no problem.
I think this should be pursued.
As to a central quick reaction force, there is force
available that is placed centrally, maybe somewhere
in northern Cote d'Ivoire. This force is available to
react anywhere. Again, some of the teething aspects
will have to be sorted out in the memorandums of
understanding, the status-of-forces agreements or the
status-of-mission agreements in order to ensure that it
works out smoothly. The use of technology, again, is
one of those areas of cooperation that I believe to be
feasible.

Finally, I come to the most challenging question,
which came from the representative of Pakistan. What
are the challenges in inter-mission cooperation? I covered
that particular issue in my presentation. There were
three things that I spoke about in terms of challenges:
legal and administrative challenges, restrictive mission
mandates, and the non-availability of standard means.
The last two are important, but the most difficult
challenge is the legal, political and administrative part.
What number of troops is acceptable to a particular
country? What types of weapon are acceptable to a
particular troop-contributing country? Is a country
politically prepared to move into the mission area or
not? Is it acceptable to that country or not? Maybe they
are neighbours; maybe in a regional context they are not
ready to operate in a certain country. As to contingent-
owned equipment, the United Nations wants a certain
standard and a certain type of weapon, whether that
country has it or not. What are the capabilities? Some
of these things will have to be sorted out. This is a real
challenge.

But I should like to digress a little bit here. There is
one more very important challenge to which I alluded
earlier. That is regionalizing our approach to conflict
resolution. I was talking with my colleague, the Force
Commander of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
We are neighbours. Day in and day out, we are sorting out
some of our problems in Sector West along the border.
He is on the other side and I am on mine. Although we
talk regularly to each other on the telephone and meet,
and I always thought our understanding of some of our
issues was really common and we had no problem, but
having talked with him here, I realize how differently
he thinks of his own problems than I do of mine.

A mission has a certain identity, and one develops
sympathy with that identity. One develops sympathy
with the local authorities. They have their own
respective points of View on different issues. Until
such time that we regionalize this entire concept, bring
people together and discuss these thingsjointly, we will
not be able to develop a commonality of views on this.
That is important, and although I did not cover it in my
statement, I think it is the most important challenge.

The last question was from the representative of
Togo, concerning cooperation between UNOCI and the
Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI). I assure
the representative of Togo that such cooperation is
wide-ranging. It is in the field of operations, training,
logistics, and security operations. I have 29 different
bases that I occupy throughout all of Cote d'Ivoire.
From those bases, I initiate patrolling all over the
country. FRCI has about eight major bases that I
know of. We complement one another. Wherever it is
not possible for them to dominate the area, my troops
dominate that area. This is actually what I would call
complementarity in operations to dominate the area.

There is joint patrolling. Whenever there is a
problem, we run to assist them, even in terms of
information-sharing. We conduct training on a regular
basis. My force has conducted more than one session. In
fact, the Mission on its own is also conducting training
for FRCI troops. Our logistics support is phenomenal.
We have provided transport on more than one occasion
since I took over responsibility for the force. We have
even allowed commanders to use helicopters.

As I mentioned in my statement, we have provided
security in elections to different voting centres and
regional offices throughout the country. My entire
force was deployed as recently as April. I am sure the
Council received numerous reports on that. It was a very
successful operation. We provide security to strategic
sites. By the end of last year, the spoilers were attacking
strategic sites after the FRCI found it very difficult to
defend some of those sites, which were very important
to them. So we moved in and provided security to 11
sites. We are continuously providing security there to
VIPs.

For my last point, we are starting a partnership
project with the FRCI. I have a lot to say on this, but
I am constrained by time. It is a major project, and we
look forward to enhancing the capacity of the FRCI in
a big way if the project gets through somehow or the
other.

