Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, Sir, we very much appreciate your
work as President of the Security Council, as well as
the efforts of the entire Kuwaiti team. We also thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We share the
views he expressed and support his efforts to achieve
a lasting settlement in Syria. It is crucial that he has
been able to establish and maintain an ongoing and
constructive dialogue with all of the parties involved
and is working to bring their positions closer together
on both the regional and international fronts.

Russia is working actively to advance the political
process and restore confidence between the key parties
within and around Syria. We are collaborating diligently
with our Astana format partners, Iran and Turkey, while
staying in constant contact with the Special Envoy and
coordinating with Syria's Government and opposition.

On 25 June Major General Bakin, the Head of
the Russian Reconciliation Centre, gave the Security
Council a thorough briefing on the military and political
situation in Syria (see S/PV.8561), which we found
extremely useful and informative, with exhaustive
answers to many of the questions that have been raised
in the Council. Members should familiarize themselves
with it. The Russian representative gave particular
attention in his statement to the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. There can be no denying that militias
from the terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
is essentially the Al-Nusra Front, have not stopped their
provocative attacks on Syrian Armed Forces positions,
the country's civilian population and the Russian air
base at Khmeimim. Urging or demanding that we do
nothing in this situation is at the very least dishonest,
especially when Major General has confirmed that our
military operations are directed exclusively at targets
that have been confirmed by intelligence. We are
not harming the civilian population or humanitarian
infrastructure in any way.

We are concerned about the fact that the Al-Nusra
Front's members are trying to refashion themselves
into a moderate opposition. We all know very well that
rebranding does not mean refraining from terrorist
activities. Their content remains the same and the fight
against terrorist organizations that have been recognized
as such by the Security Council - by all of us,
unanimously - must continue. The Astana guarantors
are determined to fully implement the agreements on
stabilizing Idlib and are actively cooperating to that
end with Syria, Iran and Turkey. We are scrupulously
implementing the memorandum that we drafted, agreed
on and signed in Sochi. Instead of demanding that we
implement what we ourselves agreed on and signed, it
would be better for everyone to get involved in the fight
against terrorism. That would be a real contribution to
achieving the Syrian settlement.

We are seriously concerned about the situation in
north-eastern Syria. Ensuring stability and security in
this area will be possible only ifit is based on respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
and the rejection of separatist plans that undermine
the national security of Syria and its neighbours.
Generally speaking, it is baffling that on the one hand
we are being asked to provide more information and
details about what is going on, and then, when we invite
our representative - who is working in the country
and carrying out important national reconciliation
tasks - to brief the Council, that briefing is suddenly
questioned. In fact, it was questioned before it had
even been delivered, and by countries that are illegally
occupying Syria and violating its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

We hope that we will soon be able to achieve
a breakthrough in the launch of the constitutional
committee. Russia's representatives have been holding
intensive consultations on the subject in the past few
days, with the opposition and other stakeholders involved
in the conflict as well as the Syrian authorities. It goes
without saying that the strategic aim oflaunching a full-
fledged political process in Geneva under the auspices
of the United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen,
based on resolution 2254 (2015), is unchanged.

I have emphasized that in spite of the situation that
has been whipped up, often artificially, including in
today's Council meeting, we remain optimistic about
future developments in the Syrian Arab Republic,
because we are working fully in accordance with
international law. We are in Syria at the invitation
of the legitimate Government. It is clear that, as the
situation in Syria is normalized, the main hotbeds of
terrorism are eliminated and the country is restored to
peace, the problems of post-conflict recovery and the
provision of humanitarian assistance will come to the
fore. Humanitarian aid must be provided to all Syrians
throughout Syria, without preconditions. It is important
to provide assistance for Syria's reconstruction in
strict compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law and the principles of neutrality and
impartiality, without bias and in cooperation with
the central authorities. We must work to create the
conditions needed to support the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
to their homes in Syria. However, there was detailed
information about this in Major General Bakin's
briefing (see S/PV.8561), so I would once again ask
Council members to read it carefully.

We urge everyone to once and for all reject
unilateral sanctions, which only exacerbate the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Its citizens are
suffering in large part because ofthose restrictions, and
Syria is experiencing serious problems in its health-
care, fuel and energy sectors. Russia will continue to
provide Syria with comprehensive support on issues
regarding the reconstruction of infrastructure and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, both bilaterally
and internationally, including through the United
Nations system.

We again underscore that Syria was, is and will
remain a key State in the Middle East and an integral
part of the Arab world. It cannot be artificially
ripped from the broader regional context for the
sake of circumstantial expediency. In that regard, we
support returning Damascus to the Arab family as
soon as possible, which will enable the restoration,
normalization and improvement of relations among
Arabs and in the situation in the Middle East as a whole.
Incidentally, that is a natural and objective process that
is progressing despite resistance from outside.

It is high time that many of our colleagues took
another look at their outdated approaches to the Syrian
issue, which have been overtaken by history. It is time to
abandon the pressure, the attempts at isolation and the
open flirtations with illegal armed groups, which easily
change their loyalties and are not ashamed to cooperate
with outright terrorists. Has history really taught our
colleagues nothing? We need only look at the destruction
of statehood that has resulted from illegitimate outside
interventions in various Arab States.

We call on everyone interested in restoring peace
to Syria to engage constructively with our efforts. We
can end the war and focus on the issues of the political
process and national reconciliation, which Mr. Pedersen
is actively working on. Together we can guarantee the
rights of the minorities, including the Christians who
have lived in the Middle East for thousands of years.
The situation in Syria and the Middle East requires a
comprehensive approach. Establishing international
cooperation requires a decisive rejection of policies of
escalation and a switch from confrontation to dialogue
and cooperation, and I want to emphasize once again
that that applies to Syria, Iran and other countries in
the region.

