Mr. Treki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): The Security Council is meeting today to
discuss the problem of the separation wall being built
in the occupied Palestinian territories as a security
construction but which is in reality a part of Israel's
long-term plan to annex additional territories by force.
This represents a serious violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, of the United Nations Charter, and
dangerously threatens international efforts aimed at
reaching a peaceful solution.

The wall will ruin fertile Palestinian agricultural
land, isolate and separate Palestinian towns and
villages and destroy the lives of the thousands of
Palestinians who are and will be cut off from their
lands, work, schools and institutions. The construction
of the wall is also an attempt by Israel to reaffirm its
annexation of East Jerusalem. Moreover, the Israeli
occupying authorities are pursuing the establishment of
illegal settlements in occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, thus revealing their
expansionist intentions and their offhand attitude
towards international efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to this problem.

Israel's attacks on Palestinian cities; its targeting
of innocent Palestinians and demolition of their homes;
its extrajudicial executions; its recent destruction of the
Rafah refugee camp; and its murder of dozens of
innocent Palestinians must be condemned by this
Council, which bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council must compel Israel, the occupying Power, to
end the occupation of all Arab lands and to abandon all
measures to annex new lands. This most contemptible
form of occupation is unacceptable and would be cause
for resistance by any people on whom it was imposed.
The Europeans resisted the Nazis, the United States
fought its occupiers, and the Palestinian people is no
exception.

My country condemns all forms of terrorism, but
we cannot accept the pretext put forward by the
occupying Power for its killing of Palestinians. True
terrorism is that which is being pursued by the
occupying Power. This is the same excuse that has been
used by colonizing Powers against all those who have
resisted them. Fascist Italy, too, used it against Libyan
fighters during their war for liberation. The essential
problem is that of the unspeakable occupation of the
Palestinian territories. This Council must make Israel,
the occupying Power, respect all its resolutions and
those of the General Assembly. It must compel Israel to
withdraw from the Palestinian territories and restore to
the Palestinians their legitimate right to an independent
State on their own national soil, with Jerusalem as its
capital. Israel's excuses regarding its own security are
mere procrastination and demonstrate its lack of
earnestness in withdrawing from the occupied
territories. It is putting the cart before the horse,
because its security can be assured only when its
occupying forces withdraw.

We ask the Security Council and the international
community to strive to ensure that the suffering of the
Palestinian people is finally ended and to exert pressure
on Israel to withdraw from Palestinian territories. That
is the only way to ensure peace and security in that
sensitive region. The wall is only one manifestation of
the illegal occupation.

