Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to express our condolences in connection with the attack that took place near Niamey and our hope that those responsible for this attack will be found and punished. We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine Sori- Coulibaly; the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly; and the representative of Brazil, Mr. Joao Genesio de Almeida Filho, who spoke on behalf of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. Since the start of 2020, Guinea-Bissau has gone through a very complex post-electoral period. The disputes about the outcome of the presidential election have had a negative impact on the political, social and economic situation in the country. The neutrality of the military has come into question. At the same time, we need to acknowledge that the situation has gradually been returning to normal since April. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) recognized Umaro Sissoco Embalo6 as the legitimately elected President. In June, Parliament endorsed the programme of work of the Government of Prime Minister Nuno Nabiam, a decision that was welcomed by the leadership of ECOWAS. Naturally, some disagreements remain among the main political actors. In this regard, we call on all public and political forces to behave responsibly, which would lead to creating the conditions for the easing of political tensions. We call on the military to stay out of politics, as it has in the past. We believe that the formation of a new Government in Guinea-Bissau will allow the country to focus on implementing the reforms envisioned by the Conakry Agreement, including the revision of the national Constitution, the electoral law and the law on political parties. It is particularly important to start resolving the socioeconomic problems of the country, which have clearly become more acute in the context of the coronavirus pandemic. As we have said in the past, we believe that restructuring the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) must be done gradually and in the framework of the timetable set out in resolution 2512 (2020). By the end of December, when UNIOGBIS is set to end its presence in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations country team must be given all the instruments it needs not only to assist Guinea-Bissau in its development but also to provide it with effective support in addressing such important challenges as drug trafficking and corruption and in ensuring the smooth operation of Government institutions. In that connection, I should like to stress in particular the work that UNODC is doing in the region and which will continue, as we heard during the briefing. Furthermore, we are convinced that the time has come to consider the possibility of gradually lifting the Security Council sanctions against Guinea-Bissau, as they are now obsolete. The current situation has nothing to do with the coup d'etat that took place in 2012, when the sanctions were introduced. As the events of the first half of this year have shown, sanctions in no way influence the internal political situation. It turns out that they exist as though they were in a parallel dimension. Their further maintenance, given the closure of UNIOGBIS and the absence of genuine threats to international peace and security, is increasingly puzzling.
