Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Over the past few weeks, we have been
witnessing the vitality of our Organization and of the
Security Council, where arduous work has been done
for the benefit of the citizens of the world in
developing ways to guarantee security for all and to
ensure world peace. Our multilateral system continues
to offer the only legitimate means of finding solutions
to which we are collectively committed; we alone are
responsible for our common destiny.

Nicaragua has been following with great concern
the situation that has arisen as a result of the lack of
proactive Iraqi cooperation in faithfully complying
with Security Council resolutions. When a country
does not abide by its obligations, it endangers that
multilateral system and undermines the good faith that
it showed in entering into obligations pursuant to the
Charter. We are in favour of multilateral efforts. We
would like to see a multilateral system that is capable
of exercising a worldwide mandate promptly and
effectively. We do not want to see a multilateral system
that can be used as a shield against accountability.

In our opinion, resolution 1441 (2002) is clear-cut
and specific. It should not now be applied flexibly; nor
should it be expanded or interpreted in a new way. We
should not delay multilateral acknowledgement of what
the inspectors said. Let us make no mistake: the
disarmament of Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction
is the goal. This is not simply a process of inspectors
and inspections; this is a disarmament process.

The inspectors themselves have pointed out Iraq's
shortcomings in providing a detailed, exact and
complete declaration of its weapons of mass
destruction. To date, there has been no clear-cut
decision on the part of Iraq to cooperate with the
objectives of resolution 1441 (2002) by disarming
immediately. After a decade of Security Council
resolutions calling for the disarmament of Iraq,
concrete, timely and effective measures are required to
deal with the threat to international peace and security.
Immobility and inaction will undermine trust in our
collective resolve and imperil the very credibility of
the Organization.

We listened to the reports of Mr. Hans Blix of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. They both
deserve our appreciation for their tireless work and our
support for the work that remains to be done.
Nicaragua reaffirms the importance of the United
Nations as an international institution for the
maintenance of peace and security among nations. We
believe, however, that the time has come for this
Organization to give proof of its ability to respond
immediately in the face of Iraq's non-compliance with
Council resolutions.

As a peace-loving country, we are concerned
about the repercussions and consequences of an
immobile multilateral system. If Iraq does not
cooperate with the Council, all the means provided for
in the Charter should be used in order to guarantee
collective security. We cannot allow the situation
brought about by Iraq's non-compliance with the
Council's resolutions to jeopardize international
security.

After December 1998 there was no monitoring,
inspection or verification in Iraq, as required by the
Council's resolutions. That is why we agree with Mr.
Hans Blix that Iraq must present credible proof of the
existence, or of the verifiable destruction, of its
weapons of mass destruction. It is Iraq that must allay
the suspicions of the international community by
providing the facts. The inspections cannot continue
indefinitely if Baghdad does not provide prompt, active
and effective cooperation.

Resolution 1441 (2002) has truly become the last
chance for Iraq. Iraq, however, has not cooperated fully
with the inspectors and continues to fall seriously short
in its obligations. For that reason, we believe that we
must continue with the immediate and complete
disarmament of Iraq. Current circumstances demand
that our Organization take concrete and timely
measures. We cannot allow resolutions to continue to
accumulate for another decade without any real effect.
The multilateral system must justify its existence and
demonstrate the firm and unswerving commitment of
the peoples of the United Nations to peace and security.

Through omission, we might seriously undermine
world peace. We trust that this Organization will not be
blamed for inaction.

