Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): Lithuania thanks
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his efforts to
protect civilians and reach a sustainable ceasefire in
Gaza. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
on.

Our eyes are riveted upon Gaza. We condemn the
loss ofhundreds ofcivilian lives, many ofthem children,
and the 100,000 people displaced. The magnitude ofthe
humanitarian crisis is breathtaking. This is the moment
for the international community, regional Powers and
the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to respond to
the cry of civilians for peace. Violence has no place in
addressing the ongoing situation. The actions of Hamas
and military groups in Gaza * including the firing
of rockets into Israel, developing rockets and tunnels,
using civilians as human shields - cannot be tolerated.
We recognize Israel's legitimate right to defend itself.
Israel must act in a proportionate manner, in line with
international humanitarian law, to ensure the protection
of civilians.

Lithuania is alarmed by the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We condemn the shelling of a third
hospital. The humanitarian situation requires urgent
attention. Humanitarian causes should be respected
and immediate access for humanitarian assistance
must be unconditionally allowed. All parties are
obligated to protect schools and hospitals, respect their
civilian character, and ensure safe passage for medical
personnel and ambulances. We sincerely appreciate the
tireless work and efforts of doctors, paramedics, United
Nations personnel, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other humanitarian organizations in
saving human lives in Gaza.

We strongly support the ongoing diplomatic efforts
of the Secretary-General, together with regional
Powers - including Egypt, Turkey, Qatar and the
League of Arab States - to convince Hamas and other
militant groups to cease all rocket attacks and agree on
a complete, immediate ceasefire. We hope that it will
lead to a genuine dialogue with Israel and Palestine.
The tragic escalation of hostilities once again confirms
the unsustainable nature of the status quo and the need
for a comprehensive solution with regard to the situation
in Gaza, Palestine and the entire region.

Lithuania reiterates that a two-State solution
remains the only way to achieve a lasting peace and
security for Israelis and Palestinians. My country
is willing to work with the United States and other
partners on an initiative to relaunch peace negotiations.

The Middle East is gripped by bouts of extreme
violence. There is no breakthrough in sight for Syria.
The shocking levels of human suffering today, we
know, will pale against those oftomorrow. We welcome
resolution 2165 (2014), which we hope will facilitate
the delivery of aid to all Syrians in need. In case of
non-compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014) and
2165 (2014) by any Syrian party, the Council has the
responsibility to act by taking measures under Article
41 of the Charter of the United Nations and referring the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
The ultimate goal remains a political solution to the
conflict in Syria and we welcome the appointment of
the new United Nations Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to Syria, Staffan de Mistura.

The Syrian crisis has become a regional crisis with
potential international security threats. A political
settlement in Syria could play a decisive role in fighting
the growing terrorism and insurgency in and around
regional flashpoints, mainly Iraq. Terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) already control
a large swathe of the Middle East, a chunk of Iraq, and
oil wells in Syria. They undermine the stability, unity
and territorial integrity of States. ISIS fuels the worst
kind of extremism. Mosul is just the latest example.

The systematic discrimination, assassination and
killing of Shia, Christians, Turkmen, Shabaks, Yazidis
and other religious and ethnic groups by ISIS are a
serious cause of concern. The grievances of religious
and ethnic groups against the central Iraqi Government
are one of the reasons behind the dramatic rise of
insurgency. We call on all Iraqis to pursue an inclusive
national dialogue. We urge all actors in the region to
continue contributing to the stabilization of the political
and security situation in the country.

A failure to implement resolution 1701 (2006)
may have further dramatic political, security and
humanitarian consequences for Lebanon. By increasing
its presence in the south of the country, the Lebanese
Armed Forces will contribute to regional peace and
security. We commend the Lebanese Government
for keeping Lebanon's doors open to refugees, for
upholding the Baabda Declaration and for pursuing the
national dialogue. We urge the Lebanese Parliament to
elect a new President as soon as possible. Lebanon needs
the political support and assistance of the international
community.

