Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Permit me
to express my delegation's appreciation to Ambassador
Inocencio F. Arias, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, for his complete and detailed report on the
Committee's work. We also congratulate him on his
efficiency and dynamism.

This meeting gives us another opportunity to
evaluate what has been accomplished in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Through its structure, working methods and mode
of operation, the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
contributed to a better understanding of terrorism and
inspired trust among the different parties involved with
a view to greater cooperation for the eradication of
terrorism.

The submission of initial reports by 191 Member
States and five other entities, of second reports by 150
Member States and two other entities, and of third
reports by 71 Member States indicates in every respect
the will and determination of the various actors to
strengthen this cooperation. Nonetheless, we urge those
States that have not met the deadline for submitting
their reports to submit those reports as soon as
possible. In this regard, we support the proposals of the
Committee in paragraph 5 of its current programme of
work (S/2003/995). We encourage the Committee to
disseminate information on the progress made by
States as well as on solutions to strengthen their ability
to meet their obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).

My delegation attaches special importance to the
working paper entitled "Criteria for the preparation of
draft letters to States beyond Stage A". This suggests
that the consideration of the passage of a State from
one stage to another should be conducted carefully, in
order to provide concrete responses to Member States'
problems in implementing the resolution. For this
purpose, the suggestions in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the
programme of work deserve our fullest attention.

The question of assistance remains fundamental
for strengthening the capacities of certain actors in the
fight against terrorism. In this regard, we welcome the
Committee's development of the Directory of Counter-
Terrorism Information and Sources of Assistance. We
appeal to the donor community to give greater attention
to this question because the consequences of terrorism,
which strikes where the international system is
weakest, are unforeseeable. To this end, my delegation
encourages increased cooperation between Member
States and the Committee, which in our view should be
the central mechanism for coordinating assistance.

We welcome the transparency with which the
Committee is doing its work, especially through the
regular information given to Member States and close
contacts between experts and the institutions and
bodies of the United Nations system. We appreciate the
provision of a Web site, which is becoming an essential
source of information regarding all questions relating
to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

In the framework of cooperation between the
Committee on the one hand and international, regional
and subregional organizations on the other, we are
delighted by the work under way to implement the
recommendations resulting from the meeting of 6
March 2003. My delegation believes that the Council
should be informed of the conclusions of meetings of
international, regional and subregional institutions and
organizations, and of the results of contacts between
the Committee and those institutions and organizations.

While underscoring the importance of
coordination between the different entities of the
United Nations system, we emphasize once again the
need to strengthen cooperation between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). These Committees
have focal points of interest that, to a great extent,
converge, just as they do with those of the Ad Hoc
Committee established by General Assembly resolution
51/210.

As for the Committee's future activities, my
delegation believes that the report that the Chairman
intends to submit will shed further light on the
difficulties confronting certain Member States in their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and on the
proposed solutions, as well as the prospects for a better
functioning of the Committee.

The road leading to the eradication of terrorism is
long and full of obstacles. The results achieved thus far
by the international community indicate our shared
determination to eliminate terrorism.

The Committee, through its work, has in many
respects made clear the interdependence of terrorism
and other forms of organized crime, and the existence
of a global structure to combat terrorism. The entry
into force on 29 September this year of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime was undoubtedly another victory for our
Organization.

The progress made by the Committee testifies not
only to its determination to fulfil its responsibilities
effectively and expeditiously, but also to the political
will of States to shoulder their obligations.

My delegation welcomes the Council's renewed
confidence in the Chairman and the entire Committee
with the continuation of their mandates, and we assure
them of our full support. We are convinced that today's
debate will give rise to initiatives that can enrich our
collective thinking in the fight against terrorism.

