Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert
on her appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and thank her
for her briefing. I would also like to commend the work
of her predecessor, former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Jan Kubis.

China welcomes the progress made in forming the
Iraqi Government and commends the efforts of Iraq's
leaders to resolve their differences through consultations
and dialogue, while promoting economic development,
improving people's living standards and accelerating
the reconstruction process. Iraq is at a critical stage in
promoting peace, stability and reconstruction. I would
like to underscore the following points.

First, we should continue to adhere to the general
direction of seeking a political solution to the Iraqi issue.
Achieving inclusive reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence among the Iraqi parties is in line with the
fundamental interests and development needs of all
Iraqis. The international community should earnestly
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq, support the good offices of
the United Nations, and provide constructive assistance
in achieving an inclusive political solution.

Secondly, we should continue to support Iraq in its
fight against terrorism. Iraq is at the forefront of this
fight and terrorist remnants continue to pose a threat.
All parties concerned should strengthen their counter-
terrorism cooperation, unify standards, crackdown on
all terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council,
consolidate the achievements of counter-terrorism
efforts and resolutely curb the return of terrorist forces
and the spread of their activities. The international
community should support Iraq in its efforts to bring
terrorists to justice, in accordance with relevant
domestic laws. We support the efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, in close consultation with the
Government concerned, to actively carry out its work
based on its mandate.

Thirdly, we should actively promote the economic
recovery and accelerated reconstruction of Iraq.
The Iraqi Government should focus on developing
infrastructure, promoting economic reconstruction and
progress, enhance its capacity to provide public services
and improve people's living standards. The international
community should continue to provide support and
assistance to Iraq, help ease its humanitarian situation,
assist in its economic recovery and create a favourable
environment for its reconstruction.

UNAMI has played an important role in supporting
the Iraqi Government in promoting inclusive political
dialogue, national reconciliation and reconstruction,
and it has continued to support Iraq's efforts to improve
its bilateral relations with countries of the region,
such as Kuwait, and to resolve historical issues. China
supports the efforts of UNAMI to carry out its work in
accordance with its mandate.

In recent years, the Chinese Government has
provided Iraq with multiple deliveries of humanitarian
supplies and economic assistance, some of which have
been used in areas affected by terrorism. In addition,
the Red Cross Society of China has also provided
medical-facility assistance to the Iraqi Red Crescent

Society, which has been used to alleviate the difficulties
faced by the Iraqi people.

As always, China supports any effort aimed at
achieving a political solution to the Iraqi issue and
combating terrorism. It will actively participate in the
economic reconstruction of Iraq and will continue to
provide assistance to the best of its ability.
