At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his extensive briefing. A few days ago, alongside Palestinians worldwide, we commemorated the seventy-second anniversary of the Palestinian Nakba, or catastrophe, in remembrance of the pain of countless victims of occupation, discriminatory treatment, violations of fundamental human rights and continuing aggressive unlawful practices by the Israeli occupying Power over the course of more than seven long decades. Nakba Day constitutes a renewed occasion for Tunisia to reaffirm its commitment to maintaining its steadfast and principled support for the Palestinian cause and the indivisible and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, which are not time-bound. It is high time that the international community as a whole, and the Security Council in particular, assume their responsibility to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by its obligations under international law, put an end to its aggressive policies, cease all settlement activities and refrain from attempts to implement its long-planned illegal de facto annexation of Palestinian land. Amid alarming rhetoric and constant announcements by Israeli officials of unlawful plans to annex parts of the Palestinian territory, on 30 April, the Council of the League of Arab States adopted resolution 8522, in which the Arab Ministers of Foreign Affairs unanimously affirmed that, "the implementation by the Israeli occupation government of its plans to annex any part of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, constitutes yet another war crime added to the long record of Israeli atrocities perpetrated against the Palestinian people", and called upon the international Quartet to convene an urgent meeting to salvage the prospects for peace and the two-State solution. This is a moment of truth for all of us. In the light of the speech of the Israeli Prime Minister asserting Israeli sovereignty over the Israeli colonies in Palestinian territories, starting on | July, and considering that the annexation of parts of those territories is a priority of his Government, the international community must react by upholding international law, including the relevant Council resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016), and strongly rejecting and preventing any such unilateral illegal move, which would undermine all efforts to revive the peace process. This Israeli Government attitude once again demonstrates its complete disregard of international law and is a blatant violation of the relevant Council resolutions and the agreements signed with the Palestinians. It is well known that the denial of rights, the persistence of injustice and oppression, and continuing aggressive practices against defenceless civilians all lead to frustration and exacerbate feelings of helplessness and persecution, which will make the situation in the region even more complex and undermine any prospects for peace. The Palestinian people are facing the unprecedented challenges posed by the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, on top of the already harsh living conditions due to Israel's illegal occupation and collective punitive measures, including through the seizure of Palestinian tax revenues. The endless Israeli blockade has also created an alarming humanitarian situation in Gaza. We stress the need for the international community to continue to express its solidarity with and support for the Palestinian Authority, including public health response and economic recovery efforts. Likewise, substantial and urgent support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East is also essential to help meet the most pressing needs of Palestine refugees. In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia's commitment to peace and international legitimacy as a strategic choice, as well as to its principled position that security and stability can be restored in the region only through a just and comprehensive peace based on the two-State solution, as set forth in the Arab Peace Initiative, and the internationally endorsed terms of reference. That peace must ensure the establishment of an independent, sovereign State of Palestine along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and must resolve all final status issues. That would usher in a better future of stability and prosperity for all the peoples of the region.
