Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. Kono, for presiding over
our meeting today, and the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the situation on the Korean peninsula.
There can be no doubt that we are experiencing one
of the most acute and dramatic phases in the evolving
situation there. We can say without exaggeration that
peace in that region is being seriously tested and the
risk that the situation could be transformed from one
of confrontation to outright conflict is greater than it
has ever been. Military rhetoric, accompanied by rash
muscle-flexing between the participants, has led to a
situation in which the whole world is seriously beginning
to wonder whether there will be a war or not. As we
know, in such tense circumstances one ill-considered
or misinterpreted step could have dire consequences.

Russia has been watching the dangerously evolving
situation in the region with concern. Needless to say,
we are united in our condemnation of Pyongyang's
provocative nuclear-missile activity, which has gained
dangerous momentum in the past year and a half. A
situation such as that of the latest launch, which was
made from North Korean territory with no warning
whatever, endangering the lives of ordinary citizens,
including those travelling by air and sea in the region,
is absolutely unacceptable. We repudiate any such
action by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which reinforces our support for all the relevant
Security Council sanctions resolutions, which we have
implemented to the letter. We call on the North Korean
authorities to wind down their banned programmes and
return as a non-nuclear State to the non-proliferation
regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the control of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. However, it should be clear
to everyone that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is hardly going to renounce its nuclear-missile
programme while it still feels that its security is directly
threatened, which is exactly how Pyongyang sees the
regular large-scale manoeuvres and exercises that the
United States and its allies conduct in the region.

We want to once again confirm our commitment
to implementing the international sanctions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That said, as
we have emphasized time and again, such measures
should not be an end in themselves but rather a tool
for engaging countries in constructive negotiations
on substantive issues. Diplomacy is not just about
sanctions, and sanctions are not diplomacy at all, in spite
of some partners' efforts to convince us otherwise - or
at least they are not diplomacy in the traditional sense
but rather a blunt instrument of persuasion when all
other methods have been exhausted. There is a whole
range of other methods in the diplomatic arsenal. All
of the Council's decisions on sanctions also include the
obligation to fulfil a political component, something
that many people forget, unfortunately, as they focus
on the restrictions alone.

It will be impossible to settle the nuclear issue on
the Korean peninsula through sanctions and pressure
on Pyongyang alone. Sanctions should not be used to
strangle the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
economically or worsen its humanitarian situation.
That applies especially to unilateral restrictions, which
affect civilian sectors that have nothing to do with the
country's nuclear-missile programmes and are one
reason for the serious deterioration in the population's
living conditions. Furthermore, unilateral limits that
circumvent or intensify action taken through the
Security Council undermine the effectiveness of the
Security Council's decisions on a political solution to
the situation on the Korean peninsula, not to mention
the damage that they do to third countries' legitimate
interests. Incidentally, I would like to inform the
Secretary of State of the United States that the North
Korean workers in Russia are not working in conditions
of slavery but on the basis of an inter-Governmental
agreement with the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea that guarantees their rights. And while I am
addressing the Secretary of State, I would like to add
that we very much hope that his four no's will become
the basis for the United States approach to resolving the
crisis on the Korean peninsula.

With regard to the Security Council sanctions
regime, we have to acknowledge that the humanitarian
exemptions identified in them are not working. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
recently briefed the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) about
this. The ban on correspondent relations with banks
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
complicated not only purchases of food and goods
abroad for the domestic economy but also the financing
of those United Nations agencies that are still
operating there.

There can be no question that the refusal of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions is unacceptable.
But neither are attempts of any kind to resolve the long-
standing problems in the region by military means alone.
We only have to look to the history of the Korean War to

understand that. In the current situation, we urge all the
parties concerned to prevent any further escalation of
the tension that accompanies each new cycle of reactions
and counterreactions. We must reconsider the policy of
mutual pressure and intimidation. It does not get results.
In our View, a comprehensive approach to resolving the
situation is essential. The Korean peninsula cannot be
denuclearized without normalizing the military and
political situation generally; refraining from building
up military infrastructure, including the deployment by
the United States in the region of elements of its global
missile defence system; reducing the scale of military
manoeuvres; and establishing an atmosphere of trust
among the States of North-East Asia.

Recently, unfortunately, we have been seeing the
reverse of this picture. In October and December,
Washington and its allies responded to two and a
half months of silence from Pyongyang by holding
unscheduled and unprecedentedly large-scale
manoeuvres and exercises on the borders of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as well as by
introducing new unilateral sanctions and including it
on its list of State sponsors of terrorism. All these steps
make us wonder about the sincerity of all the declarations
about the preferability of peaceful approaches to
resolving the crisis regarding the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

We call on the stakeholders to take practical
measures to de-escalate the situation as soon as possible.
In particular, it would be a good idea to skip the planned
regular military exercises. It goes without saying
that Pyongyang must also cease its nuclear-missile
tests. We are ready to cooperate more closely with all
partners with a View to achieving a speedy settlement
of the issues on the Korean peninsula through political
and diplomatic means, the only possible path, and a
mutually respectful dialogue. That is the aim behind
Russia and China's road map for a settlement. We call
on all parties involved in the preparation and holding of
the Olympic Games in South Korea to refrain from any
kind of provocation or ill-conceived initiatives during
the period of preparation and holding of the Olympic
Games in South Korea, and to use the time to find a
way to reach a political and diplomatic settlement.

In conclusion, I would like to address Mr. Klimkin,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, who spoke
here today, and to advise him that when he graces the
Security Council with his presence, he should do it at
meetings where his fairy-tales about what goes on in
Ukraine will at least have some vague connection to the
item on the Council's agenda.

