Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the United Kingdom's
initiative to convene this debate on children and
armed conflict. I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui; the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Brandt; and the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Ladsous, for their briefings. I have also listened to
the statement by Mr. Ramm, the representative of Save
the Children.

Children carry the hope for human progress. The
ability of children to grow up in a secure and safe
environment depends on the caring and joint efforts of
all Governments and the international community as a
whole. However, in many parts of the world, children
are the most vulnerable group and are subject to the
suffering caused by armed conflict. The protection of
children in armed conflict is the abiding obligation of
all parties to a conflict.

China is greatly concerned by violations of the
rights and interests of children and supports the
tireless efforts of the United Nations - and the
Security Council in particular - to use their respective
advantages to protect children in armed conflict on the
basis of their respective mandates. I would like to take
this opportunity to emphasize the following.

First, to protect children from harm in armed
conflict, it is crucial to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts. The Security Council should focus on the
maintenance of international peace and security as its
primary responsibility and give priority to preventive
diplomacy through mediation and good offices. Efforts
should be made to prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts
by addressing their root causes. That is the best way
to protect children and is much more significant than
providing remedies in the aftermath of conflicts. All
conflicts are not the same, and the Security Council,
when addressing issues concerning children and armed
conflict, should not adopt a one-size-fits-all approach.
Although sanctions are one way to address threats to
international peace and security, they alone cannot
remove the root causes of those problems.

Secondly, Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting children in armed
conflicts. To ensure the effectiveness of mechanisms
for the protection of children in armed conflicts, the
Government concerned should play a leading role.
Communication and coordination with Governments
should be strengthened. The mechanism for the
protection of children in armed conflict should heed
and respect the views of the Government concerned
through dialogue, coordination and consultation.
Priority should be given to supporting and helping the
Government concerned in its efforts to protect children
and their rights and interests. China urges the parties to
armed conflict to carry out their relevant obligations,
abide by international humanitarian law and respect
and safeguard the rights and interests of children.

Thirdly, the protection of children in armed conflict
requires that the international community, in its efforts
at post-conflict reconstruction, adopt a comprehensive
strategy aimed at creating a conducive security and
social environment for the healthful development of
children. The international community should give
priority to the reintegration of children into their
families and societies and to their continued schooling,
so that they can resume normal lives.

We encourage UNICEF, the World Bank and
other international organizations to strengthen their
coordination and cooperation and use their respective
advantages in the joint effort to help countries in
conflict to build their capacity to protect children
and to aid them in their efforts to eliminate poverty,
to provide universal education and to work towards
sustainable development.

China will continue to work with all parties in an
effort to improve the situation of children in armed
conflict and will do its utmost to maintain international
peace and security so as to save children from the
suffering of war.

