The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/20l7/561, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the Plurinational State of
Bolivia and Japan.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2365 (2017).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia welcomes the Security Council's unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2365 (2017), on mine action,
which has been one ofthe goals ofthe Bolivian presidency
of the Council this month. The resolution just adopted
represents is an important precedent, since it is the first
time that the Security Council has adopted a resolution
on the subject. This is a significant step forward on the
issue, whose basis rests on the presidential statements
of 30 August 1996 (S/PRST/l996/37) and 19 November
2003 (S/PRST/2003/22) and the conventions signed and
ratified by a majority of Member States over the past
20 years, such as the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction.

The resolution's principal aim is to point out and
define the threat that those objects pose to the security
and physical integrity, indeed the lives, of civilian
populations, peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel
and all who work in conflict zones. It also calls on all
parties to armed conflicts to immediately put an end
forever to the indiscriminate use of anti-personnel
mines, the explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices and urges them to protect local
populations from all the problems created by such
devices. It also calls on all Member States to comply
with their various international obligations with regard
to mine action.

In considering the mandates of peacekeeping
and special political missions, the Security Council
regularly requests reports on the mitigation of threats
posed by dangerous explosives such as anti-personnel
mines, the explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices. Bolivia firmly believes that
mitigating such threats is essential to ensuring the
success of missions and to promoting peacebuilding
and stabilization efforts in countries in conflict. Over
the past few years mitigation efforts have expanded
from anti-personnel mines to the explosive remnants
of war and, more recently, to the emerging threat
of improvised explosive devices. It is important to
emphasize mitigation, including the five pillars of mine
action - risk education, victim assistance, weapons and
ammunition management, stockpile destruction and the
promotion and strengthening of national capacities and
institutional support.

In addition to the five pillars, we note the
increasingly important link between mine action
and other substantive areas, such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the reform of
the security sector. We also promote the establishment
of effective governance and the rule of law. In that
connection, we welcome the work of the United
Nations Mine Action Service as one of the key players
mitigating the risk of such explosives. It is deployed in
peacekeeping missions and special political missions at
the request of the Security Council and heeds requests
for assistance from affected States.

Mine action affects not only the security of
those immediately exposed to such threats but also
contributes significantly to maintaining peace and
bolstering stability. Those activities supplement
relevant international conventions. The clearest
example is the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,
also known as the Ottawa Convention. Bolivia is a
signatory to that Convention and has ratified it. We
call for the universalization of the Ottawa Convention
and all other mine-action conventions through
accession by all Member States. We also ask that all
Member States redouble their efforts to honour their
international commitments.

Finally, Bolivia firmly believes that resolution
2365 (2017), adopted today, will serve as a precedent in
recognizing the threat posed by landmines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, as
well as the importance ofmine action in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Bolivia thanks the members of the Security Council
for their participation and contributions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.


