Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on a very relevant issue in terms
of the functioning of States and their co-existence in
the aftermath of conflict. Focusing the discussion on
institution-building demonstrates its value for
generating conditions that can ensure sustainable
peace. The statements by the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste and Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
reflect the progress that has been achieved and the
tasks that remain before us on this issue.

Peacebuilding is primarily a national
responsibility, and I believe we all agree on that.
Countries recovering from the effects of conflict
require tools to ensure good governance, strengthen the
rule of law and channel economic and social
development. In this regard, the international
community is responsible for providing support for
national agendas and priorities aimed at creating,
restoring or reforming institutions in order to achieve
effective administration and national capacity-building.
The actions of the international community, including
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
international financial institutions, should be aimed at
supporting programmes that encourage a country's
stability and Viability. That is why the leadership of the
State in question is paramount at every stage of the
process.

Rebuilding the institutional structure that sustains
a State affects every area of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. This Viewpoint must be present from
the earliest stages of the planning and executing of
peacekeeping operations. Strategies aimed at
establishing stable and lasting peace must be adapted
to the specificities of each individual case. This
understanding must guide the Council's discussion and
decisions in order to ensure that the measures adopted
respond to the political, economic and cultural
characteristics of each situation.
The preparation and implementation of
institution-building require from the outset the
participation of the State and the use of existing
national capacities to ensure the transition towards
stability and long-term development and to help
progressively to reduce dependence on the
international community.

Conflicts weaken or lead to the dissolution of
important civil society structures. There are many
examples. Therefore, it is essential to generate
sustainable economic activities that guarantee a steady
income, a decent standard of living and the
reconstruction of the social fabric. That will help to
prevent the re-emergence of the conditions at the root
of the conflict. Likewise, we must ensure that all actors
involved in the peacebuilding process work in a
coordinated and consistent way in order to avoid the
duplication of efforts and to ensure the efficient use of
available resources.

Colombia believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission is destined to play a central role in
meeting the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict. It should promote recovery, reintegration and
reconstruction and help to lay the foundations of
sustainable development. Accordingly, it should
promote institution-building and the regular use of its
advisory role to the Security Council. Moreover, if the
United Nations is to be more effective throughout the
conflict cycle, the Security Council must make use of
the conflict prevention tools at its disposal to develop
actions to prevent the emergence and recurrence of
situations that threaten or undermine peace. The
experiences and lessons of all countries in that regard
should serve to foster solid institution-building that
ensures the transition to lasting peace.

