Mr. Laro (Nigeria): Nigeria thanks the delegation
of Venezuela for organizing this debate and for the
concept note (S/2016/103, annex) provided to guide our
deliberations. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

The purposes and principles of the United Nations
are the foundations upon which the Organization
stands. They define the parametres of multilateral
engagement by United Nations Member States and
provide a framework for achieving global peace,
security, stability and prosperity for all. We welcome
the opportunity that this debate provides us to reflect on
the importance of respecting, at all times and without
qualification, the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, as defined in the Charter.

The Charter ofthe United Nations, over the decades,
has stood the test of time. It is as relevant today as it
was more than 70 years ago when it was adopted. Its
pre-eminence as an international treaty is reinforced
by its Article 103, which places the obligations of
Member States under the Charter over and above their
obligations under any other international treaty. What
this implies is that Member States must at all times
act in accordance with the Charter, and especially the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.

Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter define
very clearly the means by which the United Nations,
Member States and regional organizations can promote
international peace and security. Chapter VI calls for
the peaceful settlement of disputes that are likely to
threaten international peace and security. This provision
of the Charter was the basis upon which Nigeria and
Cameroon peacefully resolved their territorial dispute
in the Bakassi peninsula. This and other actions that
Nigeria has taken in the interest of international peace
and security, particularly at the regional level in West
Africa, demonstrate our commitment to respect the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We encourage Member States having disputes
to resolve such disputes in the spirit of the Charter.

The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
displayed profound foresight with the inclusion of
Chapter VIII, which recognizes the role of regional
agencies in the maintenance of international peace
and security. While the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, regional organizations
have played and continue to play an important role in
addressing threats to peace, especially at the regional
level.

In West Africa, the Economic Community of West
African States has made significant achievements
in resolving conflicts and maintaining peace. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development has
played a key role in the maintenance of peace and
security in East Africa. The Southern African
Development Community has also been effective in
maintaining peace in its sphere of influence. The Lake
Chad Basin Commission member States and Benin are
working together to defeat the Boko Haram terrorist
group. The United Nations is working closely with the
African Union in a win-win partnership that promotes
peace and security in Africa. All these examples point
to the relevance of regional arrangements in the global
security architecture.

Contemporary international relations are growing
in complexity with multiple overlapping dimensions.
This sometimes leads to friction among States.
Against that backdrop, the way to minimize threats
to international peace and security is for all States
to conduct their international affairs at all times in
a manner that is consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.

