Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's debate. I believe that your contribution and
those of the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Director of Groupe
de recherche, d'e'tude et de formation femme-action
serve as an effective guide for us on the path of the
reforms that have been boldly launched.

France would like to pay heartfelt tribute to Peter,
a Netherlander in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA);
A'ichatou, a Nigerian, also in MINUSMA; Ratih, an
Indonesian in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon; and Luis, a Chilean in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. They are among the
100,000 soldiers, police and civilians who risk their
lives every day in peacekeeping operations, protecting
tens of millions of people around the world. Above all,
their Blue Helmets are more than ever an embodiment
of the United Nations. They are a beacon of hope,
as Mr. Bakayoko saw for himself. I would also like
to pay tribute to the memory of the approximately
3,700 peacekeepers who have died in the line of duty,
including 113 of my compatriots. Their sacrifice in the
service of peace will never be forgotten. And ifI may,
Mr. President, at a time when the entire French nation is
applauding the heroism of Lieutenant Colonel Beltrame,
I would like to include him in my tribute to those who
give their lives so that others may live and survive.

Member States will understand why France
will always remain committed to efforts to improve
peacekeeping operations with steadfast resolve and
conviction. Because those operations are inseparable
from the founding principles of the United Nations,
it is our collective credibility that is at stake. These
reform efforts should strengthen the effectiveness of
peacekeeping. The aim is of course to help to settle
conflicts by political means in increasingly complex
contexts, to protect civilians who are victims ofconflict,
violence and massive violations of human rights and, in
short, to build collective action with Members of the
United Nations in the service of peace and security.

As the Secretary-General emphasized, and I
commend his vision and determination, that is a complex
and difficult but crucial undertaking. Ifwe consider the
examples of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and Timor-Leste, it
can succeed. However, at times it faces new political
and security challenges in tackling asymmetrical
threats. Needless to say, in the light of that, we must
reflect and, above all, act. Peacekeeping operations are
our common good. That is why, together with all those
present, we would like to inspire a new ambition.

In order to achieve that, I believe that we must
first reaffirm the cardinal principle that peacekeeping
is a tool for achieving the political goal of peace.
Peacekeeping operations must be part of that political
horizon. The local, regional and multilateral
stakeholders involved frequently lead those political
processes, and peacekeeping operations must contribute
actively to that in full coordination with them. I believe
that coordination is key and should also be applied to
relations among the various entities present in the field
so that the link between security and development is
not merely a concept for research efforts but also truly
effective on the ground.
If we are to ensure the success of peacekeeping
operations, we have a twofold task - better prioritizing
and sequencing for mandates so as to prevent what
the Secretary-General called a Christmas tree. That
is particularly important for the multidimensional
mandates that represent the connection to peacebuilding.
Both the short- and long-term objectives must be well
understood by all components of the mission, as well
as by its external partners. The mandates must then
be converted into concepts of operation and rules of
engagement, implemented by all Blue Helmets as part
of the principles of peacekeeping.

That goal of more effective peacekeeping clearly
requires operations conducted in optimal conditions.
The Netherlands presidency has rightly called on us
to address the issues of establishing the criteria for
success, the measurement of progress and performance
evaluations. That involves all of us - the members of
the Security Council, the Secretariat, force contributors,
host countries and regional organizations. France is
committed to that as a troop-contributor, the second-
highest in Europe and among the permanent members
of the Security Council. This is not about giving good
and bad marks but about improving the overall level of
peacekeeping. The development of evaluation, analysis
and action tools and strategic reviews conducted by the
Secretariat are of course part of that change. Troop- and
police-contributing countries should also participate
fully in that effort. I believe that better performance will
be achieved once there is full respect for the procedures
and the concept of operations of missions. That will
make it possible to reduce the number of peacekeepers
killed or injured in operations, which is still too high.

As noted by my colleague, the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and
the Cruz report have made relevant and operational
recommendations to improve the overall performance
of peacekeeping. The time for action is now. Today's
meeting marks an important moment in the process
launched by the Secretary-General. We believe that there
are three key components to improving performance.

First is training - before, during and after
deployment, in the basic military operational areas
as well as linguistically. Without interaction with
local populations, peacekeepers will not be fully
effective. That was the issue discussed at a ministerial
conference held in Paris in late 2016 on peacekeeping
in a francophone environment. France has made a great
contribution in that regard. We train almost 30,000
French-speaking African soldiers a year, who provide
major contingents to peacekeeping operations.

We intend to further develop our cooperation with
the troop contributors and the Secretariat. We intend to
increase our involvement in teaching French in military
and police academies, particularly in Africa, South
America and Asia. We also seek to promote the widest
dissemination of doctrinal concepts drafted by the
Secretariat to French-speaking contributing countries
and thereby help them to strengthen their participation
in peacekeeping operations by acquiring the necessary
operational skills, which will promote increasingly
effective and successful predeployment certification.

The second key to performance is better force
generation, given the need to enhance mobility and
force projection and, as has been said, to increase the
presence of women in operations.

Thirdly, I believe that peacekeeping operations
must enjoy the resources necessary to implement all the
components of their mandates and use them in the best
possible way. As the fifth-largest financial contributor
to the peacekeeping budget, France is contributing fully.
France systematically consults the troop-contributing
countries ahead of the renewal of a mandate for which
it is responsible. We are committed to doing this even
more regularly throughout the year.

The exemplary nature of peacekeeping agents is
critical for us. France fully supports the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse.
Preventing and suppressing sexual violence is essential.
Any violation of the law must be firmly punished. Zero
tolerance must extend to all behaviours that could
hinder the smooth running of the mission.

Our ambition for peacekeeping must be fully
reflected in the United Nations relations with regional
organizations, which play a growing role in the
promotion of peace and international security. The
Charter ofthe United Nations is far-sighted in providing
for it in Chapter VIII.

The European Union plays an indispensable role,
as do, of course, the African Union and the subregional
organizations of the continent. Their operations can
play a role that is perfectly complementary to those
of the United Nations, as eloquently noted by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. That can been seen with the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, whose full
operationalization should facilitate the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

France welcomes and fully supports the
development of such operations, which must have
established planning and accountability systems,
as well as predictable and sustainable funding
mechanisms. France will continue to contribute to
efforts in this direction. At the right the time, and as the
President of the Republic said in Ouagadougou, within
the Security Council France will support the African
Union initiative to ensure independent and predictable
financing for African peace operations.

This year marks the centenary of the end of the
First World War. This conjuncture reminds us of our
collective responsibility not to let history repeat itself
again and again. That is why France is fully committed
to ensuring that multilateralism, and in particular
the United Nations, can meet today's challenges.
Peacekeeping is the manifestation of that ambition. It
will naturally be at the heart of the Paris Peace Forum
on 11 November, which will fully support the United
Nations efforts to attenuate warfare. It will be the
first iteration of an annual meeting involving States,
international organizations and civil society to advance
global governance by making it ever more effective and
adapted to contemporary global challenges.

We who sit comfortably in this Chamber today
owe that to populations held hostage by conflict. We
owe it to our peoples, who demand action rather than
resignation. We owe it to A'ichatou, Peter, Ratih and
Luis, who as I speak are the very embodiment of the
United Nations and of hope on the ground.

