Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Ambassador van Oosterom for their
briefings. I welcome Secretary of State Pompeo to the
Security Council today.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA),
as a multilateral agreement endorsed by the Security
Council, has the effect of international law, and as
an important achievement of multilateralism is in
the common interest of the international community.
It has played a significant role in upholding the
international nuclear-non-proliferation regime and
maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East.
It also serves as a model for addressing international
and regional hotspot issues by political and diplomatic
means. Despite the significant changes that have
occurred in the international situation in the past
six months, the current parties to the JCPOA, given
their sense of responsibility, have continued to focus
on implementing the agreement while maintaining
normal economic and trade cooperation with Iran, and
have received broad support from the international
community. The International Atomic Energy Agency
has confirmed Iran's compliance with its nuclear-
related commitments under the JCPOA 13 consecutive
times. The coordination between the Council and the
procurement channel is functioning normally. Practice
has shown that the JCPOA is an effective agreement
and should be fully and effectively implemented.

The implementation of the JCPOA is now at a
critical juncture. China appreciates Iran's efforts to
implement resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We
hope that Iran can continue its implementation and
that the other parties to the agreement will continue
to honour their commitments as well. China deplores
the fact that the United States has withdrawn from the
JCPOA and made a decision to reimpose sanctions. It
calls on all parties to work to find the right solution
to the difficulties in maintaining normal economic and
trade cooperation with Iran. We believe that all parties
concerned must bear the overall long-term interests in
mind, adhere to multilateralism, uphold multilateral
agreements, fulfil their responsibilities and obligations
and facilitate the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/ 1089)
emphasizes the need for all parties to adhere to
multilateralism, cooperate in responding to challenges
and work together to preserve the JCPOA. It supports
the initiatives of the parties to the JCPOA to protect
the freedom to pursue legitimate business with Iran,
in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015), and calls
on all parties to support the procurement channel.
China expresses its appreciation for those elements.
At the same time, China also believes that the report
of the Secretary-General should be balanced and
objective, comprehensively reflect the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and fully address Iran's
legitimate concerns. The Secretariat needs to act
strictly in accordance with its mandate and functions so
as to avoid including unverified elements in the report.

In the current circumstances, the parties should
exercise caution in dealing with Iran's missile launches
and accurately interpret resolution 2231 (2015). On
several occasions, Iran has stated that it is committed
to fully complying with its obligations under the
JCPOA, that it has no intention of developing nuclear
weapons and that its missiles are not designed to be
capable of delivering nuclear weapons. Such a stance
deserves attention. China commends Ambassador Van
Oosterom, in his role as Facilitator, and his team for
their efforts in facilitating the 2231 format. China has
taken note of the recent report of the Joint Commission
to the Security Council on the status of the Procurement
Working Group's decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2018/1070) and will continue to participate
in its work.

China has always advocated for a political and
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue and
remains committed to consolidating the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and the maintenance
of international and regional peace and stability. China
will continue to uphold the principles of impartiality
and objectivity with a firm sense of responsibility and
work with the international community in its tireless
efforts to uphold the JCPOA.

