Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their briefings. I welcome the Secretary-General's first report (S/2020/912) on the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). I would also like to take this opportunity to express my condolences to the victims of the floods in the Sudan. As we speak, the Sudan is going through a critical period of political transition, in which positive developments are obvious to everyone. That transition would not have been possible without the mediation efforts of the African Union, South Sudan and the regional partners. It is also an important practice of African countries implementing the Silencing Guns in Africa initiative. At the same time, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, floods and a fragile economic system still constitute challenges for its transitional process. The international community should increase its assistance and help the Sudan get through this difficult moment. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the following four points. First, China welcomes the recent positive developments in the political process in the Sudan, not least of which was the initialling of the peace agreement on 31 August. We appreciate South Sudan's important role in that regard. China calls on all parties in the Sudan to remain united, proceed to sign the peace agreement as scheduled and earnestly implement it. Those who are not yet party to the Juba process should TAT also sign the peace agreement as soon as possible. The peace agreement is a new starting point for peace and development in the Sudan. We encourage all Sudanese parties to continue with the dialogue in a bid to jointly promote the Sudan's transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and expeditiously achieve long-term peace and stability. Secondly, with the fragile economic and health system in the country, the COVID-19 pandemic and the floods have worsened living conditions and increased the humanitarian challenges facing the Sudanese people. The international community should provide targeted assistance to help the Sudanese Government realize economic reforms and strengthen its health system. International financial institutions should also take debt relief action to help the Sudan. China actively supports Sudan in its efforts to develop its economy and fight the pandemic, and has provided the country significant material and technical assistance. We will continue to do our best to help the Sudan achieve sustainable development. Thirdly, China appreciates the important role played by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to promote the peace process in the Sudan, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat and peacekeeping personnel to that end. We expect UNAMID to implement its exit strategy in an orderly manner, as planned. I wish to thank the UNITAMS planning team for its advance work and welcome the strong support the Mission received from the Sudanese Government. We highlight that the core task of UNITAMS is to support the political transition process in the Sudan. It has a mandate that should not go beyond the provisions of our resolution, let alone intervene in the internal affairs of the Sudan. A smooth handover is needed from UNAMID to UNITAMS. We should save resources and avoid duplicating responsibilities. UNITAMS should also step up its efforts to help the Sudanese Government promote sustainable development, while coordinating international humanitarian assistance efforts. The Sudanese Government bears the primary responsibility for protecting civilians. China supports the Sudanese Government in formulating and implementing, in earnest, a national strategy to protect civilians. UNITAMS should provide technical support to that end and strengthen coordination with other United Nations agencies on the ground, which should perform their duties strictly in accordance with their respectivemandates and avoid stepping on each other's toes in carrying out their functions, as that would affect the expected results. Fourthly, in view of the positive developments in the Sudanese political process, the Security Council should, according to the latest developments, carry out a timely review of the sanctions imposed on the Sudan and establish a road map for lifting them, thereby sending a positive message. China calls on the countries concerned to remove the Sudan from the sanctions list of sponsors of terrorism as soon as possible and lift the unilateral sanctions against the Sudan in order to create favourable conditions for the Sudanese Government and its people to fight the pandemic. The hard-won peace process in the Sudan is an opportunity for the international community to help the Sudan move towards peace and development. China will join the international community to contribute to promoting the Sudanese political transition, long-term stability, development and prosperity in the Sudan.
