Mr. Nebie (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to thank the President of the Council for having
invited me to make a briefing on the implementation
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. My briefing will focus
on the following points, as the President has requested:
the status of implementation of the road map for the
African Initiative, the agenda in the coming months,
the action of the African Union mission in Bangui, the
elements hindering the peace process in the Central
African Republic, the regional dimension of the crisis
and, finally, recommendations.

First, with regard to the state of implementation of
the Libreville road map, on 11 September in Bangui, all
the structures for the operationalization of the road map
for the African Initiative were put in place. Those include
the panel of facilitators, the technical committee and the
focal point for the Central African State. The panel of
facilitators was set up on 11 September and held its first
session immediately on 11 and 12 September in Bangui.
The participants were the representatives of Angola, the
Central African Republic, Congo-Brazzaville, Gabon,
Chad, the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). Those
were the panel members referred to in the road map.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) was present as an observer.

During the meeting, it was suggested that the
panel be extended to all neighbouring countries and to
other observers who wished to join. The extraordinary
conference of Foreign Ministers of ECCAS, held on
21 October in Libreville, endorsed that proposal, which
seeks to strengthen the presence of all countries on
the panel.

The technical committee was also formed on
11 September to establish the secretariat of the panel.
The committee is made up ofrepresentatives ofECCAS,
the African Union, the Central African Government
and MINUSCA. It holds two meetings per week in
preparation for the implementation of the road map.
Since its establishment, the technical secretariat has
produced a programme of activities and a draft budget.
A first programme of activities had been developed, but
could not be undertaken due to interference from other
regional and subregional agendas. A second programme
has been developed that includes the second meeting
of the panel of facilitators on 24 and 25 November,
followed by a field trip to meet the commanders of the
armed groups.

The secretariat has also prepared a draft budget,
which is estimated at $4.14 million. ECCAS has
already contributed $100,000. The contribution of the
African Union is expected in the coming weeks. The
African Union's representation in Bangui and the panel
secretariat are working hard to mobilize contributions
from panel member countries and various partners.
MINUSCA provides threefold support to the Initiative
in terms of logistics, financial resources and security. It
will also manage the first field trip.

Finally, with regard to the focal point, as provided
for in the road map, the Central African Government
has appointed its focal point, which is already involved
in all preparatory processes.

Secondly, with regard to the Initiative's agenda for
the coming months, the new programme is established
as follows. From 22 November to 15 December, the
second meeting of the panel is to be held in Bangui, to
be followed by a first field trip to meet armed groups.
From 15 to 31 January 2018, the third meeting of the
panel will take place, to be followed by the second
field trip to meet the armed groups. In February 2018,
a dialogue will be held between the Government and
the armed groups. In March 2018, an ECCAS summit
will be held, with the participation of the African
Union, for the signing of a comprehensive peace and
reconciliation agreement between the Government and
the armed groups.

Thirdly, with regard to the actions of the African
Union mission in Bangui, since the formalization of
the African Initiative, the African Union and ECCAS
have conducted information, awareness-raising and
promotion activities, both in the Central African
Republic and in neighbouring countries. Following its
first meeting in September, the panel of facilitators met
with the President of the Republic, the President of the
National Assembly, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
MINUSCA, the African Ambassadors Forum, the
Coordination Group for the Preparation of and Follow-
up to the Meetings of the International Support Group
on the Central African Republic, and the international
press. Those various meetings allowed the Chair of
the panel to bring to the attention of the authorities the
conclusions of the panel's meeting and to solicit their
support for the African Initiative and their commitment
to dialogue and reconciliation for lasting peace in the
Central African Republic. Regarding armed groups,
some were sensitized to the African Initiative.

Fourthly, without being exhaustive, the main
elements of the blockage of the peace process in the
Central African Republic concern the lack of trust
between the Government and the governed, the absence
of State authority throughout the national territory and
the weakness of governance, the persistence ofviolence
committed by armed groups, poverty, the political
and religious manipulation of which my colleague,
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, has just spoken, and the low
levels of training and education.

F ifthly, with regard to the regional dimension of the
crisis, aware that the Central African crisis has serious
consequences for neighbouring countries and the
subregion, the various subregional organizations - the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region - took up the issue and put it on their agenda.
Several summits and meetings have thus been held on
the question of the Central African Republic to discuss
issues concerning security, the economy, refugees
and migration.

As Mr. Onanga-Anyanga told the Council earlier,
there are 600,000 displaced persons and 500,000
refugees, in addition to the issue of transhumance.
The subregional organizations have reaffirmed their
determination to contribute to resolving the crisis. At
the continental level, on 14 November I will make a
presentation to the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on that issue.

Finally, I shall now move on to my recommendations.
The Security Council will soon have to renew the
MINUSCA mandate. In View of the crisis situation in
the Central African Republic, I take this opportunity
to make some recommendations, on the one hand, to
support the process of dialogue, reconciliation and
peace in the Central African Republic, and, on the
other, to contribute to the economic recovery that is
essential to improving the living conditions and well-
being of the population.

First, support for the implementation of the road
map for the Initiative will require mobilizing significant
financial resources. However, the panel has few
resources at its disposal apart from MINUSCA, which
is willing to support its first outings in the field. I have
already pointed out that the budget is $4.14 million, and
the contribution of the African Union is being assessed.
I seek the support of Council members for the panel's
timely implementation of the programme that I have
just outlined.

As for the MINUSCA mandate, given the increased
activity of some armed groups, the presence of a deterrent
force is necessary to compel armed and uncooperative
groups to avoid violence. It is therefore essential that
the mandate of MINUSCA not only be renewed, but that
it be strengthened to increase its effectiveness on the
ground in view of the resurgence of attacks. Similarly,
an increase in the number of Blue Helmets would be
very useful, as it would increase their presence and
Visibility on the ground, which should significantly
improve the protection of civilian populations.

Thirdly, in the same vein, it is important to relax
the arms embargo so as to enable the Government of
the Central African Republic to equip its defence and
security forces in the greatest possible transparency.
These forces were created in a republican spirit to be
deployed on the ground and enhance the security of
populations, with the support of MINUSCA.

Fourthly, with regard to the promotion of quick-
impact projects and humanitarian assistance, widespread
impoverishment among the population of the Central
African Republic, especially among its young people, is
helping to fuel armed groups. That is why humanitarian
action must be extended to areas that have not yet
been served, and quick-impact and income-generating
projects developed for young people and women. In
addition, special emphasis should be placed on school
enrolment and the education of children, as well as on
accelerated and large-scale training for young people
in the trades. Such a policy would allow young people
to be shielded from the influence of armed groups and
prevent them from joining their ranks. Similarly, there
is a need to continue providing reintegration assistance
to internally displaced persons.

Fifthly, with regard to the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan, I appeal to the Central African
Republic's partners to urgently honour the pledges
made at the Brussels Conference, because only 30 per
cent of pledges made at the Conference have been
fulfilled to date.

Sixthly, as regards fighting impunity and the
expansion of State authority, fighting impunity does
not only concern the armed groups that commit abuses
against civilians; it must also include the perpetrators
of economic crimes, who, through corruption and
embezzlement, deprive the State of the means it needs
to assert its authority. We therefore encourage the
Government to continue taking appropriate measures
to substantially strengthen its authority to combat
that scourge.

The people of the Central African Republic have
suffered enough. It is therefore extremely urgent that
the international community, as represented by the
Security Council, take strong and concrete measures
and actions to mitigate its unspeakable suffering. I
also take this opportunity to make a strong appeal to
the political classes, civil society, the forces and all
the people of the Central African Republic to make an
exceptional, patriotic and collective demonstration for
peace and reconciliation in their country.

For my part, I reaffirm the commitment
and determination of the African Union and its
representatives in Bangui to remain with the people
of the Central African Republic in order to find a
peaceful solution to the crisis. The sole objective of the
African Union is peace and reconciliation for Central
Africans. I reaffirm what Mr. Onanga-Anyanga said
earlier, namely, that we are working hand in hand, in
perfect symbiosis, to effectively implement the African
Initiative, to which the Secretary-General has publicly
reaffirmed his support.

In conclusion, I wish the Council every success in
its work and thank members for their attention and for
placing the Central African Republic at the heart of the
Council's agenda.

