Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate on peacekeeping
operations. I thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Le
Roy for his briefing and the respective Force
Commanders of the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for their very insightful briefings.

From the outset, I would like to commend the
Force Commanders, their officers and staff for the
selfless and gallant service they render in the
maintenance of peace and security in their respective
areas of operation. I would also like to thank
Lieutenant General Obiakor, the Military Adviser for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his service to the United
Nations and wish him success in his future endeavours.

My delegation welcomes this interactive meeting
with the Force Commanders. While we acknowledge
the many successes that United Nations peacekeeping
has achieved over the years, it is also clear that there
are existing and emerging challenges that have to be
addressed. This debate therefore provides an
opportunity for the Council to better appreciate the
challenges that peacekeeping operations face on the
ground. We are convinced that, by addressing the
challenges identified, peacekeeping operations will
become more effective tools in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Peacekeeping operations today have multifaceted
mandates. As we have heard from the various briefings,
the tasks range from the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation among the parties to conflict, to the
protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, security sector
reform, supporting electoral processes, promoting
human rights and restoring the rule of law. This brings
together a number of participants from various
backgrounds to perform these interrelated functions
and calls for careful planning and coordination.

There have been cases of mismatch between
peacekeeping mandates in dynamic mission
environments and the provision of adequate or
appropriate resources. In other instances, inordinate
delays in the deployment of peacekeeping operations
have resulted in the escalation of conflict and loss of
lives, affecting the credibility of the United Nations in
the eyes of the affected population.

We commend the ongoing initiatives for inter-
mission cooperation in addressing the challenges,
including the protection of civilians, in close
cooperation with the national and regional authorities.
My delegation would appreciate hearing from the
Force Commander of MONUSCO on the extent of
cooperation amongst peacekeeping operations in the
region to combat the threat of the Lord's Resistance
Army, what challenges the peacekeeping operations
face and what more could be done.

What is needed to enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations is greater commitment on the
part of Member States and other stakeholders to
providing the requisite logistical, financial and human
resources. There is a need for renewed impetus and
political will to ensure support for more expeditious
deployments with the requisite human resources, assets
and logistics. It is also essential that the concerned
parties cooperate with and render full support to
peacekeeping operations in the implementation of their
mandates. The United Nations should also strengthen
further its strategic partnership with regional and
subregional organizations to take advantage of their
proximity and capabilities.
Uganda reiterates the need for early
peacebuilding activities within peacekeeping missions.
This, in our view, creates the conditions for efforts to
sustainably address the root causes of conflict through
peacebuilding.

Finally, my delegation pays tribute to the memory
of the peacekeepers who have paid the ultimate price,
sacrificing their lives in efforts to make this world a
more peaceful one.

