Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, Madam
President, as you did at the beginning of the meeting
and as other colleagues have done before me, I would
like convey our deepest condolences to the Egyptian
delegation, the Government and the people of Egypt
and the Egyptian Coptic Christian community for the
meaningless terrorist attacks that happened on a very
important Sunday for Christians all over the world.
Sadly, I think that it has almost become a habit to
start our meetings by conveying condolences, which
suggests the enormity of the terror menace in the world.
Again, I offer my condolences.

(spoke in French)

I wish to warmly thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Honore, for her briefing
and for her work over the last four years. I would
also like to underscore the fact that Italy aligns itself
with the statement to be made by Observer of the
European Union.

We welcome the conclusion of the electoral
process, the inauguration of President Jovenel Moise,
the formation of the new Government and the renewal
of the National Assembly. Now that the constitutional
order has been re-established, we encourage the Haitian
authorities to pursue a programme of political, economic
and social reform so as to strengthen the security
situation in Haiti and its democratic institutions and to
embark on a path of sustainable development. I would
like to focus on two points.

First, this is a crucial turning point for Haiti, which
the international community must be ready to support
in a manner that is effective and adapted to the actual
needs of the country, working in close cooperation with
Haitian institutions. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General for a
responsible transition of the United Nations presence
with the end goal of leaving Haiti in a position where it
can independently guarantee the security, fundamental
rights and the well-being of its citizens.

We support the gradual drawdown of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in the next six months and its replacement with a
peacekeeping mission with a lighter footprint, focused
on the rule of law, justice and human rights, which
are areas where we expect to see specific progress
towards lasting stabilization and the building of an
inclusive and resilient society. The compact envisaged
by the Secretary General in his report (S/2017/223) is
a tool to facilitate this process and to systematize and
guide assistance from the United Nations and other
international stakeholders.

My second point is that countries and the United
Nations, in providing assistance, need today to go
from an emergency-reaction posture to a structured
strategy of reconstruction and development for the long
term. We are mindful of the humanitarian challenges
and fragility that lie down this road. Haitians have
continued to suffer from the devastating consequences
of Hurricane Matthew, which ravaged the country, and
from cholera since 2010. The international community
has mobilized so as to join with the national forces in
addressing these crises. Italy, following the urgent call
made by the United Nations, contributed to UNICEF
programmes and the International Committee of the Red
Cross. We also welcome the Secretary-General's new
initiative aimed at enhanced support for measures to
combat cholera and assist victims, an approach that was
adopted by the General Assembly in December through
resolution 7l/l6l, which my country co-sponsored.

Shoring up security, the rule of law and democratic
institutions; creating a just and effective judiciary and
penal system; ensuring equality and the enjoyment of
fundamental rights; and eradicating abject poverty all
are key priorities for which the Haitian Government
will have to take responsibility on behalf of the Haitian
people. I wish here to underscore the importance of
greater participation by women at all levels, political,
social and economic.

By way of conclusion, let me say that the role of the
international community remains vital, first of all in
continuing to build the capacity of the Haitian National
Police. The United Nations must deploy the tools best
adapted to assist the country while refraining from
drawing down too hastily. Caution must be exercised
and continuity ensured so as not to undermine the
achievements made over the years by MINUSTAH.

We believe that the transition planned for by the
Secretary-General will be balanced. It will provide
the Council with calibrated, flexible tools tailored to
conditions on the ground and to the needs of Haitian
institutions, in line with the parameters of efficiency,
responsibility and clarity identified for mandates in the
framework of the reform of peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the United Nations.

Finally, I reiterate our commitment, through the
Security Council and the European Union as well as at
the bilateral level, to continue with joint, coordinated
efforts to support the Haitian authorities as it moves
towards lasting peace and inclusive democracy.

