Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, as well as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for their informative
and exhaustive briefings. I would also like to welcome
and thank Mr. Abdulmalik Al-Mikhlafi, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Yemen, for his presence in the Chamber.

Uruguay recognizes the intense work being done
by the staff and institutions involved in humanitarian
assistance activities in Yemen, which provide aid
to millions of people in need and carry out that
praiseworthy task in very hostile conditions.

We commend the Egyptian presidency for having
convened this meeting, which lends visibility to the
tragic situation in Yemen - one from which we all
hope that country will soon emerge. This meeting
also gives greater transparency to the work of the
Security Council.

Because tomorrow marks the observance of World
Humanitarian Day, I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its "Not a Target" campaign,
which we support enthusiastically. We would also like
to highlight today the fact that schools and hospitals
are not a target. Civilians are not a target. And
humanitarian workers are not a target. Humanitarian
workers in every conflict know that they have our
respect and admiration.
Uruguay sees no solution to the bloody conflict
in Yemen other than one of a negotiation process in
which all parties involved participate, that is conducted
by Yemenis themselves and that leads to a political
solution to the crisis. There is no military solution for
this conflict, as we have said so many times.

Civilians are paying the highest price of the war
with their own lives. Putting an end to the suffering
caused by this man-made crisis is possible. However,
that will happen only when the parties return to the
negotiation table - without preconditions and in good
faith - and agree to end the armed conflict.

It is time that the parties resume constructive
peace talks, without any more delay. The actors have
to accept that, to break the deadlock, concessions will
have to be made. In that regard, Uruguay reiterates
its call to resume dialogue and comply fully with
the commitment to cease hostilities, as the first step
towards the establishment ofpeace. Also, countries that
have an influence on the parties should collaborate in
the search for a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

The long-standing impasse in the peace process
and the lack of concrete results are undermining
the humanitarian situation in the country, which is
exacerbated by hunger and the cholera epidemic,
which is deteriorating every day. It is estimated that
approximately 500,000 persons have been stricken
by the illness. One person dies of cholera every hour
in Yemen.

Regrettably, the widespread violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law committed by all combatants have become the
common denominator in Yemen. Protecting civilians,
especially the most vulnerable, has become critical and
fundamental in this context of barbarism and pitiless
warfare. Lamentably, women in Yemen continue to
suffer deep-rooted discrimination. They do not receive
adequate protection against sexual and gender violence.

They are victims of abuses and degrading treatment.
This situation is exacerbated by the prolonged war,
insecurity and massive internal movements, in which
women are particularly vulnerable.

We encourage the Government of Yemen to
establish national monitoring and reporting mechanisms
to document violations of the human rights of women,
including sexual violence, and ensure accountability
for those responsible. Moreover, crimes committed
against children have exponentially increased in
this endless conflict. Children in Yemen spend their
childhood in the midst of poverty, hunger, disease and
indiscriminate attacks committed against them by all
parties to the armed conflict. Many have been killed,
mutilated or recruited.

It is critical that all perpetrators of these crimes
be added to the list annexed to the annual report of
the Secretary-General to be issued soon, in order to
clearly denounce before the world all those countries
and entities that have committed violations against
children, in open contempt not only of international law
but of the most elemental rules of humanity.

Those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law should be held
accountable for their crimes. Accountability is crucial
to resolving the conflict and achieving lasting peace. As
we did in the briefing in July (see S/PV.7999), Uruguay
reiterates that the Council has the means and authority
to establish impartial and transparent investigatory
mechanisms for reported violations of international
humanitarian law in Yemen, as committed by both
parties to the dispute.

I wish to briefly refer to the presidential statement
adopted 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14), which highlights
the unprecedented level ofglobal humanitarian need and
the threat of famine looming over more than 20 million
people in some countries, including Yemen. Conflict and
violence have devastating humanitarian consequences,
hamper effective humanitarian responses and are a
primary cause of the famine ravaging the country.

In conclusion, I would like to call on all the parties
to the conflict to agree to an immediate cessation of
hostilities so as to facilitate unhindered and permanent
access to humanitarian aid as well as the resumption of
political negotiations.

