Ms. Gahonzire: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council.

The 2011 Agreement between the Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area provided for temporary
administrative arrangements for Abyei and the
consequent deployment of an interim security force
in Abyei. Both parties requested the African Union
and United Nations to support that agreement and its
implementation. Resolution 1990 (2011) then established
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). The United Nations police (UNPOL)
component was mandated to strengthen the capacity
of the Abyei Police Service, including by training the
personnel of the Abyei Police Service and coordinating
with it on law and order.

Since the signing of the Agreement, both parties
have had difficulties implementing it because South
Sudan does not agree to the establishment of a joint
administration or joint security forces in Abyei and
claims that the Agreement expired after the initial
six-month period. The Sudan only supports the
establishment of a joint administration in Abyei and
the establishment of the Abyei Police Service. Little
progress has been made in implementing outstanding
commitments agreed upon by the parties in the 20 June
2011 Agreement, such as the establishment of the
Abyei Police Service, the additional deployment of
UNPOL officers in UNISFA and the issuance of visas
to UNISFA personnel.

The delay in the establishment of Abyei Police
Service and other institutions has created a grave
law-and-order vacuum. Due to this situation, an
informal structure known as "community protection
committees" has been created through concerted
efforts between UNPOL and Ngok Dinka traditional
leaders. Resolution 2205 (2015) therefore requested
UNISFA, within its existing capabilities and resources
and in close coordination with the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities, to strengthen the capacities of
community protection committees to assist with law
and order management in the Abyei Area. UNISFA
police therefore work closely with and supports the
community protection committees by providing
basic policing training and co-locating, mentoring,
monitoring and advising them in the performance of
their duties.

It became necessary to enhance the operational
and administrative capacity of community protection
committees. A total of 30 such committees have been
established in the central and southern parts of the
Abyei Area, which are mainly Ngok Dinka-populated
areas. In addition, one joint protection committee has
been established at the Amiet common market, and
three attached detention facilities have been set up in
Abyei, in the Amiet market and in Agok. However, there
are no community protection committees structures in
the north of Abyei, due to reservations that have been
expressed by the Government of the Sudan.

Sustaining peace constitutes a goal and a part
of the process towards building a common vision of
society with national ownership, where local actors
have a consistent voice and women and youth play a
critical role. In the context of Abyei, the role of UNPOL
is to support the community protection committees,
enhance and foster a positive protective environment
across Abyei and conduct awareness campaigns and
sensitize communities on the effects of crime and
on crime prevention, especially sexual and gender-
based violence and serious and violent crimes. The
community protection committees and joint protection
committees also serve as sources of information on
all crime-related incidents and investigations. Female
community protection committee members are playing
a crucial role in sustaining peace and security in Abyei,
especially through their involvement and support
in addressing all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence incidents and related cases.

Further enhancement to the community protection
committees support has increased. Recruitment of
community protection committee members increased
from 330 recruits in 2018 to 600 recruits to date in 2019,
including 89 females. UNPOL undertook the initiative

to organize women into associations for both the north
and south. Women from both areas met in October, and
it was remarkable.

The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of UNISFA. And the community
protection committees, supported by UNPOL, have
played a pivotal role in implementing the protection-of-
civilians strategy. The current mandate allows for
the increment of UNPOL to 148 personnel, which
also allows for their deployment to additional team
sites - 10 in the area of responsibility, including 30
community protection committees in crime hotspots.

According to performance assessments done in May,
the joint protection committee at the Amiet common
market has achieved excellent results in maintaining
law and order in the market and surrounding areas.
Good practices include a road safety strategy where
community protection committee checkpoints along
the road between Agok and Amiet have helped in
reducing traffic-related incidents. The joint protection
committee is also responsible for the management of
the detention centre at the Amiet common market,
including case management and referral of suspects and
cases to traditional courts. Executing their duties under
the mentorship and advice of UNPOL, the community
protection committees and joint protection committee
act in compliance with international standards and
human rights.

The community protection committees handle
other basic law enforcement duties, for example, during
an incident in Abyei, they restrained demonstrators
organized against UNISFA by Ngok Dinka on
30 October. Another incident occurred when the
community protection committees protected local
communities during a youth football tournament
organized by the UNISFA police in April.

Notwithstanding their generally good performance,
some community protection committee members
resigned due to better job opportunities. It would be
more beneficial to UNISFA and the communities if
the mission and related partners could support its
sustainability. Implementing the community protection
committee doctrine and concept in both areas would
be a major achievement as efforts to seek final
status continue.

In conclusion, parties should be urged to abandon
their current positions and work together for the good
of the Abyei community. The operational capacity of
community protection committees should be improved
by providing them with more operational and logistical
support and improving their infrastructure to enhance
the execution of law-and-order duties, in line with
international policing and human rights standards. It
must be noted that the developed community protection
committee infrastructure may be used by the Abyei
Police Service once it is established. United Nations
country teams working in Abyei would also indirectly
support both UNISFA and the people of Abyei.

