Ms. Bird (Australia): I would like to begin by
commending Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui and UNICEF for their tireless
efforts on behalf of children affected by armed conflict
around the world. That some 115,000 child soldiers
have been released since the beginning of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mandate is
testament to their efforts and those of their colleagues
in the field.

Despite these success stories, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/360) demonstrates that
armed conflict continues to take an unacceptably
high toll on children, so many of whom continue to
be recruited and used in hostilities, killed, injured,
raped, abducted and denied education and health care.
This demonstrates that, 20 years on, the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict is as important as
ever, which is why it continues to have Australia's
full support.

Against the backdrop of the highly dismaying
information provided in today's briefings, I would like to
focus on three issues: the need to implement action plans,
the need to address attacks on health-care personnel
and facilities, and the need for stronger protection of
children's rights in peacekeeping operations.

First, in this, the final year of the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, there is a critical need for continued
efforts to implement the action plans in place with
national security forces to end the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict. The delisting of nine
parties that have fully implemented their action plans
demonstrates that this is an initiative that is capable of
making real change. As the majority of groups listed in
the Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict are non-State actors, Australia welcomes the
efforts taken to ensure that such groups also refrain from
grave violations against children, and we encourage
further efforts to that end.

Secondly, Australia is deeply concerned that
medical facilities continue to come under frequent
attack during conflict, in gross violation of international
humanitarian law. This has serious implications for
children. It is crucial that resolution 2286 (2016) is
fully implemented, including its demand that all parties
to armed conflict facilitate the unimpeded passage
of medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties.

Thirdly, every effort should be made to ensure
that those who have a mandate to protect do no harm
to children. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's commitment to banning from participating
in peacekeeping missions those Government forces
repeatedly listed in the annexes of the children and
armed conflict reports.

The Security Council has repeatedly called for
children to be shielded from the impact of conflict.
Despite this, too many continue to suffer. We must do
more to end grave violations against children suffered
in conflicts not of their making.

