Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me join others in
thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, and Ms. Tania Hary,
Executive Director of Gisha, Legal Centre for Freedom
of Movement, for their briefings. I also welcome
the observer of the Observer State of Palestine and
the representative of Israel to the Chamber for our
deliberations today.

I would like to address the following three issues
in my statement today: the systematic annexation of
Palestinian lands, the situation in Gaza and the power
of the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

On the first issue, regarding the systematic
annexation of Palestinian lands, South Africa would
like to reiterate its steadfast stance with regard to the
peace process and resolving the constant stalemate in
negotiations. In that context, we affirm that the only
way to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East
is by reaching lasting peace between Palestinians and
Israelis themselves and by restoring all the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance with
the two-State solution and the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international terms of reference,
including the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, among others.

The continuing disregard for those prevailing
and long-standing international concepts cannot be
allowed, particularly with regard to the circumvention
of final -tatus issues, such as borders, the status of
Jerusalem and the right to return of refugees. Israel's
continuing pronouncements on the annexation of
large parts of the West Bank and the building of
additional settlements further undermine the prospects
for peace and are glaring examples of violations of
international law. Since 1967 - that is, for over half a
century - Israel has systematically constructed more
than 160 settlements and outposts on land seized from
the Palestinian people. More than 600,000 Israelis
are now living in settlements built from the ruins of
demolished and destroyed Palestinian properties. Since
the adoption of the first resolution on the situation in
Palestine - resolution 42 (1948), of March 1948, over
70 years ago, and all subsequent resolutions - the
Council has failed to ensure that those resolutions are
implemented or to take any concrete action to address
the blatant violations of those resolutions. I now ask my
fellow Council members, what will force the Council
to act?

I would like to remind the Council of its unanimous
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), on 23 December
2016. It clearly states, in paragraph 1, that the Council

"[r]eaffirms that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has no
legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace".

There is no ambiguity, legal or otherwise, in those
words or in that resolution.

Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
clearly states that

"[t]he Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter."

It must be clear to all that no State Member of the
United Nations is exempt from its obligations under
the United Nations Charter. If we were to abandon the
principles enshrined in the Charter, it would render
the Council and its decisions obsolete. In that regard,
South Africa has and will continue to insist on the full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and all other
Council resolutions on this matter, including by calling
for written reports by the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We cannot
ignore one Security Council resolution while calling
for the full implementation of others.

On my second point, South Africa is deeply
concerned about the recent activities in Gaza, which
have led to increased tensions, the killing of more than
30 Palestinians and injuries to hundreds of innocent
Palestinians and Israelis. Those actions perpetuate
the dire security and humanitarian situation in the
area, and we welcome last week's announcement of a
ceasefire brokered by the United Nations and Egypt.
In that regard, we call for a halt to the violent attacks
on both sides and for all parties to begin negotiations.
Additionally, South Africa is concerned about the
continued human rights violations in the occupied
territory and reiterates that such Violations only foster
hatred between the peoples of Palestine and Israel.
With regard to my third issue, on the power of
peaceful conflict resolution, the security of Israel and
its future generations does not lie in the annexation of
Palestinian territories, the imprisonment ofPalestinians,
the erection of high concrete walls and checkpoints
or the continued blockade of Gaza but rather in a
peaceful, stable and happy neighbour and a sovereign
and independent Palestinian State, whose children, like
Israeli children, can go to school, play, attend places
of worship and compete in sporting activities with
their Israeli friends in peace and security. That can be
achieved through sustained dialogue, negotiation and
mediation, through both sides respecting one another
and through compromise and understanding. As our
late President Mandela said at a banquet in Cape Town
during the visit of President Yasser Arafat in 1998,

"Our own humble experience has shown that
negotiated solutions can be found even to conflict
that the world has come to regard as insoluble. It has
taught us that such solutions emerge when former
opponents reach out to find common ground."

In conclusion, I would like to say that South Africa
is fully committed to ensuring that a two-State solution,
and the agreed peace processes aimed at ensuring two
viable States coexisting side by side for the mutual
benefit of all peoples in the region, especially Israelis
and Palestinians, becomes a reality. We are ready to play
our part to assist the parties in finding durable peace
for the sake of their children and future generations.

