Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on China's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also thank you, Sir,
for taking the initiative in organizing this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We also thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing this morning.

Events in the region and internationally have an
impact on the Palestinian question. While the peace
process has been paralysed in political terms since
2014, Israel has continued to take unilateral measures in
expanding its settlements in an unprecedented fashion
on the Palestinian territory that has been occupied since
June 1967. Unprecedented violence in the region is
dashing Palestinian hope. They have the feeling that the
international community has abandoned them to turn to
other issues. It is certainly true that other questions are
no less important, but they should not lead us to forget
the Palestinian question. It remains the main crisis in
the Middle East.

In political terms, the years we are living through
are very difficult ones when compared to previous
years. We see that the occupation has continued
for 50 years in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
while settlements, colonialization and Judaization
continue. Those policies cannot lead to peace. That is
why the international community should assume its
responsibilities and encourage the parties to return to
the negotiating table to kick-start the peace process
on the basis of the two-State solution, a solution that
is currently under threat more than ever before. The
current situation will lead only to violence and chaos.

We appreciate and are optimistic about the
determination of the new American Administration to
encourage dialogue between the parties to achieve the
two-State solution. Were the situation to remain bleak,
it would go against the interests of the parties. I repeat
that that will only fan the flames and cause the violence
to increase. In that regard, my country supports all
attempts to restart the peace process on the basis of
a precise time frame decided upon by the parties, as
well as on the basis of the two-State solution within
the borders of 4 June 1067, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the Palestinian State.

There can be no doubt that Jerusalem has a very
special place not only in the hearts of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, but also for worshippers of the three
monotheistic Abrahamic religions. That is why
coexistence needs to be maintained in Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is the city that Muslims turn to before Mecca,
and it is the third holy city, after Mecca and Medina, for
more than 1.5 billion Muslims. That is why any attempt
to alter the legal status of Jerusalem will lead only to an
increase in violence and hatred. That would encourage
a number of young people to turn to terrorism. The
King of Morocco Chairs the Al-Quds Committee at
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and, in that
regard, we call for the rights of the Palestinian people
to be respected, in particular their right to create a State
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is the only way
that we can achieve a fair and sustainable peace in the
Middle East, and that would allow us to strengthen
international peace and security.

His Majesty King Mohamed VI has on a number
of occasions, including at multilateral and bilateral
meetings, called for an end to settlements, as does
resolution 2334 (2016). His Majesty has also warned
against the Judaization of Jerusalem and any attempt
to change the legal status of the city. He said the same
in a statement to the press, and the Security Council
itself also raised the issue in a statement issued on
17 September 2015 (SC/12052). His Majesty the King
of Morocco has called for every step to be taken to
allow the Palestinian people to create a State with East
Jerusalem as its capital within the 1967 borders, living
side by side in peace with Israel. Morocco's position on
the Arab Peace Initiative therefore remains unchanged,
which we support. We also call for the creation of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the 1967 borders. Morocco stands
ready to participate actively in all initiatives that allow
for progress on the peace process and the achievement
of peace, security and stability in the region.

