Mr. Valle (Brazil): I wish to begin, Sir, by expressing
the satisfaction of the delegation of Brazil at taking part in
this debate under your able presidency. Your diplomatic
and personal qualities have earned our respect and deserve
recognition. Let me also congratulate Ambassador Gambari
for his outstanding work as President for the month of
October.

We wish to add our voice to that of the rest of the
international community at this moment of renewed hope
for peace in the war-torn Balkans. The successful outcome
of the negotiations creates the conditions for the opening of
a new chapter in the relations among all peoples in the
region after almost four years of violence and destruction.

As hundreds of thousands lost their lives and millions
were displaced, successive diplomatic attempts to bridge
differences through peaceful means met with intransigence
and defiance. An outraged world looked on with dismay at
the atrocities, while its faith in the capacity for dialogue
and understanding among nations was eroded, precisely
when conditions seemed most favourable for the
establishment of a new partnership world wide.

As we welcome this important occasion, my first
thoughts go to the innocent civilians and the brave peace-
keepers who got caught in the crossfire, as well as to all the
victims of the massive human rights violations associated
with this heinous conflict. The initialling of the Peace
Agreement in Dayton, Ohio, would not have been possible,
however, without the leadership provided by the United
States Government in bringing the parties together. Special
acknowledgment is due in this context to the role played by
President Clinton and Secretary of State Christopher. Their
whole team is to be congratulated on their sense of purpose
and their perseverance.

Many others also deserve credit for their untiring
efforts in the search for solutions to a complex and
unprecedented situation for which existing diplomatic
instruments seemed insufficient and conventional wisdom
inadequate. I must take this opportunity to express the deep
appreciation of the Brazilian Government for the crucial
role played by the United Nations, and in particular by
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali, in handling the
gravest of the crises of the post-cold-war era.

The challenges faced by the Organization in the
former Yugoslavia have been enormous and the
frustrations bred by the involuntary involvement of a
peace-keeping operation in armed combat have been
many. It is undeniable that without the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and its successors the
humanitarian catastrophe in the region would have
reached even greater proportions and the conflict might
have spread even further.

Throughout the conflict, Brazil remained firmly
committed to the achievement of peace in the Balkans
and stood behind efforts directed at avoiding escalation
and at promoting an agreed settlement, including through
participation in UNPROFOR. Our belief in the possibility
of harmonious and democratic coexistence between
peoples of different ethnic and religious backgrounds is
firmly rooted in our own experience. We continue to
show readiness to contribute to the strengthening of the
peace process in the Balkans along the steep road that
must still be climbed if the promises of Dayton are to be
translated into a better life for all in the region.

