Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General and his Under-Secretaries-
General, as well as his Special Representatives, for
their thought-provoking briefings.

The views expressed so far reflect the common
will and determination of this Council to improve, in
consultation with partners, its response to the needs of
United Nations peacekeeping. Turkey is certainly
committed to contributing to this endeavour. Over
time, we have already accumulated a wealth of lessons
learned on how we can further enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping. It is
now the right time to analyse those lessons and to
develop a clear strategy that will help us chart a viable
road map to peace in conflict situations.
Much of what I want to say has already been said
by the previous speakers, particularly the briefers, so I
will not repeat them. Moreover, the draft presidential
statement that we are going to adopt today also
contains all the right elements, allowing me to be
rather brief.

The only point I wish to stress further is the need
for an integrated political strategy that will merge
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding tools
into a single framework. Undoubtedly, such a strategy
can succeed only if all partners are willing to back it. It
must therefore reflect the shared vision of all
stakeholders and address all phases of a peace mission:
the entry and, perhaps even more important, the post-
conflict recovery phases, including, of course,
transition and exit.

As Under-Secretary-General Le Roy said,
peacekeeping can be seen as the emergency room of a
hospital, where the patient should continue to be
treated in the aftermath of a recovery phase. But there
is no doubt that transition and exit strategies should be
part and parcel of this overall strategy. Unless we
determine at the beginning what we want to achieve in
the end, we can neither properly set the course of the
mission in terms of mandates and task prioritization,
nor answer the question of how we are going to
achieve it.

In the development of an integrated strategy, it is
important that we should first agree on the end state
that we want to achieve through peacekeeping
missions, as well as their role and place within the
bigger picture of sustaining peace. Only then, and in
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries, can we develop clear and credible mandates
providing a sound political directive to our troops. In
this critical process, the input of regional organizations
should also be given the utmost attention. The Security
Council's cooperation with the African Union is a good
example of such a relationship.

We should also agree on a shared vision of what
constitutes success. Indeed, one of the perennial
questions facing us is how the Council can assess when
a political and security situation has stabilized
sufficiently to warrant a significant transition. To this
end, we can make better use of benchmarks to measure
progress in achieving tasks and as a tool for reviewing
mandates.
Yet we should also be careful to avoid creating
benchmarks that are solely Council-driven, which
could result in a lack of local ownership. This is also
important in setting priorities, which ought to reflect
the unique conditions and needs of a country. It is in
this frame of mind that we look forward to the review
in the coming months of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Indeed, given the evolution of
the situation in that country, this is going to be an
important challenge for the Council, and we need to
get it right this time.

In conclusion, I once again reiterate the vital
importance of an integrated approach to conflict
situations. Indeed, the coherence and coordination of
broader international efforts in an area of conflict is
key to helping countries succeed in their efforts to
sustain peace. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in particular could play an earlier and enhanced role in
that respect. In that regard, we look forward to the
comprehensive review of the PBC and express our
commitment to contributing actively to that process.
Moreover, for better coordination among Member
States and other partners, we can also make use of the
clearinghouse type of mechanisms to promote synergy
and complementarity in our peacebuilding activities. I
agree with Mr. Doss as to the difficulties of
coordination and the need to streamline our existing
arrangements.

Last but not least, I would like to emphasize that
the real challenge lies in the creation of a suitable
foundation on which the transition from the phase of
the strategic use of security to that of the strategic use
of development can take place, because the exit or
withdrawal of United Nations troops cannot be an end
in itself. We have to think beyond the lifecycle of a
peacekeeping mission, as security is not the only
element of peace and stability.

In this regard, there is no linear relationship
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and thus the
early integration of peacebuilding elements into our
peacekeeping strategies becomes crucial. After all, the
inextricable link between development and security
compels us to do so. As the Secretary-General pointed
out on an earlier occasion, there can be no security
without development, and vice versa. So our efforts on
both accounts should go hand in hand from the very
outset. Turkey commits itself to further advancing the
implementation of such an integrated approach.
