Mr. Sahovic' (Serbia and Montenegro): I should
like to thank the British presidency for having
convened a ministerial meeting on the very important
topic of justice and the rule of law, as well as for this
opportunity for the wider United Nations membership
to contribute to the debate.

My delegation has listened with great interest to
the interventions of the members of the Council and to
the many concrete suggestions for strengthening the
role of the United Nations in this field. Since my
country has direct experience of United Nations efforts
to promote justice and the rule of law, we would like to
use this opportunity to offer a few observations on
some aspects of this process, in relation to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

Before doing so, however, I should like to
emphasize that my Government fully agrees with the
virtually unanimous assessment that the establishment
of the rule of law is of crucial importance for
stabilizing societies emerging from conflict. Without it,
the risk of new human rights violations and of a return
to conflict remain real and permanent.

Secondly, we fully support the view that the role
of the United Nations does not end with the physical
separation of the parties to a conflict. Its task is
fulfilled when firm foundations for peace, security and
stability have been laid - the basic precondition for
this being institutions that guarantee the primacy of
law.

The United Nations established one of its largest
and most comprehensive missions in my country, in the
province of Kosovo and Metohija, in 1999. There were
many references during the ministerial meeting to the
role of UNMIK in securing the rule of law. We deem it
necessary, however, to point out that the achievements
in this field are far from satisfactory.

As we have repeatedly stated during Security
Council meetings on Kosovo and Metohija, not a single
perpetrator of ethnically motivated crimes has been
apprehended that we are aware of. The inevitable
consequence is the emergence of a culture of impunity
with respect to violence against minorities. There have
also been no major breakthroughs in fighting
widespread organized crime.

Various reasons have been cited to explain such a
state of affairs. In that context, my Government
considers the insufficient number of international
judges and prosecutors to be a significant cause for
concern. According to the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) of 26 June 2003
(S/2003/675), there are only 15 international judges
and 10 international prosecutors serving in the local
justice system and they handle only approximately 3
per cent of the criminal cases. In addition, the number
of UNMIK staff dealing with police and justice issues
is continuously being reduced. In our view, however,
that segment of UNMIK's human resources should be
strengthened, rather than weakened.

Owing primarily to the prevailing climate of
insecurity, the chances for return of 250,000 internally
displaced persons are diminishing. Of course, returns
are among the most important stated aims of UNMIK,
along with the establishment of the rule of law and the
protection of human and minority rights.

As has been stated in virtually all reports on
Kosovo and Metohija, much remains to be done in
establishing the rule of law. We therefore welcome the
fact that the international community seems to
recognize the need to adopt a comprehensive approach
to supporting societies that need reconstruction, such
as in Kosovo and Metohija, until the firm basis for a
just society is in place. That approach must include
better resources and expert assistance for the efficient
reform of law enforcement and the judiciary.

In that context, we find very useful the
suggestions presented during the Council's ministerial-
level debate calling for the United Nations to establish
a standing data base of experts, nominated by Member
States, who would be available, if called upon by the
Security Council or by States, to assist in these areas.

One of the significant contributions of the United
Nations to managing post-conflict situations is the
establishment of international criminal tribunals. The
ad hoc tribunals have shown, within their scope, that
no one is above the reach of international law. They
have enabled the processing of a number of war crime
cases in circumstances where national judiciaries were
unable to do so. My Government recognizes that role
of the tribunals. It also fully recognizes its obligation
to cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and is doing its
utmost to fulfil that obligation.

In many respects, however, the tribunals seem to
have a mixed record. For example, the fact that the
ICTY was formed as an ad hoc body is not sufficient
justification for its practice of changing its rules of
procedure and evidence as it goes along. That can only
lead to legal uncertainty, which obviously does not
contribute to the strengthening of the rule of law.

Also, in the case of the ICTY at least, it is
sometimes difficult for the wider public to make the
necessary clear distinction between the Court and the
Office of the Prosecutor. The Court, as an independent
legal institution whose aim is to secure justice, is often
overshadowed by the prosecution. In addition, there are
differences in the perception of the purposes of the
ICTY that distort the image of the Tribunal as an
institution above political considerations. The ICTY
has variously been defined: as a means of determining
individual responsibility for the most serious war
crimes, as a vehicle for reconciliation and as a venue
for deciding what constitutes the historical truth about
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.

It is our firm belief that the goal of any court of
law, including ad hoc tribunals, must be to bring
individual perpetrators of crimes to justice. The task of
the tribunals is to concentrate on the top echelons of
the chain of command that led to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. On previous occasions, the
Council has recognized that lower-level cases should
be tried by national courts. We believe that the time is
approaching when the ICTY should begin to refer the
cases it deems appropriate to national jurisdictions.
However, in that process the importance of
international assistance in reforming and strengthening
national judiciaries is paramount.

Allow me to conclude by saying that my
Government views the establishment of the
International Criminal Court as a major step forward in
creating a lasting framework for promoting the aims of
justice and the rule of law at the international level.
The International Criminal Court is permanent and its
jurisdiction was envisaged as universal. Therefore, it is
not focused on one country in particular but on all
perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. As was stated at the ministerial-level
meeting, it does not represent victors' justice but is
aimed at objectively determining individual
responsibility in cases of the most serious violations of
international humanitarian law. My Government
supports that role of the International Criminal Court.

