Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me join in
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, and thank him for his very
informative briefing.

Although the Council has over the last three
months dealt with many of the issues raised in the
report of the Secretary-General, the report and Mr.
Haekkerup's updates provide a useful benchmark in the
process leading up to Kosovo-wide elections, to be
held on 17 November. This meeting gives the Council a
further opportunity to assess the activities of UNMIK
in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
The assessment of the Jamaican delegation is that
we have a good scorecard before us, particularly in
regard to the Constitutional Framework and the
institutions of provisional self-government, the
engagement of the Kosovo communities, relations with
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, issues relating to
law and order and economic reconstruction. We
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the staff of UNMIK for developing a legal
and administrative framework which could lead to
sustainable political and economic structure for the
future development of Kosovo.

As my delegation fully supports the elements in
the presidential statement which the Council will adopt
later today, I wish to highlight only a few issues which
my delegation regards as critical.

First, in regard to the forthcoming elections, we
note that there has been a substantial increase in voter
registration, particularly of people from minority
communities, with the active cooperation of Kosovo
Serb leaders and the authorities of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. However, we have heard from Mr.
Haekkerup that this registration does not guarantee the
participation of members of these communities in the
elections. We would urge full participation, particularly
of the Kosovo Serb community, in the elections on 17
November and their subsequent participation in the
institutions of self-government. We have also noted
that the elections should result in a substantial number
of women being included in the Assembly.

My delegation agrees that substantial progress
has been made in preparing the people of Kosovo for
substantial autonomy and meaningful self-
administration. The report of the Secretary-General
provides details of a process whereby more and more
responsibility and essential departments of government
are being handed over to the people of Kosovo, in
accordance with the provision of resolution 1244
(1999). This has been complemented by the
information provided by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

The elections on 17 November will establish a
democratic process for the selection of the political
leadership of Kosovo and will be important for the
future decision-making process. Mr. Haekkerup has
focused on the structures being set up to enable the
people of Kosovo to operate effectively the different
departments of government. These will provide a
strong foundation for a viable and sustainable system
of government.
One of the main priorities of the United Nations
presence in Kosovo has to be a reduction in the
incidence of violence in the territory in the weeks
leading up to the elections. The increase in the
incidence of violence is a cause of concern to my
delegation. Most alarming are the reports of numerous
attacks on members of the international security
presence. In this regard, the challenge of Mitrovica
remains, despite the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR.
Fear and mistrust continue to characterize relations in
that part of Kosovo, and we would wish to hear from
Mr. Haekkerup about how the situation in Mitrovica is
developing in this period leading up to elections.

My delegation is also very interested in the work
of UNMIK in the area of returns. We welcome the
attempts to establish a secure environment in which
refugees and displaced persons can return home in
safety and to an environment conducive to the
establishment of a transitional administration. We are
encouraged by the work of the Joint Committee on
Returns of Kosovo Serbs and its adoption of an action
plan for the 10 most advanced potential return
locations in Kosovo. The provision of assistance for
housing reconstruction is essential to that process, as is
the provision of security. We believe that cooperation
with the international community, in the provision of
financial resources, and cooperation with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will be helpful in facilitating
an environment conducive to returns.

Besides the problem of housing reconstruction,
the report of the Secretary-General has also identified
occupied properties as among the obstacles to returns.
We would also wish to hear from Mr. Haekkerup about
the level of security and the type of economic and
employment opportunities that exist in the 10 return
locations that have been identified.

The progress made in the consolidation of pillarI
augurs well for the future of law and order in Kosovo.
The recent signing of three key regulations designed to
facilitate UNMIK's fight against organized crime is an
important development. We welcome the efforts to
recruit additional judges and prosecutors, and again
urge that steps be taken to ensure that the judiciary is
representative of the multi-ethnic nature of the society.
The Kosovo Police Service will need to undertake
effective community policing in the future and
therefore must have the capacity and training necessary
to carry out such tasks. We encourage further efforts
aimed at capacity-building in the Kosovo Police
Service and plans for the assumption of greater
responsibility for border police operations by the fourth
quarter of 2002.

Security and confidence for all the people of
Kosovo are key to economic reconstruction. We are
pleased to note the economic and financial measures
taken, which have resulted in increased inflows of
private investment and in improvements in the banking
system and in the system of tax collection.

Following the adoption of resolution 1367 (2001)
on 10 September and the resulting termination of the
arms embargo imposed by resolution 1160 (1998), I
was authorized, in my capacity as former Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1160
(1998), to submit a final report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee. I wish to advise
members of the Council that the report has been
submitted to the President of the Security Council; it
covers the period 1 January to 10 September 2001 and
is now available as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/2001/931. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the former members of the
Committee, and the Secretariat, for the tremendous
cooperation and support extended to me during my
tenure as Chair of the Committee.

Although the work of the sanctions Committee
has ended, our concern about the flow of arms into
Kosovo has not diminished, and my delegation - and I
am sure the other members of the Council - will
continue to pay close attention to efforts to eliminate
unauthorized weapons in Kosovo. We urge UNMIK
and KFOR to continue their work in that regard.

In conclusion, my delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that UNMIK's commitment to the
goals and objectives of creating the conditions for
substantial autonomy and for fulfilment of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) has begun to bear fruit.
The international community's involvement and its
support for the people of Kosovo must continue after
the 17 November elections, in particular through
support for capacity-building and for strengthening the
ability of the people to provide security for all within a
true multi-ethnic society.

