Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General De Mistura for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
his statement.

One year ago, the Kabul International Conference
on Afghanistan was successfully convened. Over the
past year, through the efforts of the Afghan
Government and people and with the help of the
international community, positive progress has been
achieved in the Afghan peace and reconstruction
process. Meanwhile, Afghanistan is undergoing a
critical period of transition whereby continued efforts
are needed to achieve comprehensive and balanced
development in all sectors - security, political,
economic and social. In that connection, I would like to
underscore the following five points.

First, China supports Afghanistan in its continued
efforts to push through the Kabul process with the help
of the international community. In order to achieve
Afghan peace, stability and development, there is a
need to fully respect its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to support its ownership and
leadership, so as to genuinely achieve an Afghanistan
run by Afghans.

Secondly, China is seriously concerned about the
recent worsening in the security situation and the rising
number of civilian casualties. We have noted that a
certain country has announced that it plans to withdraw
its troops from Afghanistan. We hope that in the
transfer of security responsibilities to the Afghan
Government, the parties concerned will earnestly
assume responsibilities to help Afghanistan to
strengthen its security capacity-building to ensure a
peaceful and stable transition.

Thirdly, China supports Afghanistan in its
national reconciliation efforts, fully respects the
Afghan Government and people in their choice of their
own accord and hopes to see progress in its peace and
reintegration programme.

Fourthly, with regard to peace and reconstruction,
Afghanistan still needs the sustained attention and
support of the international community. The
international community must deliver on and fulfil its
commitment to help Afghanistan and to continue to
provide the country with assistance. The parties need to
respect and implement the priorities identified by
Afghans themselves in the context of the Afghan
National Development Strategy.

Fifthly, China appreciates the active efforts of the
United Nations to push through the Afghan peace and
reconstruction process. We support the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in its
continued efforts to play a central and leading role in
coordinating aid to Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA
will strengthen its communication, coordination and
cooperation with the Afghan Government.

As a friendly neighbour, China has consistently
committed itself to friendly and good-neighbourly
relations with Afghanistan. We attach great importance
to our participation in reconstruction efforts in
Afghanistan. China will continue to provide assistance
to Afghanistan within its capabilities and will work
with the international community to contribute to
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.

