Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Argentina on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council; to thank you,
Madam President, and your country for organizing this
debate; and to welcome and underscore the stewardship
of this debate for a large part of today by President of
Argentina, Ms. Cristina Fernandez.

We welcome presidential statement (S/ PRST/2013/ 12)
and we are grateful for the statements by the Secretary-
General and the representatives who spoke on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Union of South American Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States.

For a country without armed forces such as Costa
Rica, international law and the multilateral system
are the main tools to protect our integrity. For that
reason, we believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations and
agreements is essential in maintaining international
peace and security.

The American hemisphere has a wealth of
experience in the development of bodies for cooperation
and collective security to prevent and settle conflicts
and to promote peace and stability. The Organization of
American States (OAS), as was previously stated, is the
oldest regional organization in the world. Its democratic
mandate offers multiple options for mediation, electoral
monitoring, justice and the protection of individual and
social rights, which are key to peace. The Inter-American
system of human rights in particular is an example of
independence, relevance and legitimacy.

Following the inception of the OAS, in 1948,
there developed in our hemisphere other regional or
subregional organizations and agreements with multiple
aims and scopes. Among them are the Caribbean
Community, the Central American Integration System,
the Andean Community, the Common Market of the
South, the Union of South American Nations, the Pacific
Alliance and the Ibero-American Summits, which span
the Atlantic and include Andorra, Spain and Portugal.

The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, which is a collective endeavour, is the broadest
and most recent regional mechanism for dialogue and
political agreement. Its immediate predecessor was the
Rio Group, which, in turn, emerged from the Contadora
Group, which was established to seek peace in Central
America in the 19805 and shoe contributions contributed
to the achievement ofpeace in 1987, with the Esquipulas
II Agreement, promoted by the President of Guatemala,
Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo, and President of Costa Rica,
Oscar Arias Senchez, who, as a result of that initiative,
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The great success
of the Esquipulas process was based on its regional
roots, its comprehensive approach to conflict and the
effective participation and coordination of the United
Nations, the OAS and other regional and international
actors in the management and implementation of the
accord. Its lessons are extremely relevant to this debate.

Faced with the reality of growing regional and
subregional arrangements in the world, with both
potential and genuine impact on peace and security,
coordination is increasingly necessary in two ways:
between the arrangements and organizations themselves
as well as between them and the United Nations. On that
basis and because of our experiences and aspirations,
my delegation wishes to make four proposals.

First, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, should devote at least the same attention to
prevention as it does to the settlement of conflicts.
Prevention involves confidence-building, mediation,
providing good offices, triggering early warnings
and establishing mechanisms to facilitate, implement
and monitor agreements. However, true conflict
prevention, especially those of a domestic nature,
requires addressing the roots of the conflict; respecting
human rights; encouraging democratic processes;
strengthening the rule of law, good governance and
transparency; and creating conditions for development,
accountability and the fight against impunity.

Regional and subregional bodies can play key roles
in both aspects of prevention. They have in their favour
more direct knowledge of national dynamics, closer
and more personal contact with the parties, a greater
ability to act, greater facility to establish links with
the relevant organizations of civil society and probably
a particular interest in avoiding or settling conflicts
directly affecting their members. For that reason,
the United Nations should place particular stress
on building capacity for prevention and mediation
in regional bodies and support them in those tasks.
Support for the International Criminal Court is also
part of the preventive diplomacy equation.

Our second recommendation is that cooperation for
peace and security between the Security Council and
regional bodies should not be limited to only Articles
52 to 54 of the Charter of the United Nations. Equally
important, but very much neglected, is Article 26,
which gives the Council the mandate to develop plans
for the regulation of armaments,

"[i]n order to promote the establishment and
maintenance of international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the
world's human and economic resources".

The Council must give real expression to Article 26
and channel its cooperation with regional organizations
more towards arms control, the regulation of military
spending and the prevention of an arms race, which are
obvious obstacles to peace and development.

However, many of the tasks entailed in promoting
peace and security go beyond the scope of Council
action. Therefore, our third recommendation is to boost
the organic connections between the entire United
Nations system and regional bodies, especially in the
systematic drive to prevent and mediate.

Our fourth and final recommendation is that, in order
to guide its coordination with regional organizations
and arrangements, the United Nations take into
account their different legal natures, experience, focus,
capacity for execution, institutional strengthening
and legitimacy. Given its comprehensive perspective,
the United Nations may discern which partnerships
to enhance and when, according to different needs
and goals. In addition, given its universality, it can
act to generate more communication, coherence and
synergies between regional entities.

