Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Carmel
Agius, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for
their briefings to the Security Council today.

It has now been two years since the Residual
Mechanism assumed full responsibility for the residual
functions of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) alongside those of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). During that time
the Mechanism has continued to make commendable
progress in carrying out its mandate. However, there
is still more to do to guarantee the legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR.

The year 2020 will be a significant one for the
Mechanism, with the ambitious plans to complete the
Stanisie and Simatovic' retrial and the Mladic' appeal at
The Hague branch, and the Ngirabatware and Turinabo
at al. cases in Arusha. This will be in addition to the
other mandated functions. We commend the ongoing
work to find efficiencies and to harmonize and apply
the most effective practices and approaches across
the branches, including the unified judicial database,
making it a truly unified institution.

The United Kingdom will continue to support the
Mechanism for the remainder of its mandate. However,
there is much to do, since, as well as ongoing cases,
among other things witnesses need protection, missing
persons need to be found and domestic prosecutions
need assistance. The Mechanism will need the ongoing
support of Member States to ensure that its mandated
functions are completed.

I am pleased to note that the process for appointing
a successor to Judge Ben Emmerson, for whose
contribution the United Kingdom is grateful, is well
under way, and we hope that it will be concluded soon,
bolstering the judicial roster of the Mechanism. At this
point, may I also take this opportunity to thank Peru for
its effective chairing of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

We congratulate the Mechanism on the successful
conclusion of its first review hearing and welcome the
outcome of the Ngirabatware case. We also welcome
the subsequent indictments against Ngirabatware and
the five accused in the Turinabo et al. case. It is vital
that witnesses be protected and the integrity of the
proceedings conducted by the Mechanism maintained.
We therefore welcome these important steps to hold
accountable those who interfere with witnesses. We
note the decision yesterday, mentioned by the President,
that the Ngirabatware contempt case would be joined
with the Turinabo et al. case, and are pleased that this
will not result in a significant delay to these cases.

I would also like to remind Member States of
the importance of cooperating with the Office of
the Prosecutor to find the eight remaining Rwandan
fugitives still at large so that they can be transferred
to the Mechanism without further delay. We agree with
the Prosecutor that this is vital to international peace
and security. Acting to apprehend fugitives must be
treated as a priority by States if the painstaking work
undertaken by the Prosecutor's Office is going to lead
to concrete results. We also at this stage express our
serious concern at the denial of the Rwandan genocide,
as mentioned by the Prosecutor.

Turning to The Hague, we note the progress made
in the Mladic', and Stanisic' and Simatovie cases, and are
pleased that these are due to conclude by the end of next
year. However, despite some progress between certain
countries of the Western Balkans, we are disappointed
at the fact that regional judicial cooperation, denial of
war crimes and glorification of war criminals remain
significant challenges to accountability and ending
impunity in the region. When leaders signed the
joint declaration of war crimes at the 2018 London
Western Balkans Summit, they agreed to underline the
importance of supporting, and removing impediments
to, effective regional cooperation and to reject the use
of hate speech and the glorification of war crimes. The
United Kingdom calls on them to ensure that they are
taking every step possible to honour their commitments,
including improved cooperation with the Mechanism.

In the week marking the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This Crime,
it seems particularly appropriate for us all to seek to
work together to try to ensure that the Mechanism
makes progress in its very important work.

