Mr. Lourenco (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation): We
appreciate the invitation to participate in this meeting
on the security situation in the Great Lakes region, and
to discuss our shared concerns about issues relating to
peace, stability and development in Africa.

This meeting is being held in a complex international
context that calls for special attention and serious
intervention on the part of the international community
if an effective solution is to be found to conflicts that
pose grave threats to international peace and security.
We commend the fact that resolving conflicts in Africa
is a focus both for the United Nations and for various
political institutions and entities dedicated to peace,
solidarity and the common good and united in their
efforts to eradicate such conflicts.

Such situations are caused by negative factors
that require our attention and intervention if we are
to change them and be able to build a better and safer
world for all. The Republic of Angola will continue
to contribute actively to efforts seeking to attain
and maintain stability worldwide by shouldering its
international responsibilities, in particular with regard
to Africa and within the regional framework in which it
operates, including the Southern African Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.

Although there have been some problems with
the stabilization process in the eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo, when it comes to achieving peace
in the Central African Republic and South Sudan
we believe there can be positive developments if the
international community can exert firm pressure and
intervene appropriately, and if all stakeholders take
the political negotiations seriously and fairly and
respect all agreements made. We believe that through
constructive dialogue and joint measures, we can take
into account the legitimate concerns and interests of
all parties involved and find just and lasting solutions.
In that regard, the Republic of Angola therefore
reiterates its support for the efforts being made in the
aforementioned countries to achieve peace, stability
and prosperity. They should receive urgent assistance,
particularly technical and humanitarian, designed to
contribute to effective resolution of their political and
social problems and support their plans for sustainable
development.

Since Angola assumed the rotating chairship
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, it has spared no effort to find durable solutions
to ending war in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and finding consensus and convergence
in the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
However, we are concerned about the slow progress
of the voluntary surrender and disarmament, with
a view to repatriation, of the members of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda; the numbers
of those for whom this has been achieved are still far
fewer than the estimated force of about 1,500 armed
men and their families.

Under the initiative of His Excellency President
Jose Eduardo dos Santos, in his capacity as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Angola has had the honour to host various summits of
Heads of State and Government to discuss issues of
peace in the central region of our continent generally
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular.
The Republic of Angola will continue to adhere to
and support the international community's initiatives
and actions aimed at restoring and maintaining peace
and stability in Africa and the world in general and at
promoting enhanced understanding and cooperation
among nations in order to build a better world for
all. I am certain that this meeting dedicated to peace
and security in the Great Lakes region can contribute
substantially to achieving the noble goals of peaceful
coexistence, harmony, understanding, solidarity and
development.

