Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and Ambassador Jose' Singer
Weisinger, Permanent Representative of the Dominican
Republic, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017)
concerning Mali, for their comprehensive briefings.

I would also like to express my deep condolences
for the death of one peacekeeper and the injuring of
five others during attacks in northern and central Mali.
We appreciate the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and all MINUSMA personnel in
ensuring peace and stability in Mali. I would now like
to share three points.

First, we welcome the political developments in
Mali, including the launch of an inclusive national
dialogue on 16 September. We hope that the dialogue
will enable an important consensus to be reached on
constitutional reform, the election of a new Parliament
and the redeployment of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces. We also welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, including the continuing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the promulgation of laws on the establishment
of a northern economic development zone. We call
on all Malian stakeholders to continue to work
together in accelerating the implementation of the
peace agreement and the priority measures set out in
resolution 2480 (2019).

Secondly, the security situation continues to be a
cause of concern, particularly in northern and central
Mali. With this situation in mind, we believe it is
necessary to step up efforts to redeploy the Malian
Defence and Security Forces. That will be crucial to
restoring a State presence and addressing the security
situation, particularly in northern Mali. In central Mali,
we commend the reconciliation efforts being led by the
Government and supported by international partners,
including MINUSMA. We believe that reconciliation,
the re-establishment ofa State presence and the provision
of basic needs for the population should continue to be
prioritized, along with security responses. With regard
to MINUSMA, we commend the efforts made to adjust
its footprint and increase its proactive posture. We call
on the Government to support the implementation of
that adaptation plan.

Thirdly, we would like to reiterate the importance
of a holistic approach to addressing the situation in
Mali that encompasses security, humanitarian and
development efforts. We therefore call on regional and
international partners to advance the implementation
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and its support plan. Only such a concerted effort
can enable us to achieve durable peace, stability and
sustainable development in Mali.

