Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and for convening this open debate on the
situation in Somalia. My delegation also thanks the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
Augustine Mahiga for their respective briefings.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Kazakhstan on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

For too long, violence and instability have
prevented the Somali people from living in peace and
normalcy. National authorities must be fully responsive
to the needs and aspirations of Somali citizens. The
regional community and the international community
must do better, by further strengthening their support
for Somali-identified aims and solutions.

Indonesia welcomes the London conference held
on 23 February 2012 and its communique, which
comprehensively addresses the challenges in Somalia.
The next steps to be taken by the United Nations and
the international community are extremely important,
and it will be critical that Somali stakeholders are fully
involved in the efforts. While we welcome political
progress in the country and the upcoming completion
of the transition period under Somalia's Transitional
Federal Government, we also underscore the importance
of establishing a future Government that is fully
representative of the Somali polity. National
reconciliation is crucial, and we hope there is sufficient
realization of that fact in all quarters, leading to a
reinvigorated and well-supported political effort
towards that end.

Indonesia is deeply concerned by the terrorism
and violence in Somalia. We support the Security
Council's decision to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in order to ensure
security and stability in the region. However, the
increase in AMISOM. troops needs to be supported
with adequate and predictable resources.

While the goal of preventing terrorism, violence
and piracy is imperative, and it is rightly receiving great
attention by partners from the international community,
there must also be equal attention given to the need for
rebuilding. The building of well-functioning and
accountable State institutions and capacities in Somalia
will go a long way towards creating an environment
conducive to ensuring that measures against terrorism,
violence and piracy produce lasting results.

We should also be mindful of the fact that poverty
remains a very serious challenge. Efforts and support
should be increased to provide the people of Somalia
with sustainable livelihoods and to help them improve
their conditions. Piracy needs to be considered in a
comprehensive context as well, with greater focus on
revitalizing local economic activity and the national
economy as a whole.

We note that with the increasing international
efforts to combat piracy off the Somali coast, the issue
of prosecuting and trying pirates is becoming more
challenging. Indonesia supports strengthened
international cooperation in the prosecution of piracy
and armed robbery under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

In conclusion, we believe that the United Nations
and the international community must continue to focus
attention on the situation in Somalia. We also believe
that there is a need to ensure that the solutions devised
are comprehensive and driven by the work of Somali
stakeholders, embedded in the process of national
reconciliation.

Indonesia reiterates its support for the unity,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Somalia. We will continue to play our
part in helping to achieve peace, security and prosperity
for the Somali people.

