Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me take this
opportunity, first of all, to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. My delegation has full confidence and trust in
your capacity to discharge the duties of this important
office in the very efficient and wise manner for which you
are known. May we also convey through you our sincere
gratitude and appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for the excellent
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council in
December.

My delegation is also grateful for the very warm
welcome extended to us by all the members of the Council.
We pledge to cooperate fully with the President and all
delegations in the Council's important work.

On behalf of my delegation, let me also welcome the
Foreign Minister of Italy to the Council.

The delegation of Botswana thanks the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) for the comprehensive
report before the Council on the effectiveness of the closure
of the border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We have scrutinized the report very carefully,
and the detailed analysis of the monitoring system is very
informative indeed. The conclusions spelt out at the end of
the report are, of course, of critical importance.

The report is generally positive. It indicates that,
sporadic incidents of smuggling notwithstanding, Belgrade
is trying its best to honour its obligation to close the border
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are told that in cases
where violations were brought to its attention, the
Government took appropriate measures and responded in a
satisfactory manner. It is this constructive role which has
persuaded my delegation to support the adoption of the
draft resolution before us today.

But I must say this: we labour under no illusion. The
border between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has not
been rendered impenetrable by any means, and we would
be deluding ourselves were we to be so trusting as to
believe that no contraband traverses it.

At the same time, it is my Government's position
that the closure of the border with Bosnia should not be
an end in itself. President Milosevic of Serbia is,
inescapably, a key player in efforts to find a peaceful
solution, not only to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but also to the Yugoslav crisis as a whole. The leverage
he has on the Serbs in Bosnia is widely recognized and
must be put to good use. It is our hope that the
cooperative spirit shown to Belgrade - deservedly or
not - by the Security Council in the draft resolution we
are just about to adopt will encourage President Milosevic
to exert substantial pressure on his brothers across the
border in Bosnia to accept the Contact Group plan, which
has already been accepted by Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The agreement recently signed by the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for a complete cessation of
hostilities has opened up encouraging prospects for a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in that troubled part of
the Balkans. We are encouraged by the reports from the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) which
indicate that the situation is generally calm in the country,
though there are violations here and there. What is left,
therefore, is for the leaders, in a positive spirit, to sit
down and negotiate seriously and in good faith the end of
that terrible conflict.

