Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank you, Sir, and Italy for the initiative of holding this
meeting. I should also like to convey a special welcome
to Ms. Audrey Azoulay and congratulate her on her
election as Director-General of UNESCO. I also thank
all the briefers for their important contributions. The
perspectives they have shared with the Council have
added greatly to our discussion today.

As we have heard, the destruction, looting and
trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in situations of armed conflict has both immediate and
long-term consequences. We reiterate our steadfast
condemnation of these hateful and cynical practices. As
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/969) shows,
the destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage
is particularly problematic in Iraq, Syria, Yemen
and Libya, with sites in these countries permanently
damaged and where our common heritage is lost forever.
Even though Da'esh has been pushed back considerably
from territories in Iraq and Syria, the reports of
continued seizures of antiquities originating from those
areas underscore the need for our continued attention.

History has shown that cultural heritage is often
targeted in its own right. Continued preventive efforts
to protect cultural heritage are therefore essential,
including those proposed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2017/969) on the implementation of
resolution 2347 (2017), adopted earlier this year. We
recognize UNESCO's leading role as the standard-
setting agency for cultural-heritage protection and
welcome its efforts to combat the destruction of cultural
heritage and the illicit trafficking of cultural property.
Sweden is actively supporting UNESCO's work in
this field. We were pleased to join the States parties to
the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict after our recent ratification of it.

As clearly demonstrated here today, there are a
multitude of international and regional actors that
play an important role in the protection of cultural
heritage. A positive example of this was Pandora, a
joint INTERPOL-European Police Office operation
conducted in October and November 2016 with the
cooperation of many Member States, UNESCO and the
World Customs Organization, which resulted in a large
number of works of art and cultural goods seized, as
well as a significant number of arrests.

Sweden has been paying increased attention to
the illicit trafficking of cultural property and cultural
heritage crimes. As mentioned by Director-General
Azoulay, a special wildlife and cultural-heritage crime
unit was established within our national police force
in 2016. There is also a dedicated national coordinator
within the Swedish police authority working on
strategies and developments in the field, and we are
continuing our efforts to increase understanding ofthese
issues among Swedish nationals travelling to conflict
areas, as well as to train customs officers on export and
import regulations related to cultural property.

As with all forms of trafficking, it is essential
to look at the demand side of the trade. The burden
cannot be borne solely by countries affected by war
or terrorism. For that reason, we welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General's report addresses the role of
the art and antiquities market. The Swedish National
Heritage Board has opened a dialogue with major
Swedish art and antique dealers in order to raise their
awareness of Security Council resolutions, with the aim
of strengthening the fight against the illicit trafficking
of cultural property. Revised anti-money-laundering
and counter-terrorist financing legislation also creates
stronger incentives for the private and public sectors to
work together on such issues.

Looking forward, we take note in particular of
the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding
the training of personnel on the protection of cultural
heritage and on planning processes ahead of mandate
renewals and the establishment of new missions,
where relevant. We look forward to UNESCO's
continued involvement in that regard, together with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and other relevant actors.

Where preventive efforts have failed, accountability
for attacks on cultural-heritage sites and their
destruction is essential, and the perpetrators of such
crimes must be brought to justice. As shown by the
Al Mahdi case, the International Criminal Court plays an
important role where national authorities are unwilling
or unable to properly investigate and adjudicate such
crimes. We look forward to the important work of other
investigative mechanisms, such as the International
Impartial Independent Mechanism for Syria and the
investigative team for Da'esh crimes in Iraq, in the
fight against impunity for these crimes.

Finally, we warmly welcome the Secretary-
General's call for further engagement and partnership
with civil society, communities and young people
through heritage education and other activities.
Hopefully, with a stronger connection to our common
heritage and a better understanding of it, we can
promote respect for cultural diversity and tolerance and
build inclusive societies that not only help to protect
our cultural heritage better but that are also less prone
to falling into conflict in the first place.

