Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his detailed briefing on the situation in
the region and the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We note the efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Mr.
Haekkerup, and the Mission he heads to re-establish
normalcy in the province. We welcome steps to
develop dialogue between UNMIK and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
anticipate further intensification of that cooperation on
all matters, without exception, relating to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We would
emphasize yet again that it is only through solid
interaction with Belgrade that the Mission can
discharge its mandate. In that context, we stress the
need for the signing with Belgrade of an agreement on
the status of UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KF OR).

One of the key issues now - as Mr. Guehenno
stressed in his briefing - is preparation for the
Kosovo-wide elections. The task of ensuring that they
are truly democratic and representative is ineluctably
linked to the need for their careful preparation, with the
active participation of Belgrade. First, security
conditions must be established to ensure an equal
footing for all ethnic communities in the province,
without exception, and to guarantee them genuine
freedom of expression and fair participation in the new
organs of self-government. It is important that proper
security conditions be established prior to the elections
and that a steady process of return for refugees and
displaced persons be under way.

We are seriously concerned over the ongoing
absence of any real progress in identifying the fate of
the 1,300 missing Serbs and other non-Albanian
inhabitants of Kosovo. Inaction on this matter merely
confirms the argument over unilateral humanism in
respect of Kosovo Albanians and indicates a lack of
willingness to heed appeals for assistance made by the
relatives of missing non-Albanian inhabitants of the
province. We urge that the matter be resolved as soon
as possible.

We feel that we must recall the main achievement
of the June visit by members of the Security Council to
Kosovo: a clearly stated demand to UNMIK, KFOR
and all the political leaders in Kosovo for full and
comprehensive implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), especially in respect of security
for minorities.

Another serious problem that remains unresolved
is the disarmament of combatants and the elimination
of their illegal armed units. Literally every day, we
hear reports of the discovery of weaponry in the
province. As was noted by Principal Deputy Special
Representative Matthews at the recent meeting of the
Secretary-General's Group of Friends of Kosovo, it is
not a question of nineteenth-century muskets, but of
very modern types of weapons. We would expect that
the arrangements recently made by the head of UNMIK
to combat the illegal ownership of arms and illegal
crossings of the external and administrative borders of
Kosovo and to fight against terrorism will truly help to
solve the problem.

UNMIK and KFOR have taken certain steps to
halt provocation raids by Albanian fighters beyond the
borders of the province. These efforts, however, must
be stepped up. It is now absolutely essential for the
international presences to take effective and immediate
steps to halt the expansion of Albanian extremism
beyond Kosovo and to preserve stability in the
Balkans.

We are very disturbed by reports that, in
connection with the crisis in Macedonia, a large group
of Albanian fighters in Kosovo are awaiting orders to
invade that country. This cannot be allowed. We expect
the leadership of UNMIK, in close cooperation with
KFOR, to take additional steps to complete the genuine
demilitarization and disarmament of former fighters of
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), to deprive the
post-KLA structures of any ability to influence the
political situation and to halt illegal cross-border
deliveries of weapons to extremists. One task of
particular urgency today is the strict implementation of
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998) on the arms
embargo in Kosovo.

We have drawn attention to the UNMIK decision
to suspend the powers of five leading members of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) who are suspected of
engaging in subversive activities in Macedonia, and to
arrest Major Saramati, the commander of a KPC
brigade accused of undertaking activities threatening
the international presences in Kosovo. We must stress
once again the inadmissibility of a situation in which
such individuals are among those cooperating with
UNMIK on behalf of the KPC.

We would like once again to warn very seriously
against any attempts to resolve the problem of the
reintegration of Kosovo Mitrovica by force under the
pretext that the status quo is inadmissible and that the
situation needs to be resolved before the elections. Mr.
Guehenno spoke of this matter in his briefing to us.
Any attempt in Mitrovica to use force or to speed up
the Albanization of the region would be fraught with
the most dangerous consequences: a flare-up of
Violence throughout northern Kosovo; the forcing out
of the Serbs from that part of the province; and, in the
final analysis, their complete exodus from Kosovo.

The solution can only be a political,
comprehensive and carefully monitored one, and the
basis for it must be a strengthening of the trust between
the Serb and Albanian communities. In this context, we
take note of the proposals to involve Serbian
representatives from the parallel structures in
UNMIK's police work in Mitrovica.

Overall, to stabilize the Balkans, we need
approaches based primarily on the political will of the
States in the region and on active assistance from the
international community. That is the objective of the
Russian initiative to convene a Balkan summit so that
States of the region could conclude a legally binding
agreement setting forth their mutual commitments to
strictly abide by the basic principles of inter-State
relations.

The signal from the international community
must be clear and unambiguous. There can be
absolutely no further redrawing of borders in Europe,
including in the Balkans. It is essential to establish a
solid and effective barrier to any kind of extremism,
national intolerance or religious fanaticism. Those who
try to resolve extremely complex problems of a
national or religious nature by force of arms must be
well aware that they will receive no support from the
international community.

