The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

Despite the diplomatic efforts made by many
countries, the situation in the Middle East has reached
a boiling point.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories has been described by everyone as
catastrophic. Representatives of the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, non-
governmental organizations and the mass media all
have been shaken by the tragedy that took place in the
Jenin refugee camp. The Security Council must take
urgent measures to remedy the terrible plight of the
Palestinian population and to protect the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem as well as all other holy sites.

Members of the international community are also
united in their belief that a comprehensive settlement in
the region can be achieved only within the framework
of political dialogue, and that the first step in this
direction should be the immediate implementation of
all of the provisions of Security Council resolution
1402 (2002), including a ceasefire, an end to the terror
and violence, and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
the Palestinian territories. All impediments to the
activities of humanitarian organizations must be
removed, and the siege on Yasser Arafat's residence
must be lifted, as he is the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people and must lead the efforts of the
Palestinians to normalize the situation.

We deeply appreciate the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in seeking a way out of the
extremely dangerous situation now prevailing. We
support his proposal to send an international force to
the Palestinian territories. Of course, this proposal will
require discussion in the Security Council, on the basis
of comprehensive and complete information on the
parameters of such an operation. It is of fundamental
importance in the implementation of that proposal to
develop common approaches on the part of all
interested States and parties.

Russia, for its part, will continue to work actively
with the parties to defuse the crisis as soon as possible,
acting in coordination with the American co-sponsor
and other participants in the "quartet" of international
mediators, in close contact with the leading countries
of the region. We agree with the Secretary-General that
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), the Madrid quartet statement, which
was supported by the Council, and the Arab peace
initiative contain all the necessary elements for the
collective elaboration of a comprehensive settlement
that would make it possible to address the security
concerns of all of the countries of the region, to ensure
peaceful coexistence between Israel and a Palestinian
state and to deal with the causes of the current acts of
terrorism.

However, the most important step at this point is
the implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). This is
the position of all members of the Security Council.
The joint statement of the members of the quartet was
devoted to this issue, and this was also the aim of the
mission to the region of the United States Secretary of
State, Colin Powell. Only if this resolution is
implemented will it be possible to stop the situation
from spiralling even further out of control, destroying
Israeli-Palestinian relations, creating a further setback
for the peace process in the Middle East and causing
the conflagration to spread to the entire region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

