Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, let me express my gratitude to the delegation of
Ukraine for organizing this open debate, as well as to
thank the briefers for their inputs.

I align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

Today we are facing a proliferation of terrorist
acts on an unprecedented scale. No country is immune
from the possibility of falling victim to terrorist acts.
The most recent terrorist attacks, particularly those
committed by Da'esh and other extremists and terrorist
groups, serve to show that critical infrastructure is
increasingly becoming an attractive target for terrorist
operations. The real dimensions of this global menace
is revealed when we note the fact that there are still
tens of thousands of terrorists, including women and
youth from over 100 countries from all the regions
of the world, who have joined the rank and file of
terrorist organizations. Terrorist acts against critical
infrastructure create a state of terror among the
general public and inflict adverse consequences on the
economic and social development of States, including
the possible disruption of the delivery of basic services.
Therefore, there is a dire need to protect infrastructure
against a growing number of diverse terrorist attacks,
both physical and cyber.

Terrorist attacks against infrastructure, such as
energy and water supplies, financial institutions,
telecommunications, transportation or governmental
structures, may well result in civilian fatalities, harm
and loss of property on a large scale, disrupt the
proper functioning of public services and bring about
chaos in societies. They may also cause widespread
environmental damage and significantly undermine
national resources and capabilities to face its challenges
and emergencies.

The protection of critical infrastructure should
therefore be seen in the framework of the fight against
terrorism, and needs to be incorporated into national
plans for countering and preventing terrorism. At the
international level, enhanced resilience on the part of
the international community to face these threats is
also key to curbing the loss of human life and protect
the services that are essential for our societies.

The attacks in Turkey, Iraq, Brussels, Afghanistan
and some African countries are the most recent terrorist
attacks targeting critical infrastructure. At the same
time, we should not overlook the fact that the collective
punishment of peoples and the brutalization of peoples
under foreign occupation - such as the blockade
carried out by Israeli regime against Palestinians for
decades - also constitute the gravest form of terrorism,
depriving consecutive Palestinian generations from
their vital infrastructure and natural resources. In
places where war continues to be waged, such as
Yemen, much of what was already an impoverished
civilian infrastructure has been decimated, helping
to strengthen terrorism and destabilize the region. In
the face of terrorism as a global threat, we must build
a stronger collective political will for international
counter-terrorism cooperation. At the same time,
we emphasize that all efforts to fight terrorism must
be conducted in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

We need robust coherent multilateral mechanisms
if we are to respond to terrorism as a common threat
to our world. Since there are no simple solutions
to complex phenomena such as terrorism, only
mechanisms such as these can ensure that our policies
are more coherent and coordinated and prevent careless,
imprudent or dangerous unilateral action in the name of
combating terrorism.

In conclusion, we believe in the centrality of the role
of the United Nations and other relevant international
and regional organizations to counter-terrorism and
conflict-prevention efforts. Their involvement will
improve capacity-building and further enhance the
effectiveness of the general effort to counter terrorist
attacks, including against critical infrastructure, and at
the national, regional and international level.

