Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting ofthe Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dacie.
We share his views. We took note of the statement by
Mr. Thaci.

We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for introducing the
Secretary-General's report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2014/68) and for his assessment
of the situation in the province.

Russia's position on Kosovo remains consistent. We
support Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
effect and is still the universally binding, international
legal basis for a settlement of the Kosovo issue. The
United Nations Mission is the main international
presence in the province. No one is entitled to hinder
the implementation of its mandate. We condemn the
attempts to undermine the role of UMIK, including those
that took place during the November and December
2013 municipal elections. We call on UNMIK to fully
and proactively carry out its mandate, and to focus, inter
alia, on tackling challenges in such important areas as
the rule of law, the protection of the rights of ethnic and
religious minorities, forging intercommunity dialogue
and the protection of orthodox shrines and cultural
buildings.

We note the intensification ofdialogue at the highest
political level between Belgrade and Pristina. Priority
has been given to issues linked to the establishment of
a community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo and to
clarifying their authorities. The creation of an effective
structure duly representing the interest of Kosovo Serbs
is important in terms of ensuring security for the Serb
community and maintaining stability in Kosovo as a
whole. In that regard, the Kosovo Albanian authorities
and the international presence should strengthen efforts
to develop interethnic dialogue and build an atmosphere
of trust. Without that, any talk of the multiethnic nature
of Kosovo society seems unrealistic.

The plight of the Serb minority in Kosovo remains
disturbing. There has been no progress in efforts to
return internally displaced persons. In that regard,
we note the conclusions of the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons,
Mr. Chaloka Beyani, with regard to the continued
discrimination against minorities on ethnic grounds:
high unemployment, restrictions in education and
problems recovering property stolen by the Kosovo
Albanians. Such a situation has also been confirmed
by the representatives of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and by the Kosovo
Ombudsperson.

People are afraid to go to Kosovo because of
ethnically motivated threats ofviolence and the absence
of security guarantees and protection of their rights by
the local authorities. Sadly, there has been a trend of
attacks by Kosovars on Serb worshippers travelling to
Kosovo for Christmas. Such a situation reflectes the
inabilitiy of the international structures, above all the
Kosovo security forces and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), to effectively
counter provocative actions by the Kosovo Albanians.

We are seriously concerned by the signs coming
from Pristina with regard to the drawdown of EULEX
activities as early as June. The Mission was deployed
with the consent of the Security Council. With that
approval, it received several mandates from UNMIK
that the European Union Mission was unable to cope
with unilaterally. As resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in effect, those powers are assigned to UNMIK
under international law and cannot be transferred to a
third party, particularly not to Pristina's self-declared
institutions.
We await the end of the EULEX investigation into
allegations of illegal organ harvesting, identified by the
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty, and
the beginning oftrials. All those found guilty of serious
crimes must be brought to justice. Proceedings must be
carried out objectively and impartially, and should not
be guided by dubious criteria of political expediency.

We are also seriously toubled by reports of the
participation of Kosovo Albanians in the Syrian armed
conflict in the ranks of Al-Qaida affiliated terrorist
groups, such as Jabhat Al-Nusra and Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. Sadly, such facts have not been
condemned by religious and political leaders in the
province. We call on them to consider the serious
consequences that could arise once the militants return
to the territory of Kosovo. To Member States, it is clear
that further radicalization, both in the Western Balkans
and in the European Union, is inevitable in that regard.

