I offer my thanks to Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his valuable briefing. Allow me to take this opportunity, on behalf of my Government and also on my own behalf, to extend our appreciation for all the work that Mr. Mladenov has done, for his tireless efforts and, of course, for his excellent work in trying to pursue peace in the Middle East despite the wide variety of challenges faced. I wish him all the very best in his future endeavours. The report before us today (S/2020/1234) is the sixteenth quarterly report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) submitted to the Security Council; sadly, we have seen little progress between the first quarterly report and this one. The many elements that hinder the peace process have remained relatively unchanged: ongoing settlement expansion, increased demolitions, worsening settler violence, a deplorable humanitarian situation, civilian casualties and the absence of direct and credible negotiations between the parties. Resolution 2334 (2016) remains the last major achievement of the Council on the question of Palestine. Although it was once thought to be a major breakthrough, we are reminded today that, in the four years since its adoption, nothing has truly changed, especially for the Palestinian people. I had high hopes when I joined the Council two years ago, but I am saddened that there has been progress; on the contrary, there have been setbacks. People are still dying in the Palestine territory. We are still seeing many issues involving violations of the resolution, as well as many issues that are even more saddening for all of us. Against that backdrop, allow me to convey the following points. First, there is an urgent need to create positive momentum for the peace process. In paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council, respectively, "[c]alls upon all parties to continue, in the interest of the promotion of peace and security, to exert collective efforts to launch credible negotiations" and "[u]rges in this regard the intensification and acceleration of international and regional diplomatic efforts". Indonesia welcomes and reiterates its support of President Abbas's call to convene an international conference in early 2021. We are encouraged by the report of the Secretary-General, particularly the efforts of the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Egypt, France and Germany, in trying to jump-start the peace process, as reported. All efforts and initiatives should be directed towards upholding Palestinian rights and implementing the two-State solution, as the only way to bring a sustainable peace to the region. More important, we remain hopeful for the continued intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks and stress the importance of unity among Palestinians to create a conducive and inclusive environment for the peace process. Our hope is that there might be a new beginning in 2021 - that there might be more jump-starting of the peace process and greater momentum towards reaching the two-State solution. Secondly, any violations must have consequences. In paragraph | of resolution 2334 (2016), the Council also "[rJeaffirms that the establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation under international law". As such, the message is clear. Those who speak the English language know very well that the message is clear. We call on the international community to demand accountability and ensure that any violations have consequences. If we ever truly wish for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, we simply cannot allow aculture of impunity to prevail. We in the Council continue to reiterate that point about impunity, but in this particular case we have not done our job. We strongly urge the Israeli authorities to immediately and completely cease all settlement activities and to fully respect international law. Thirdly, we recall the obligations of the occupying Power. As vaccines for the coronavirus disease continue to become available, we would like to remind Israel of its obligation as the occupying Power under international law to protect the lives and safety of the Palestinian population, particularly in providing the much-needed vaccine. The international community should also continue to extend its support to the Palestinians and leave no one behind, including support through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. As this is Indonesia's last meeting in the Council on the question of Palestine, allow me to conclude by quoting our first President, Sukarno: "As long as the freedom of Palestine has yet to be returned to the Palestinians, then it will forever be for Indonesia to stand in defiance against the occupation by Israel." It was true then, it is true now and it will remain true for the future: until the Palestinian people are no longer denied their legal and inalienable rights to create a sovereign and independent State, we will continue to fight for their cause. Although we will no longer sit on the Council next year, we can assure members that Indonesia will always extend its unequivocal support and solidarity to the Palestinian people, and we will remain steadfast and unyielding in our support for the Palestinian cause. "Kita tidak akan pernah menyerah untuk perjuangan Palestina dan untuk kebenara." Loosely translated: "We will continue to fight for the Palestinian cause: it is holy and just and it is the right thing to do". I hope the Council, in future, will continue to do the right thing.
