Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
for his briefing and his third report on the situation in
Libya pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

We support the efforts of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate all those who
participated in illegal acts during the events in Libya.
There is sufficient information to show that crimes
were committed both by persons from the Al-Qadhafi
regime and by rebels. However, we have not yet heard
of any prosecutions of Al-Qadhafi opponents,
including those involved in exacting revenge against
the former Libyan leader. Questions also remain with
regard to possible crimes committed by senior officials
5
of States involved in the NATO-led operation. All cases
of disproportionate or indiscriminate use of force
during the conflict leading to civilian casualties should
be investigated.

The Prosecutor's remit includes determining
whether any crimes were committed by any of the
parties to the conflict, so as to ascertain whether there
are indications of criminal acts such as crimes against
humanity and war crimes. In that context, we deem it
important to continue to evaluate the data received
from the Human Rights Council's Commission of
Inquiry, non-governmental organizations and other
quarters so as to look into the future work of the
International Criminal Court based on resolution 1970
(2011).

We take note of the expressed desire of Libyan
authorities to prosecute Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
including assurances of the commitment of Libya's
Government to the highest standards of justice. We
believe that prosecuting the most serious crimes under
international law is first and foremost the responsibility
of the particular State concerned. The jurisdiction of
the ICC complements, but does not replace, national
jurisdiction.

It is also clear that Governments are not always
in a position to tackle this on their own. One particular
obstacle to doing so could be the absence in a country
of a viable judicial system functioning in line with
international standards. In this case, however, the
primary issue is whether Libyan authorities are taking
real steps to investigate the crimes committed. We are
seriously concerned about reports from the country of
the aftershocks of the conflict resulting in violence and
additional crimes being committed.

We once again underscore the importance of
upholding the appropriate legal guarantees when
meting out justice in the post-conflict stage. In our
opinion, the ICC must facilitate the implementation of
that. We are closely following the work of the ICC in
that area.

