Mr. Qazi: First of all I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the representatives of countries
members of the Security Council and of the
Government of Iraq for their very constructive
contributions, and for their very encouraging remarks
with regard to the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI).
I would like to say that we are at a very critical
time. It is always a critical time in Iraq, but right now
the possibilities for progress in a challenging
environment are there, and we need to avail ourselves
of them. It is true that many achievements of the
benchmarks of resolution 1546 (2004) - in fact, they
were all achieved - have not yet translated into the

security situation that we all aspire to achieve. But the
newly elected Government, headed by Prime Minister
al-Maliki, has indeed taken a number of extremely
important initiatives, not least, the National
Reconciliation Plan and the decision to launch, in
partnership with the United Nations, the International
Compact with Iraq.

Those are comprehensive initiatives and it is our
privilege to be associated with them - with the
National Reconciliation Plan and the individual
programmes that comprise it, including the Baghdad
peace initiative and the International Compact with
Iraq.

The first preparatory group meeting, which took
place in Abu Dhabi recently, was a very constructive
event. We look forward to the high-level meeting on
18 September, to enable a broader range of
participation from countries which were not at Abu
Dhabi and whose views will be valued and taken into
account.

There is no doubt that the major challenge that
confronts Iraq today is the degree of violence which
comes from a number of sources - the sectarian
violence, insurgency and terrorist violence, and,
indeed, organized criminal violence. Collectively, they
add up to an extremely challenging environment, to put
it mildly, for the average Iraqi in those areas where this
violence is particularly acute. I say that because one
often loses sight that there are many areas in Iraq
which, mercifully, are free from significant levels of
violence. Nonetheless, the fact that this violence does
affect Baghdad impacts upon the perceptions with
respect to Iraq. The United Nations will always be
ready to lend support, at the request of the Government
of Iraq and with the support of the international
community as expressed by the Security Council, and
to continue its work.

We are now under the extended mandate which
includes responsibilities for the International Compact,
looking for the realization of an Iraqi national vision
which will entail its transformation and integration into
the global and regional economy. The regional
countries will have a critically important role here. It is
very encouraging to see the emphasis that has been
placed on this fact and on the extremely important role
that regional countries and organizations like the
League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference have to play with respect to future
developments in Iraq.

The United Nations was proud to assist the
League of Arab States in its preparatory conference in
Cairo last November and will continue to associate
itself with those efforts.

It remains for me to thank all participants for
their constructive comments and advice. I would like
also to thank the Government of Iraq for all the
assistance that it has extended to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) in order to make
our work possible. I would also like to thank all the
06-52155

member countries of the Multinational Force in Iraq,
which have also enabled us to do our work in Iraq. We
also wish to thank the Governments of Japan and of
Denmark, which have assisted us with respect to
aircraft, because mobility has been an issue which has
hampered us. Their contributions are valued and
appreciated and will facilitate our work.

