Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Ould
Abdallah, and thanking him for his update on the
situation in Somalia. We also thank the representative
of Somalia for his statement. My delegation
appreciates this opportunity to receive an in-depth
update about Somalia, given that the Council must
contribute to managing and resolving the 17-year-old
conflict in that country - not only due to increasing
humanitarian suffering but also because of the
Council's responsibilities under the Charter to address
threats to international peace and security.

We welcome Mr. Ould Abdallah's efforts to
promote dialogue, consultations and reconciliation in
the country, as well as his leading role in fostering
greater unity of action by the international community.
We urge him to continue with his commendable efforts
for greater international awareness of the Somali issue.
We note the idea of a new agenda for peace and
stability in Somalia and wish to be continually updated
on the development of a harmonized approach among
all partners under the leadership of the United Nations.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Nur Hassan
Hussein as the new Prime Minister of Somalia. We
believe that the continued divisions in Somalia, both
within the transitional federal institutions and between
the Transitional Federal Government and the
opposition, are the main obstacles to any possible
progress on the political front. It is therefore crucial
that Mr. Hussein's Government strengthen all-inclusive
dialogue and consultations with all Somali
stakeholders, with a View to achieving unity of purpose
and political direction.

Indonesia supports the two-track approach of a
political track and a security or peacekeeping track as
the main thrust of the Security Council's efforts. On
the political track, we are of the view that the primary
task for Somalis should be the completion of the tasks
set in the Transitional Federal Charter. In particular,
efforts should be focused on the constitutional process,
preparation for the national population census and the
holding of the elections scheduled for 2009. We look to
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) to support this effort and to play a leading
role in channelling and coordinating all international
assistance for Somalia.

On the peacekeeping track, Indonesia favours the
deployment of a United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping force. At the moment, when United
Nations deployment is still under thorough assessment
and consideration, a greater technical, logistical and
financial support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) is absolutely essential and
urgently needed. We commend Ugandan troops on the
ground for their efforts and wish to express our
appreciation to Member States that have provided
naval protection for shipments of humanitarian aid

against piracy and armed robbery along the coast of
Somalia. We believe that a United Nations force should
in time be deployed to Somalia, and we encourage the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to continue
to work on contingency planning.

Indonesia is in favour of the Secretary-General's
intention, as stated in his report (S/2007/658), to
elaborate a two-track approach for Somalia. A
strengthened UNPOS should be able to support such an
approach. Contingency planning for a possible United
Nations peacekeeping component will need to be
developed in coordination with and with the support of
UNPOS and in keeping with the overall political track.
Moreover, the establishment in the Secretariat of an
interdepartmental and inter-agency integrated task
force on Somalia is welcomed, in particular to develop
a coherent peacebuilding strategy for Somalia.

The continued presence of foreign troops in
Somalia has been reflected in part in the hardening
stance of the opposition and the intensification of the
insurgency, making any resolution even more difficult.
The international community therefore must contribute
to a conducive situation for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces that are not part of AMISOM.

Finally, we call on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law. It is unacceptable that
innocent civilians continue to become the victims of
this protracted conflict. We appeal once again to all
those with weapons, whether Government, insurgent,
or Ethiopian troops, to cease indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks affecting civilians. Ultimately,
Somalia needs a political and security resolution, but in
the meantime, humanitarian assistance and access must
be enhanced. We call on the international community
to increase their assistance to Somalia, including to the
consolidated appeal for Somalia, and we call on the
Somali authorities to facilitate and widen access for
humanitarian assistance.

