Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank Mr. Pascoe for his extensive briefing and the
representative of Palestine for his statement.

The year 2011 marks twenty years since the
Madrid Conference launched the Middle East peace
process. The goal of the international community
should be to ensure that this is the last year of the
process and the beginning of a lasting agreement
between the parties. The current stalemate is deeply
damaging. The longer it continues and the more facts
that are created on the ground, the slimmer the
prospects for peace become. The urgency and gravity
of the situation should not be lost on anyone.

So it is critical that the parties find a way to
restart negotiations, which represent the best way to
achieve a sovereign, viable and contiguous Palestinian
state living in peace and security alongside a safe and
secure Israel and other neighbours in the region. The
international community must continue to stress the
importance of this to both parties.

For renewed negotiations to have a chance of
success, the parties should be clear on the parameters
within which they are working: a two-State solution,
based on 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States and with a fair settlement for
refugees.

If we are to overcome the current impasse, it is
also vital that the parties refrain from taking unilateral
actions that make peace harder to achieve.

The demolition of Shepherds Hotel in East
Jerusalem and the plans to expand the Israeli
settlement of Gilo by a further 1380 units are exactly
the sort of actions that must be avoided. The United
Kingdom has always been clear that settlements are
illegal and an obstacle to peace. Pushing ahead with
settlement activity is a deeply unhelpful move. With
actions such as those, it is no surprise that this Council
has been asked to consider a resolution condemning
settlement activity.

Creating an atmosphere conducive to peace
entails responsibilities on both sides. Israel's legitimate
security concerns must be met. Israelis should not have
to live under the constant threat of rocket attacks and
random acts of violence. We are increasingly
concerned by recent incidents in the Gaza area. We
strongly condemn the continuing rocket fire by
militants in Gaza, who target and endanger thousands
of Israeli citizens with the goal of provoking reaction
and further stalling the peace process.

We remain concerned by the prevailing situation
inside Gaza. There has been some welcome progress:
the move from a list of permitted goods to a list of
banned goods and an increase in the volume of imports.
But more fundamental changes are needed in order to
achieve pre-2007 levels of imports and exports, and
greater effort is required to improve cooperation with
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations.

The recent Israeli measures to facilitate exports
from Gaza are welcome, but they need to be swiftly
implemented. That means action on the ground. The
United Kingdom is ready to help. We are coordinating
closely with Baroness Ashton's office on her package
of proposals for Gaza: expanding the infrastructure at
Kerem Shalom, providing security equipment to
facilitate exports and expanding the role of the
European Union's Police Mission in the occupied
territories to provide training in border and crossings
management for the Palestinian Authority.
Progress must be judged by impacts on the
ground rather than simply through counting inputs,
such as truck numbers. Aid dependency and
unemployment remain high, and construction of
schools is still held up. We are urging Israel to address
those issues concretely. Gaza's aid dependency will
continue until the economy recovers, which is why it is
so important to make progress on exports and to
improve access to land and to fishing areas. The surest
way to safeguard Israel's security is through
empowering Gaza's business fraternity.

Turning briefly to Lebanon, the events of the past
week could have grave implications for Lebanon and
for regional stability. We call on all parties to work
together for a peaceful resolution to the crisis caused
by the decision by the opposition to withdraw from
government. We condemn continuing attempts to
undermine the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which
must be allowed to carry out its work without
hindrance or impediment. Justice needs to be done, and
there must be an end to impunity for political
assassinations in Lebanon.

We will engage strongly over the coming months
with the United States, the parties to the conflict and
with our European Union and United Nations partners
to find a way to re-start meaningful negotiations to
achieve a two-State solution.

