Mr. Lubbers: Thank you for inviting me,
Mr. President.
Today is International Women's Day. I would
therefore like to begin with a tribute to women in
general but, as the Council will understand, to refugee
women in particular: to widows and mothers of
children- of boys, who may become child soldiers,
and of girls, who are not seldom victims of rape or who
are at risk of being victims of prostitution or sexual
exploitation; to mothers who will have to build a new
life, empowering themselves and their children - their
sons and daughters; and to women who will set the
right priorities in Africa and all over the world: no
violence, no arms trade, no further killings, and no
further degradation of the environment. On behalf of
those refugee women, during my mission in West
Africa I claimed the right to safe and free access to
refugees and the right of safe passage for refugees.

During my mission I claimed and promoted safe
access to, and safe passage for, refugees. Through the
Secretary-General, the President has received a report
of that mission that I submitted to the Secretary-
General in a letter dated 21 February. I will of course
not repeat all the things I wrote in that report.

With regard to Guinea, I would like to say that, in
general, cooperation with the Guinean authorities and
the army has improved. To save time, I will distribute
an update on main developments concerning the
relocation exercise, relocation sites and the situation in
the Languette region. From that update the Council will
see that there has been considerable improvement in
terms of the numbers of people we were able to help to
relocate, that new sites are developing, and that we
have safe access to the sites thanks to cooperation with
the Government and army of Guinea.

Lastly, as will be recalled from my letter, the
situation in the Languette region is a very isolated one.
But in the last two weeks we were finally able to take
food in and to help those who had to get out to do so.
The paper I distributed provides more details in this
regard.

I would now like to make a few remarks about
Sierra Leone. I know the Council knows of my letter of
21 February, but has happened since then?

With the concurrence of President Kabbah, the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) together
realized, via the Contact Group, initial contacts and
results with the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
regarding the principles of safe access and passage.
In my letter of 21 February I made one remark
about the RUF. At that time I preferred to maintain
confidentiality. I can now disclose the first elements of
the action plan on the RUF. It reads as follows:

"UNHCR, via the Contact Group, invites
RUF to relate to the agreement that has been
already endorsed by the Presidents of Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia on the following points:
first, safe access to refugees; secondly, safe
passage for refugees; and thirdly, condemnation
of any act that would obstruct or hinder these
principles.

"Assuming that RUF is also ready to
comply with the above three principles, UNHCR
also requests the RUF to make a declaration
regarding refraining from taking any actions on
the Guinean territory."

This message went via the Contact Group to the
RUF. At least up until today, it seems to be functioning.
Beyond that, we signalled to the RUF that as soon as
they were able to make a public statement to adopt this
as their formal policy, we would use our good offices
to invite the Government of Guinea to refrain from all
military actions in the area of Kambia so that the road
from Forecariah to Kambia could become a safe
passage for the return of refugees from Guinea to
Sierra Leone.

This action plan- the first part of it- has
started to function and has been the basis for our
contacts with the RUF for the past three weeks. It was
crucial for the safe access to, and the safe passage of,
refugees in Guinea - I stress, in Guinea - especially
to and from the Languette region. By and large, the
principles - to which I refer to as "safe access to and
safe passage of" - are being respected not only by the
three countries, but also by the RUF. The efforts to
convince them to refrain from action on the territory of
Guinea have, until now, proven to be successful. This
has had positive effects on the situation in Guinea. It
has also contributed to better working relations
between UNAMSIL and the RUF.

Beyond that - and this is something that is very
relevant to the Council- this is in fact a real
beginning of the successful implementation of the
mandate. I draw special attention to paragraph 8 of
resolution 1270 (1999), in which we can see that the
goals laid out by the mandate are fully in line with
these recent developments. Safe access to, and safe
passage of, refugees proved to be of importance not
only for refugees, but also functions as a confidence-
building mechanism and, in so doing, creates new
windows of opportunity.

But Sierra Leone is still fragile and very
vulnerable. One has to proceed cautiously and step-by-
step. The next step will be to prepare what is needed so
that the road from Forecariah to Kambia can become a
safe passage for the return of refugees from Guinea to
Sierra Leone and then, of course, from the whole area.
I have indications that the Government of Guinea, with
its army, is prepared to ensure security along that road
up to the border while at the same time - and I am
now speaking about Guinea -refraining from all
military activity - shelling, incursions and the like -
on the other side of the border.

At this moment, the other side of the border is
RUF-dominated territory. But I have also received
indications that the RUF is prepared to leave the
Kambia area in order that it may become territory
under the control of UNAMSIL. However, UNAMSIL
is still too weak at this moment to fulfil that function.
It will be able to fulfil that function only once it is
strengthened. I realize that is not an easy thing, but it is
rather key; because opening the road from Forecariah
to Kambia is, in my reading, a responsible act only if it
can be done in such a way that the area is no longer
RUF-dominated country. That can be guaranteed only
once UNAMSIL goes in with sufficient strength.

So this is exactly what I would like to ask the
Council: to strengthen the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and to provide sufficient
troops with a robust mandate. I ask this on behalf of
the refugees. It is key for them. It is key for the
refugees who want to return. That will be only a first
step, of course. But in my reading, it is also key for the
stability and future of Sierra Leone.

I would like to make a few additional remarks. If
UNAMSIL is strengthened to the extent that it
controls the Kambia area, a number of refugees who
wish to do so will be able to return home. However, the
numbers will be limited. But even with these limited
numbers, this will diminish the burden of internally
displaced persons in Freetown and, for that matter, of
refugees in Guinea.

The second thing I want to stress is that refugees
returning to the Kambia area will not return to areas
dominated by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).
They will return only if UNAMSIL is in control. Of
course, all this has to be checked and rechecked in
pursuing this course. But in my reading, in any case,
strengthening UNAMSIL is now the first priority, and
then UNAMSIL can look into the real situation, and
when it is safe enough, do its job.

Another subject I want to talk about is poverty
and the need for assistance in Sierra Leone. All over
Sierra Leone, including in the RUF-dominated part, the
time has come to prioritize humanitarian needs.
Prudence, yes; but action - really doing something in
connection with the humanitarian needs - is needed.

Mr. President, you asked me to come and brief
the Council further in connection with the report the
Council received earlier. In that connection, I shall say
a few words on the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and Liberia. The letter of 21
February relates the situation on that day. Since then
the sanctions on Liberia have been adopted -
yesterday, if my information is correct. The ECOWAS
initiative that was very much alive in those days has
not materialized. It might be revived, possibly in
another form. We will see.

In relation to ECOWAS, I have only a few
remarks for the record, because in the aforementioned
letter I mentioned discussions and some suggestions
made three weeks ago to President Konare'. This could
be useful for the future, although not very relevant
today. Therefore, I am saying this for the record. One
suggestion was the deployment of available military
capacity in the territory of Liberia, at the border with
Guinea between the point where the boundaries of
Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia meet each other up to
the area of Zorzor, Liberia. Why was this suggestion
made? Because it was very clear that Guinea could not
accept ECOWAS troops on its own territory and, at the
same time, it was building on the willingness of
President Taylor of Liberia to accept ECOWAS troops
on Liberian territory. The concentration of such a
force - one not dispersed along a wide distance but
rather very concentrated on that particular part of the
border- could produce - together with what is
happening in the Languette and the refraining from
action on the part of the RUF - a more coherent
approach leading to safety and stability.

Now, as we all know, the Guinea ECOWAS
initiative did not materialize. Maybe it will come back
one day, perhaps under different conditions. But from
my perspective, it would be important to see these
initiatives also in relation to developments in the three
countries and the refugee situation. By the way, there
are 100,000 Liberian refugees in Guinea waiting to
return home. There are, of course, many aspects
involved here. In general, we at UNHCR accept the
free choice of refugees to go whenever they want to go.
But one thing is certain: if some day the situation
stabilizes enough for them to go home, then a safe
passage is needed from Macenta to Foya in Lofa
county. That would relate exactly to the suggestion I
made earlier to the President of Mali.

By the way, the Presidents of Guinea, Sierra
Leone and Liberia, as well as President Konare of
Mali, had these ideas earlier. I just want to share them
with you today at this briefing.

In order not to speak too long, I have a few
concluding remarks. First, our practical work is
important for us. We of UNHCR have strengthened our
presence in the area; we are providing a lot of
assistance; and it costs a lot of money. So I will go to
the donor countries once again and ask them for $20 or
$30 million additional so that we can continue our
activities.

I want to repeat what I said earlier, which is that
although we are trying to make the situation better for
the refugees, as far as the practical choices to be made
are concerned, it is up to the refugees themselves to
decide whether things are safe enough to go home.

Finally, I made a trip to the three countries in the
region and to the Chair of ECOWAS. I urged the
Presidents of those three countries, after 10 years of
misery, 10 years of violence and endless numbers of
refugees, at this time to prioritize putting an end to
violence, to provide human security, and to do that by
observing the principles of the protection of refugees,
in the form of safe access to refugees and safe passage
of refugees. From there on, one could build on further
efforts aimed at more durable solutions for all refugees
in the area.

That was the message I wanted to convey there,
Mr. President. If you will allow me to express the
message here, it is a more practical one - that is, to
make it possible for them to assist in fulfilling these
priorities. I think it is essential to make it possible from
here, and that is the reason I explained the situation as
it is developing, and it is the reason for coming here to
your Security Council, especially as regards the role of
UNAMSIL and the need for strengthening its capacity
to fulfil its mandate.

