Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the statement made by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The situation in the Middle East continues to be
a source of constant concern for the international
community, which has been reflected in the numerous
previous debates organized by the Security Council.
Despite the periodic open debates held by the Council
on the issue, which have demonstrated overwhelming
support for the Palestinian cause, the Council has not
been able to adopt a single resolution demanding from
Israel to put an end to its aggressive policies, settlement
activities, war crimes and the collective punishment
committed against the Palestinian people, which are
in clear and deliberate violation of international law
and international humanitarian law. Those actions
constitute a threat to regional and international peace
and security by depriving the Palestinian people of its
fundamental human rights.

The inaction of the Council with regard to such
acts is alarming. It is unacceptable that the Security
Council continues to be held hostage to the power
emanating from the use or the threat of the use of the
veto to prevent the Council from fulfilling its mandate
and protecting the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. It is morally unacceptable that the Security
Council continues to shirk from its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations with regard to
maintaining international peace and security within the
context of this conflict.

The international community calls on the Council
to fulfil its responsibility and spare no effort in making
the necessary decisions to end the occupation, the
various forms of aggression, the illegal settlements,
the flagrant, massive and systematic violations of
human rights, State terrorism, extrajudicial executions,
economic strangulation and collective punishment,
for which Israel is responsible. Israel must also end its
outright rejection of and disrespect for the provisions of
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly. Those
actions threaten the viability of a Palestinian State
and the possibility to resolve the conflict in a fair and
balanced manner.

The only possible solution to the Palestinian
question is the peaceful coexistence of two States. An
independent, sovereign and viable Palestine, existing
within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, deserves global respect and solidarity.
Cuba is convinced that a just and lasting solution to
the demands of the Palestinian people to exercise
their rights is fundamental to resolving the conflicts
and easing the tensions in the Middle East. Cuba
reaffirms its full support for the admission of Palestine
as a full Member of the Organization and calls on the
Security Council to decide on and accept without delay
Palestine's application from 2011 to be recognized as a
State Member of the United Nations, as clearly desired
by the vast majority of States in the Organization. The
historical debt to the Palestinian people is enormous and
must be repaid. The Council has the responsibility to
take concrete action to end such a protracted injustice.

With regard to the situation in Syria, Cuba reiterates
that it will be possible to achieve peace in that country
only by respecting the right of the Syrian people to
choose their own destiny. A political solution through
dialogue and negotiation is the only viable solution
to the conflict in that country. Cuba welcomes the
cessation of hostilities and the new channels that are
opening, aimed at providing a peaceful and negotiated
solution to the conflict. We support the Syrian people in
their aspirations to live in peace and choose their own

destiny without outside interference. Those who have
fuelled the conflict from the outside, with the stated
goal ofimposing regime change, are responsible for the
thousands of civilian victims of the conflict.

We regret the loss ofinnocent lives as a result of the
situation there and condemn all acts of violence taking
place in that country against the civilian population.
Promoting an interventionist agenda must not be
allowed under the pretext of combating terrorism. We
demand the cessation of the foreign presence in Syria,
as it does not have the approval of its Government and
is not working in coordination with its authorities.

The Security Council is a crucial organ for
achieving the aims entrusted to the United Nations of
safeguarding peace and achieving the well-being and
the development all peoples deserve, including those of
the Middle East. In respecting the mandate established
by the Charter of the United Nations and in fulfilling
the responsibilities pursuant to that mandate, the
Council is called upon to promote a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the conflicts and disputes in the
Middle East, which would make it possible to preserve
the sovereignty, security and territorial integrity of all
States in the region, which would in turn contribute in a
decisive way to creating the conditions for the progress
and well-being of all the peoples of the region.

