Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I will not begin by commenting on the
procedural point that you have raised, Mr. President,
but rather I will focus on the essential issues that
are supposed to be of interest to the members of the
Security Council.

I welcome the Secretary-General and note
the statement at the outset of his briefing that the
Secretariat does not have all the necessary information
to carefully access the situation on the ground because
the United Nations does not have a presence in all areas.
The Secretariat humbly and politely said those words,
noting that it does not have full, relevant information
pertaining to the Syrian situation, although the United
Nations has a branch of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in Damascus and there are
dozens of United Nations agencies operating in Syria,
in addition to 13 international non-governmental
organizations also operating there.

However, some of our colleagues in the Security
Council, who have shut down their embassies in
Damascus and are now completely disconnected from
credible information, instead rely on information from
what is known as open sources. They have provided
a vast amount of information that would never serve
the interests of the Syrian people or of those present
in such an important and significant discussion.
That information is misleading and could poison the
atmosphere and fuel sedition regarding the role of
the Security Council, which is mandated to maintain
international peace and security.

The Syrian Government stands ready to engage
seriously with positive international initiatives that
serve the interests of the Syrian people, especially in
ending the bloodshed throughout Syria, as stated in
resolution 2401 (2018). My country has expressed its
satisfaction with resolution 2401 (2018), particularly
the positive provisions contained therein. In that regard,
my country confirms that it has taken all the following
procedures to relieve the suffering of our people in
eastern Ghouta.

First, immediately after the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018), hostilities were ceased on a daily basis from
9 am. until 2 pm, Damascus local time, and remain
so to this very moment, with the aim of delivering
humanitarian aid and ensuring the unimpeded and safe
exit of civilians from the areas controlled by terrorist
groups. Secondly, two safe humanitarian corridors
have been opened for civilians wishing to exit the
area. Thirdly, two joint United Nations-International
Committee of the Red Cross convoys, in collaboration
with the Syrian Red Crescent, were sent to eastern
Ghouta on 5 and 9 March.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, all those
procedures have been countered by the terror of armed
organizations present in Ghouta. Incited by their
masters - some of them, unfortunately, members
of the Security Council - these organizations have
targeted civilians in Damascus since the beginning of
the year, firing more than 2,499 missiles and mortars
that have claimed the lives of 70 civilian martyrs and
injured 556 people. Those organizations have prevented
our people in eastern Ghouta from leaving in order to
continue to use them as human shields and material for
humanitarian and media blackmail. They have even
targeted those who managed to escape towards the two
corridors by firing bullets and missiles.

The latest incident in Syria occurred on 8 March,
when the so-called Faylaq Al-Rahman - one of
the terrorist arms of the petty State of Qatar in
Syria - targeted a civilian convoy heading towards
one of the corridors, leading to high casualties among
civilians. By the way, that terrorist organization, Faylaq
Al-Rahman, has been hailed by some of those present
because of its readiness to implement resolution 2401
(2018). They presented it as a part of the moderate
Syrian opposition, and distributed a letter signed by
that and other terrorist organizations, addressed to the
Secretary-General. That is the modus operandi of the
Security Council with terrorist groups.

The procedures taken by the Syrian Government
are not limited to eastern Ghouta. Over the past few
days, the Government has undertaken a number of other
procedures. First, we have requested that the United
Nations and a number of humanitarian organizations
immediately send a mission to investigate the
humanitarian situation in Raqqa, which was destroyed
by the International Coalition led by the United States of
America. Secondly, we have requested approval to send
humanitarian convoys to the Rukban camp, provided
that the aid is delivered and distributed by the Syrian
Red Crescent and the Red Cross exclusively, and not by
the United States occupation authorities or the terrorist
groups in Rukban camp and Tanaf area. Thirdly, two
days ago the Syrian Red Crescent obtained Government
approval to send convoys to Ghouta, Raqqa, Afrin and
Rukban. To date, it has not sent the convoys to Rukban
and Afrin because the United Nations failed to ensure
the necessary safeguards from the United States and
Turkish occupation forces. That is the reason.
With every advance by the Syrian Army against
terrorist groups in any given area, the States sponsoring
terrorism launch heated disinformation campaigns to
distract the world from the terrorism, aggression and
occupation against Syria. The inference is that those
countries have never been keen to protec the lives of
civilians, but prefer to protect their investments in
terrorism after they have spent billions of dollars on it,
as was said by the previous Prime Minister of Qatar, in
order to recycle terrorism elsewhere in Syria.

The behaviour that I have mentioned is not limited
to State-sponsored terrorism, unfortunately. It has
even been demonstrated by some senior officials of
the Secretariat. We had hoped that the Secretariat,
especially in the light of the second preambular
paragraph of resolution 2401 (2018), would provide an
unequivocal legal description of the crimes committed
by the so-called International Coalition led by the
United States against our Syrian people in Raqqa and
other places, and the procedures to ensure the end of
that aggression. We had also hoped that the Secretariat
would provide us with an unequivocal legal description
of the acts of invasion by Turkish forces of a precious
part of our national territory, especially against our
civilian people in Afrin, and the procedures to ensure
the end of the Turkish aggression. We had also hoped
for an unequivocal legal description of the presence of
the United States forces on Syrian territory without the
approval of the Syrian Government and the procedures
to ensure the end of that occupation.

The government of my country affirms its right to
defend its citizens and combat terrorism in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
the second preambular paragraph of resolution 2401
(2018); fight all those who practice, fund and support
terrorism; work towards restoring security stability
and peace; and rebuild all that has been destroyed by
terrorists and their masters.

Finally, I have listened to my colleague the
representative of the United States, who levels charges
again and again against my country before all who are
present and says that her country will take military
actions against my country outside the legitimacy of
the Council if chemical substances are used, just as
its administration in Washington, DC, did when it
bombarded Al-Shayrat air base in my country last year.
These irresponsible and provocative statements, which
run counter to the Charter of the United Nations, are
direct incitement to terrorist groups to use chemical
weapons and fabricate anew all the evidence needed to
accuse the Syrian Army, as they have done in previous
times. I remind the representative of the United States
that the former Joint Investigative Mechanism refused
to take samples from Al-Shayrat air base because if it
had done so it would have been categorically proved
that the Syrian Government is not responsible for the
incident in Khan Shaykhun. In fact, what the United
States perpetrated against that Syrian air base was a
full-fledged aggression.

I call on the representatives of the United States,
the United Kingdom and France to put an end to their
violations of Security Council resolutions related to
fighting terrorism, and on their Governments to stop
supporting the terrorist groups in my country and cease
providing them with a political umbrella to pursue
their crimes against the Syrian people. It is high time
that the United States Administration learn from its
mistakes and stop repeating them. Is it not enough
what they have done in Viet Nam, Iraq, Libya, Somalia
and Yemen, invoking very cheap lies that have already
been condemned and denounced by international public
opinion? In this regard, I recall the words of Naguib
Mahfouz, the Nobel laureate:

"They are liars, they know they are liars,
and they know that we know that they are liars.
However, they still lie, and very loudly so."

In conclusion, the Russian Centre for Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic issued
a statement a few minutes ago that street battles have
begun in Ghouta, following the demands for the
separation of the aforementioned Faylaq Al-Rahman
and Jabhat Al-Nusra. This current street fighting
impedes the evacuation of civilians who are forced to
find safe haven underground in Ghouta.

