The President (interpretation from Arabic): As this is
the first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Peter Burleigh, Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Burleigh for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (S/1998/1110)

The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Angola in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Coelho Da Cruz
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola, document S/l998/1110. Members also
have before them document S/ 1998/ 1135, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America.
I give the floor to the representative of Angola.


