Mr. Decourcey (Canada): The role of the Security
Council is to maintain international peace and security.
However, there can be no peace withoutjustice. Despite
growing demands for accountability, impunity for
violations of international law continues unabated. We
can do better.

Justice and accountability are prerequisites for
peace and security. Likewise, they are fundamental to
prevention. Impunity, on the other hand, begets further
human rights violations. International humanitarian
law and international human rights remain at the core of
Canada's commitment to a peaceful world and a rules-
based international order. Canada is acting to defend
that commitment in the following ways.

(spoke in French)

First, Canada supports the international legal
framework and strongly advocates for respect for
international law. Last month, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Group
of Seven committed to adopting practical measures to
promote the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law by our partners.

(spoke in English)

More specifically, they committed to using their
support to State and, when relevant, to non-State
parties to armed conflict to encourage the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law by
such parties, among other things. We did that because
we believe that greater adherence to international
humanitarian law can help to reduce unnecessary
human suffering in situations of armed conflict.

Secondly, Canada supports the fight against
impunity. Our Government is deeply committed to
ensuring that those who violate international law
are held accountable. That is why Canada welcomes
and financially supports the efforts of international
organizations such as the United Nations and of
non-governmental organizations that collect and
analyse evidence for the purpose of prosecuting those
responsible for international crimes.

Turning to Myanmar, Canada remains outraged at
the crimes against humanity that have been committed
against the Rohingya and other ethnic and religious
minorities in Myanmar. This year, for the first time,
the Secretary-General specifically cited the Myanmar
Armed Forces with regard to patterns of sexual violence
in conflict.

Wherever and whenever civilian populations
are targeted with such indiscriminate violence, the
international community must act swiftly and in concert.
There can be no impunity for the perpetrators of those
horrific crimes. Canada supports the establishment ofan
international accountability mechanism to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for atrocities.

Moreover, Canada is coordinating with like-minded
partners to support existing evidence-gathering efforts,
such as the United Nations Fact-finding Mission on
Myanmar, and explore options to assist in documenting
and investigating the atrocities and grave human rights
violations, especially in Rakhine state. That includes
violations related to sexual and gender-based violence.

Similarly, in the context of Syria, Canada is
supporting the International Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to assist in the investigation and prosecution
of those responsible for war crimes or crimes against
humanity. We also support the Commission for
International Justice and Accountability with regard
to the gathering of evidence for use in the eventual
prosecution of perpetrators.

Lastly, Canada supports the International Criminal
Court (ICC) with crucial leadership and advocacy.

(spoke in French)

Canada is proud of its pivotal role in the
establishment of the ICC and supports the Court's
efforts to bring to justice those responsible for grave
international crimes. We call on all States to cooperate
with the ICC so that the perpetrators of such crimes
are held accountable. Multilateral structures such as the
ICC play a key role in promoting accountability.

(spoke in English)

The Council can count on Canada's leadership to
engage constructively with multilateral, international
and bilateral partners to drive positive action on peace
and security issues.

(Spoke in French)

Member States and the Security Council must put
an end to persistent violations of international law and
the widespread culture of impunity. Today we affirm
our determination to enforce accountability by all
possible means. Canada is ready to collaborate.

