Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of the important
resolution 2240 (2015) today. Sadly, the issue it seeks
to address - the migration crisis - needs little
introduction to the Council. We already know it too
well from the harrowing images of the drowned, the
heartbreaking stories of loss, and the tragic death of
three-year 01d Aylan Kurdi and so many more.

The migration crisis is without doubt one of the
greatest challenges of our generation. Thousands have
died in recent months; thousands more continue to be
exploited as they risk their lives to find a safer future in
Europe. This cannot continue.

Since June, European Union (EU) forces in the
Mediterranean have worked tirelessly to help alleviate
the human tragedy on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. They have saved thousands of lives. But the
situation is worsening, so today the Security Council
has authorized the European Union military operation
in the southern Central Mediterranean to begin
interdictions against all migrant smugglers operating
on the high seas. These groups have no respect for
human life. They exploit those taking the perilous
journey across the Mediterranean. They overfill poorly
maintained boats ill-suited to such a difficult crossing,
and they abandon their passengers at the first sign of
trouble.

All EU member States contributing to the operation
now have the authority to interdict them and their
boats on the high seas. Any smugglers stopped will
be arrested and their boats will be seized. We must
not allow callous people-smugglers to profit from
others' despair. Let me be clear. Any action will be
proportionate, in keeping with the limits authorized by
the resolution, and used solely against the smugglers
and empty boats. Any migrants encountered in the
course of the operation will be taken to Europe as part
of established procedures.

Sadly, action against the smugglers on the high
seas will not solve this crisis alone, but it will send a
message that people cannot profit from this evil trade
with impunity. It will save lives. But we must continue
to do more. That means deepening our partnership with
the Libyan Government and working together towards
the deployment of future phases of this operation. I
welcome the cooperation with the Libyan authorities
on the resolution, and I also warmly welcome the
political agreement on the Government of national
unity announced by Bernardino Leon last night. We
look forward to working with that future Government
of Libya.

If we are to end this crisis in the longer term, we
all need to work collectively to bring an end to the
drivers of irregular migration. That is the surest way
to put an end to the untold numbers of people dying
in pursuit of a better future. This requires a response
beyond the smugglers. It means helping countries to
manage their migratory flows. It means addressing
the root causes of mass migration, including conflict
and poverty in Africa and the Middle East, as well as
tackling extremist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham.

Today's resolution is a small part of the solution
to a huge challenge. As part of its comprehensive
approach to migration, the European Union will do
all it can to protect the rights of those who need our
protection and to help alleviate the suffering driving
people to desperation. The United Kingdom will
continue to play a leading role in those efforts as we
seek a comprehensive solution to one of the greatest
challenges of our generation.

