Ms. Dlamini-Zuma (South Africa): First of all, just
generally, I am quite encouraged by the remarks I have
heard, because no one has said that the "month of Africa"
has come to an end, and that is the end of the attention to
these issues. Rather, everyone has said, as Ambassador
Greenstock put it, that rhetoric must be followed by action.
I think that many of the Ambassadors have said this as
well. This is really very important.

Turning to a few of the issues: as regards Burundi, I
think it is very important, obviously, to support the peace
process there, as everyone has said, and to support former
President Mandela. I just want to pick up on one issue that
the French Ambassador mentioned - about putting a lot of
political pressure on the parties in Burundi while at the
same time providing some economic relief so that the
country does not deteriorate and end up in chaos. That in
itself would set the peace process back many years. So I
agree with the French Ambassador that this is very
important and should be followed up on.

On the question of AIDS, I cannot overemphasize
that, though AIDS is a global problem, Africa at the
moment is bearing the brunt of the epidemic, and it needs
all the support it can get from everyone. So we hope that
this will be followed up on. I am glad to hear that the
General Assembly will be debating this.

Some comments that were made on Angola were
very encouraging: first, paying attention to the
humanitarian crisis there and, secondly, undertaking many
measures to implement the sanctions against UNITA,
following the report of Ambassador Fowler. This is very
important. In addition, I think it was the Argentine
Ambassador who said that there should be openness to
discussions aimed at finding a political solution, because
a military solution cannot be long-lasting. I agree with
him there.

On the question of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is encouraging to hear that there will be a
resolution that will mandate the United Nations to send
more observers and a force with a Chapter VII to act in
that country. It also will be important to make sure to
prepare for the next phase - the third phase of the
implementation of the Agreement.

The Ambassador of the Netherlands raised an
important point about the disarming of illegal armed
groups and about the fact that there have to be conditions
under which they will be able to lay down their arms and
return to their homes. I think this is very correct. I think
that the Lusaka Agreement does indeed envisage a two-
way process by which there would be disarmament and
by which the countries of origin would create an
environment in which those soldiers would be able to be
repatriated and reintegrated into their homelands. I think
it is important to look at it as a two-way process and an
important part of the Lusaka Agreement aimed at
resolving one dimension of the conflict.

With respect to the dialogue, it is really encouraging
to hear pledges of support for the Facilitator, because
President Masire is going to need a great deal of
support - political, moral and financial. It will not be an
easy process. Even trying to locate a venue for the
dialogue will not be easy. He will need a great deal of
support to identify all the necessary participants and the
venue and to start the process. But it is, in our view,
fundamental to a lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Lasting peace in that country
cannot be achieved if the political situation is not
resolved.

 

Everything I have heard is very encouraging. Let me
say a few words about the conference that several people
have mentioned - a peace conference on the Great Lakes
region. I think that this would be an important step, but I
would sound a note of caution as to its timing. If the timing
is wrong, we may not get the desired results. We must time
it in such a way as to get free-flowing and constructive
discussions. It is an important conference, it should take
place, but the timing will be critical.

I would also like to stress the comments made by the
representative of the United Kingdom regarding some kind
of group that would ensure that there is real follow-up and
planning as well as deal with the issues of when to bring
people, what to do and what other issues should be raised.
I think that this is an excellent suggestion. I am not very
familiar with how it would work, but I think that if it can
work it would be excellent and should be considered
seriously.

