Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, my delegation extends its sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. My delegation is convinced that, under
your very able and skillful leadership, the Council will
discharge its responsibilities admirably. At the same time,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation to
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia for his very able
leadership of the Council during the month of November.

I would like to express my delegation's sincere
appreciation for being given this opportunity to address
the Council on the situation in Angola.

Once again, the Council is convening to deliberate
on a very pertinent issue: the consolidation of the peace
process in Angola. Since this meeting coincides with the
second anniversary of the signing of the Lusaka Protocol,
it provides us yet another opportunity to remind the
international community and, indeed, the concerned
parties to the conflict that now, more than ever, the
people of Angola deserve peace.

The recent painful and troubled phase in the history
of the Angolan people has lasted for over three decades.
The initial decade witnessed Angolans taking up arms to
fight a bitter anti-colonial war. The end of colonialism,
however, did not bring good news to the country, but
instead a cruel and destructive civil war that caused
untold suffering for the people. Hundreds of thousands of
innocent people died; many more were maimed for life
and, inevitably, thousands of people became either
refugees or internally displaced persons.

As we commemorate the second year of the Lusaka
Protocol, it is heartening to note that the temporary
upward trend in the number of ceasefire violations has
been reversed. While the present report of the Secretary-
General, contained in document S/1996/1000, reveals a
volatile security situation in many parts of the country, we
are delighted to learn that there have been no major cases
of harassment of the personnel of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). This
positive trend of events needs to be nurtured by all the
relevant parties to the conflict under the skillful and able
supervision of UNAVEM. III.
My delegation is equally encouraged by the
quartering process of UNITA troops and the handing-over
of weapons, although, according to the report before us,
the United Nations is still awaiting an official declaration
by UNITA that it has assembled all its troops and handed
over all weapons. We appeal to the Government to
deliberately initiate the actual incorporation of UNITA
troops and generals into the ranks of the Angolan Armed
Forces (FAA), while, at the same time, we welcome
UNITA's declaration UNITA on its assembled troops and
the weapons status made just today. The international
community will be looking forward to its translation into
action.

 

In the same vein, the demobilization of ex-combatants
from the Government and UNITA must continue to take
place in an appropriate manner. UNITA officials must stop
their repeated violations of soldiers' right to choose freely
where they would like to be resettled.

As noted in the report, the expiration of the current
mandate of UNAVEM. III should inspire the concerned
parties to carry out dutifully and responsibly all their
obligations in the consolidated mediation timetable. We
thus concur with the Secretary-General in appealing to the
Government and UNITA to resolve the issue of UNITA
deputies who are supposed to return to the capital to
facilitate the establishment of the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation and also to reach agreement on
the special status of the leader of the largest opposition
party before 1 January 1997.

Tanzania commends the efforts being undertaken in
the relief and rehabilitation process, especially in returning
internally displaced persons to their original homes.
Although there are a lot of obstacles which continue to
hamper these efforts, my delegation is optimistic that, as
conditions continue to improve, more displaced persons will
be resettled in areas where they originally belonged. To this
end, we also welcome the demining operation currently
taking place under the coordination of the United Nations
Central Mine Action Office.

The socio-economic reforms currently underway in
Angola should be encouraged and beefed up. The launching
of the "New Life Programme" last June was a milestone
move in addressing the economic problems facing the
country. The importance of the envisaged International
Monetary Fund (IMF)-sponsored emergency programme,
supported by an emergency operation fund and, at a later
stage, a three-year structural adjustment programme cannot
be overemphasized. These efforts should be complemented
by the international community, especially the developed
North, which should generously offer grants and soft loans
to bail out the beleaguered Angolan economy.

We welcome and support the thrust of the draft
resolution before the Council, particularly the
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III
until 28 February 1997. We also support the gradual
withdrawal of UNAVEM. III military units as of next
February over a period of six to seven months.

Lastly, permit me to extend my delegation's
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his present and
previous Special Representatives for their relentless efforts
to find a lasting solution in Angola. As we approach the
end of the year and the beginning of a new one, my
delegation appeals to the leadership in Angola, in both the
Government and the opposition, to give the Angolan
people a well-deserved peace as a New Year's gift.

In conclusion, I can do no better than to quote my
President's address to the General Assembly last October.
President Mkapa said:

"Difficulties remain, but we have crossed the
Rubicon and, with determination, we can maintain a
steady pace towards peace. The United Nations
played a key role in this task. It will have to play an
even greater role in consolidating the progress
towards peace." (Ofi'icial Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Plenary Meetings,
22nd meeting, p. 5)

The opportunity is there and the time is right. Angola
deserves better.

