Lord Malloch-Brown (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Mufioz, Alistair McKechnie and Jordan Ryan for their
briefings this morning. I am delighted to be able to
take part in this debate myself. This is an issue in
which I have been closely involved, both when
working at the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank
and now as a Minister in the British Government. This
is an issue in which I hope the United Kingdom has
been able to lead. Today's debate follows the initiative
of my Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary last year
to press for real improvement in the response of the
United Nations to post-conflict situations.

I am also delighted that we have as Council
President today someone who is both a personal friend
and a representative of a country that has done so much
hard work and has so much experience to share on this
issue. I think having you in the chair, Mr. President, is
an eloquent reminder that we have got to intensify our
efforts to prevent and reduce conflict worldwide,

because countries affected by conflict face a tragic
human cost. They account for a third of the people
living in extreme poverty, half the children not in
primary school and half the children who die before
their fifth birthday.

As we know to our cost, ungoverned spaces, such
as those in Afghanistan or Somalia, offer safe havens
for international crime or terrorism. Today United
Kingdom and Ugandan soldiers, as well as those of
other Member States, are laying down their lives to
build peace in these countries. United Nations
peacekeepers play an indispensable role, providing
space for peace agreements to take hold and protecting
the most vulnerable. We will chair a Security Council
debate next month, as part of our joint initiative with
France, to look at how we can enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping.

But peacekeeping alone is not enough. A third of
countries fall back into conflict within five years of a
peace agreement being reached, so it is critical that we
improve the effectiveness of peacebuilding. We know
what needs to happen in countries emerging from
conflict - the economy needs to be revitalized,
creating jobs that give an alternative to violence and
crime. Basic services need to be kick-started, and
police, courts and prisons need to be re-established so
that everyone has access to accountable and affordable
justice.

In other words, we need to help reconstitute the
basic functions of a viable State, and that needs to
happen quickly. There is a critical window of perhaps
24 months after a peace agreement is signed.
Experience shows that if we do not get it right during
that period, the risk of a return to conflict increases
dramatically.

We too strongly welcome the Secretary-General's
report on peacebuilding (8/2009/304). Building on that
report, I would identify five priorities for action in the
coming months. We have heard something of these
already.

First, we must get clarity as to the roles and
responsibilities of the United Nations and the World
Bank so that there is accountability for what happens
on the ground. Second, we must launch a review of
civilian capacities, to give us a better idea of where the
gaps are and how these experts can be deployed more
rapidly to build national capacities. Thirdly, effective
and accountable senior United Nations leadership must

be deployed from the outset, to corral international
actors and drive delivery of assistance. Fourthly, access
to rapid and flexible financing must be improved,
including through the Peacebuilding Fund and
multi-donor trust funds. Fifthly, we must build on the
achievements so far of the Peacebuilding Commission.
It should focus on addressing barriers to peacebuilding,
ensuring that international efforts are better
harmonized, and mobilizing additional resources.

The Secretary-General's report gives us a
framework for a better-led, more coherent, faster and
more predictable international response to immediate
post-conflict situations, but the real test will be
delivery on the ground. A recent United Kingdom
White Paper - "Building our Common Future" -
underlines our commitment to working with the United
Nations, the World Bank and other Member States to
help make this happen. The Secretary-General has a
critical role to play. We applaud his leadership. I urge
Member States to rally behind his agenda for action.
We cannot afford to lose this opportunity. The human
costs are simply too great.

