We wish to start by expressing our deepest condolences to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and to Chad, as well as our condemnation of the recent attack against Blue Helmets in Mali. We would like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for her leadership. We commend the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in supporting the measures implemented by the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to address the current health crisis and to prevent a larger outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The Dominican Republic expresses its support to the recently elected Prime Minister, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, and notes with satisfaction his aspirations to strengthen the economy, tackle corruption and restore State sovereignty, as well as his willingness to take a new approach to the social unrest by meeting and consulting with protesters. With regard to relations between Baghdad and Erbil, we commend the cooperation between the federal Government and the Regional Government on issues relating to security, especially the fight against the remnants of the Islamic State, as well as the continued engagement to resolve pending issues, including an agreement on oil-revenue sharing. Similarly, we welcome the efforts of Iraq to foster relations with other countries on regional stability, cooperation to counter the Islamic State, the reconstruction of Iraq and bilateral relations, including the opening of a dialogue between the United States and Iraq based on the Strategic Framework Agreement of 2013. On a different note, it is of great concern that the Islamic State is gradually gathering strength and increasing its activity. We therefore urge the international community to make greater efforts and collaborate closely with Iraq to prevent the resurgence of the Islamic State and its heinous crimes. On the issue of human rights, we condemn the recent acts of violence, disappearances and killings perpetrated against journalists, demonstrators and activists by unidentified men amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, we encourage a thorough investigation of these incidents with a view to identifying the perpetrators and establishing accountability. In relation to the humanitarian situation, we encourage the federal Government and the Regional Government to work closely with the Humanitarian Coordinator's leadership to streamline communication and processes across governorates to facilitate the provision of aid, as well as to ensure coherent preparedness for the COVID-19 outbreak. Considering recent data related to the steady increase of gender-based violence cases, including domestic violence, following the implementation of measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19, we urge UNAMI to actively engage with civil society organizations dealing with gender-based violence to find ways to better address the issue and assist the Government in this task. Regarding the unresolved issue of Kuwaiti and third-country missing persons, we welcome the progress achieved thus far by members of the Tripartite Mechanism in the search for prisoners and missing persons reported by Kuwait, the recent discoveries of human remains and the devolution of assets and federal files. In conclusion, we look forward to the prompt formation of an inclusive Government that ensures the participation of women and youth and that tackles, with due diligence and responsibility, the major challenges facing the country. Moreover, we are hopeful that all parties can foster reconciliation and political dialogue with a view to ending the political deadlock that has persisted and consequently prevented authorities from making the necessary social and economic reforms.
