Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I congratulate Japan
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I thank Japan for organizing this
open debate on peacebuilding in Africa. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, Cabinet Secretary
Amina Mohamed and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security for their insightful briefings on
the initiatives at the continental and regional levels in
Africa.

At the outset, let me convey the apologies of the
Honourable Samura M. W. Kamara, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, for his absence due to unavoidable
circumstances.

On behalf of the President and the Government of
Sierra Leone, I would like to register the deep gratitude
of my delegation to this Council for the support and
assistance rendered to Sierra Leone in sustaining hard-
won peace and security. I wish to take this opportunity to
also express our profound appreciation to the members
of the Sierra Leone Configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission through the Chair, Ambassador Marc-
Andre' Blanchard of Canada, for his relentless advocacy
and for demonstrating strong support in the pursuit of
peace, security and stability in Sierra Leone.

Resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262, both unanimously adopted in April,
demonstrate quite clearly our collective commitment
towards a comprehensive approach to transitional
justice and an accountable security sector. Both of
these are prerequisites for consolidating peace and
reducing poverty, as well as for preventing countries
from relapsing into conflict.

In June, we were honoured to receive in Sierra Leone
the presence of Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and his team on a fact-
finding visit. We were heartened by his inspiring words
and his comments concerning the remarkable progress
Sierra Leone has made, especially in identifying and
resolving tensions and threats of potential conflicts.
It is a fact that Africa has made tremendous efforts
in strengthening its capacity to prevent and resolve
conflicts. However, it is imperative that we, the United
Nations, maintain the global solidarity required to
continue to develop Africa's capacity in preventive
diplomacy. We need cooperative and coordinated true
partnerships to strengthen capacities in order to ensure
that we can respond better to tensions and threats of
conflict.

This year marks 14 years since the conflict in
Sierra Leone was officially declared over. Since then,
with the support of the United Nations, we have made
outstanding progress in charting the path for a peaceful,
secure, democratic Sierra Leone. We have also reduced
our international risk profile as a post-conflict country
and, in turn, increased confidence for foreign direct
investment.

Sierra Leone has made the transition from a near-
failed State on the agenda of the Security Council to
a nation that is regarded as a storehouse of lessons on
how to successfully move away from war to peace, from
despair to hope. Since the closure of the peacekeeping
mission, Sierra Leone has made considerable progress
in identifying and resolving tensions and threats of
potential conflict, in monitoring and promoting human
rights, and in consolidating a series of good governance
reforms. We have learned through the painful lessons
and no longer bear the stigma ofbeing a blood-diamond
nation.
Preserving these gains and achieving the
country's sustainable development objectives require
an unshakable and never-ending commitment to
consolidating and empowering our democratic
institutions. Sierra Leone remains committed to a
strong partnership with the United Nations system
and the donor community. We urge the international
community to continue to invest in the achievement
of our economic development. We ask for support
for our poverty-reduction strategy - the Agenda for
Prosperity, which is anchored on the New Deal that is
championed by the g7+ States.

The Government of Sierra Leone is mindful
of the challenges of the twin shocks of the Ebola
Virus - recently vanquished - and of the shock
of the drop in commodity prices. Accordingly, we
have maintained, we have harmonized, the poverty-
reduction strategy with the promotion of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the post-Ebola recovery
strategy. On the basis oflessons learned, and the lessons
that we continue to learn in Sierra Leone, let me make
a few observations.

Sierra Leone is aware of the critical need to ensure
fair and transparent institutions that would prevent
relapse into conflict and ensure sustainable peace.
Institutions such as anticorruption commissions must
be consolidated and strengthened with true national
ownership and meaningful inclusiveness. An integrated
and coordinated approach to peacebuilding is required
to ensure the catalytic support of all national processes,
sustainable development priorities and economic
revitalization.

Sustaining peace must be every citizen's business
and should therefore continue to be at the core of the
work of the United Nations system. Women must be
fully included in all peacebuilding processes. Women,
as has been learned, can play an important role in
ensuring that peace processes are kept on track and
reach their successful conclusions. Women can also
play a role in governance and economic recovery. It is
quite simple - a nation that empowers its women is a
nation that empowers itself.

The capacity of the State should be built to create
an enabling environment for the private sector, which
would lead to the growth we all want. It is important
that all citizens benefit from that growth.

Finally, we also recognize the fact that building
the necessary alliances at the subregional and regional
levels is important to ensure that transnational criminal
activities such as drug trafficking, illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities are
curtailed. Sierra Leone fully subscribes to the call
contained in the report ofthe Advisory Group ofExperts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490) that better coordination between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
is desirable. The two institutions must work together
in a more focused manner, utilizing their comparative
strengths.

The Peacebuilding Fund has proven itself to
be an essential instrument of support of critical
peacebuilding processes in many post-conflict areas
and communities. However, unpredictable, inadequate
and fragmented financing for peacebuilding continues
to impede the effectiveness and consistency of
critical catalytic interventions. We must all support
the pledging conference for the Peacebuilding Fund
to be held in September and respond positively. The
Peacebuilding Commission must also be supported,
together with the Peacebuilding Support Office. In
particular, the Peacebuilding Support Office should not
be left to scramble for funds, resources and personnel.
If we believe in the cause of peace, we must invest in
the cause of peace.

In conclusion, the Government of Sierra Leone
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to promoting
sustainable peace and security within its borders and
reaffirms its resolve in advocating and promoting
peace in the subregion. Sierra Leone and its people
have embarked on a journey from fragility to stability.
The Government of Sierra Leone believes that with the
commitment and support of its partners, Sierra Leone
and Africa can develop the necessary institutional
resilience to create, embed, deepen and sustain the
peace we all desire.

