Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes today's debate and highlights the importance
of sharing perspectives and experiences so as to more
effectively and coherently fight human trafficking
in situations of conflict, which increases human
vulnerability

We appreciate the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/939) and his briefing, as well as the briefings
by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and the Director of the International Organization for
Migration Office to the United Nations.

Human trafficking is as complex as the horrors
it generates, in which persons, in addition to being
coerced into giving up their freedom, are deprived of
their dignity, exploited as commodities in prostitution
networks, subjected to forced labour or forced to sell
their organs to the highest bidder. We have looked on
in horror at images of African migrants sold as slaves
in Libya.

That is why we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2388 (2017), which my country has had the
opportunity to co-sponsor, with a view to responding
to this problem in a more efficient, coherent and
coordinated manner - in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. In that regard, we highlight three elements
that we consider of crucial importance.

First is the importance of analysing the increasingly
clear and complex nexus between transnational
organized crime and situations of conflict, in particular
terrorism. Indeed, there is a perverse dynamic in which
terrorist groups benefit from lucrative transnational
crimes, including human trafficking, which they in
turn use to consolidate their power and control over
vulnerable groups and individuals.

Second is the almost inherent relation between
human trafficking and migrant trafficking. In their
search for better living conditions, in many cases
generated by humanitarian emergencies, migrants and
refugees are often easy targets for criminal networks.
In that regard, we stress that neither crime should imply
the criminalization of natural migration processes.

Thirdly, we need a targeted approach for the
protection of children and women, which includes
identifying vulnerabilities with a view to improving
prevention mechanisms and caring for victims. A
gender perspective should also guide the creation and
implementation of relevant laws and measures.
Peru believes that it is imperative to address those
three elements through a complete, comprehensive and
coordinated strategy to combat this crime. That is why
our National Plan against Trafficking in Persons 2017-
2021 - the result of an inclusive process of thinking
and preparation - takes into account the social,
structural and institutional factors that exacerbate
the vulnerability of individuals, including insecurity,
violence and institutional weakness.

In addition to that, we take into account the
transnational scope of the crime of trafficking. We
believe firm action by the international community is
essential, including active promotion of cooperation
at the regional and global levels. The United Nations,
in particular through the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, should head up such action and make
it effective.

