Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join others in welcoming Mr. Fernandez Amunategui to
the Council and in thanking him for his briefing. The
United Kingdom welcomes today's debate to discuss
the current situation in Haiti. I would like to touch on
three main topics in my intervention today: the current
political situation, the role and configuration of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and the vital capacity-building work
required to improve the standard of the Haitian
National Police.

We note, with some disappointment, that it has
not yet been possible to appoint a new Prime Minister
and to renew ministerial portfolios. The impasse risks
raising political tensions and undermines the mood of
increased confidence that prevailed following the
elections and the inauguration of President Martelly.
We urge the President and Parliament to show the
necessary flexibility and spirit of compromise so that a
Prime Minister can be appointed in the near future and
Haitians can properly take the lead in the development
process.

We note that there appears to be increasing
support for a reconfiguration of the Mission's presence
in order to respond more effectively to the challenge
that Haiti faces. As United Nations Special Envoy Bill
Clinton noted in his address to the Council in April
(see S/PV.6510), troops may not be the most
appropriate means of delivering development
objectives on the ground. The United Kingdom has
long held that view. We believe that there is growing
consensus around the principle that peacekeepers
should not be tasked to undertake reconstruction or
development roles, which others are better able to
perform.

In our view, the continued presence of
MINUSTAH's military engineers in Haiti slows the
momentum for other actors to step in, stifling, in turn,

the development of the civilian private sector. We
believe that MINUSTAH's role is to maintain peace
and security and to provide an enabling environment in
which United Nations civilian agencies, with donor
support, are best qualified to lead on reconstruction
and development.

There are worrying reports that many ordinary
Haitians increasingly see MINUSTAH as an occupying
force. There is a risk that its presence could become a
barrier to the investment that Haiti so desperately
needs. We were therefore disappointed that the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/540) recommended
only a partial drawdown of surge forces.

We believe that the continued presence of large
numbers of troops is counterproductive and that police
officers, whether from the United Nations police or,
ideally, the Haitian National Police, would be seen as a
more sensitive and low-key presence on Haiti's streets.
It is our firm belief that the key to progress is the
ability of the Haitian authorities to maintain domestic
law and order. As the Secretary-General's report
recognizes, a Haitian National Police force that is fit
for purpose represents the cornerstone of
MINUSTAH'S eventual exit strategy.

With that in mind, we welcome the most recent
graduation of new police cadets in May this year. The
Security Council must now maintain that momentum
by empowering MINUSTAH to make the reform of the
Haitian National Police its number one priority. In that
regard, we look forward to the next iteration of the
police reform plan and call on the Government of Haiti
to engage fully in what needs to be a joint capacity-
building effort.

While that is under way, we agree with the
Secretary-General that Haiti will require the continued
support of MINUSTAH and international donors to
bolster the capacity of its rule of law and security
institutions. That means increased investment in
development, including through the augmentation of
the resources made available to the United Nations
country team, which the Secretary-General has made
clear is crucial to ensuring that an eventual downsizing
of MINUSTAH does not create a vacuum. It is
therefore imperative that we all respond and explore
how non-military actors, from within the United
Nations system and from elsewhere, can best assist
Haiti.

The United Kingdom shares the determination of

all here today to ensure that the mandate of

MINUSTAH will conclude successfully - and

success, of course, means that United Nations

peacekeepers will not need to return to Haiti. As Haiti

enters a new era, it is important that the international

community respond accordingly to ensure that it can

stand on its own feet. We will continue to work with
the United Nations and others to support that.

