Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): As just underlined by the
two previous speakers, the representatives of Germany and
Italy, the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) has performed its mandate with remarkable
effectiveness and success, preventing the spillover of
conflict into the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
from other parts of that volatile region. Now that its tasks
have been largely fulfilled, we fully support the Secretary-
General's intention to elaborate the next strategy for
UNPREDEP and to design an appropriate and effective
successor arrangement. Above all, those efforts will seek
to maintain the stability afforded by UNPREDEP.

Continued uncertainty, particularly instability in
Kosovo, as well as elsewhere in the region, makes it
necessary to proceed with caution in the replacement of
UNPREDEP. We must keep in mind that UNPREDEP also
plays an important role internally due to the fact that it has
the confidence and support of all ethnic and political
forces. This valuable contribution should not be
jeopardized.

According to the Secretary-General, there is a need to
observe the effectiveness of UNPREDEP following the
reduction of the military component pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1110 (1997). Furthermore, the severe
winter conditions of the region make it difficult to
downsize further the mission before the spring of 1998.

Taking all these considerations into account,
Portugal supports the extension of the mandate of
UNPREDEP, as recommended by the Secretary -General,
but for a longer final period of almost nine months. This
will allow the withdrawal of UNPREDEP to be
adequately prepared for, and will give the Secretary-
General time to look at all the possible options for
replacing that Force. We look forward to receiving his
recommendations on what type of international presence
would be most appropriate after the expiration of
UNPREDEP'S mandate.

As a sponsor of the resolution before the Council,
Portugal will of course be voting in favour of it. As a
contributor of personnel to UNPREDEP, Portugal would
like to pay tribute to all the military and civilian
personnel of UNPREDEP, and thank them for their
commitment and hard work.

