Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Since
this is, I believe, the last public meeting we have
together, allow me also to warmly congratulate
you, Mr. President - indeed, you and your entire
team - for the outstanding work of the German
presidency throughout this month of April, and, if I
may also allow myself to mention it, the particularly
close - I would even say unprecedented - cooperation
that has united our two countries and our two
presidencies during the joint presidencies in March and
April. I thank you very much, Sir.

I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Geir Pedersen, for his insightful
briefing on the actions he has undertaken to implement
the five priorities he presented to the Security Council
two months ago (see S/PV.8475). I would like to
reiterate to him France's full support for his mission,
the extreme complexity of which we all know. Today I
will focus on two points- the situation on the ground
and the political process.

To all those who claim that the war in Syria is
over, I would like to remind them of the grim reality
of the situation in that country. The terrorist threat
is still present, whether from Da'esh or Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham. The humanitarian situation is catastrophic.
The situation on the front lines remains very volatile. In
that context, the urgency, in our view, is to secure a real
ceasefire across the entirety of the territory of Syria.
A ceasefire is essential to enable us to save lives and
focus our efforts on the two inseparable priorities that
unite us - the fight against terrorism and the active
search for a political solution.
However, I would like to highlight in particular
the seriousness of the situation in the north-west. The
intensification of the regime's strikes in recent days
is extremely worrisome. The presence of thousands
of terrorist fighters in the area and the risk of a
humanitarian disaster are a source of deep concern
for all. In that particularly difficult context, France
calls on Russia specifically to honour its commitments
to maintaining the ceasefire in Idlib and to putting
pressure on the regime to stop its strikes.

Similarly, we are all aware of the considerable
efforts that remain to be made in the north-east to
ensure Da'esh's complete and definitive defeat. In
that regard, we welcome the continued presence of the
United States. Any military offensive against the area
must be avoided at all costs.

Across the country, and especially in the areas
under the regime's control, the information we are
receiving is particularly worrisome. The Syrian regime
is continuing its policy of repression. We condemn
the obstacles imposed by the regime to prevent safe,
continuous and unhindered humanitarian access, in
particular its refusal to allow the delivery of a third
convoy to Rukban. France calls on Russia to use its
influence to ensure that that convoy can be authorized
as soon as possible, which would be an important
symbolic gesture before Ramadan.

We would also like to recall that the return of
refugees requires the Syrian regime to make firm,
concrete and verifiable commitments with regard to the
security of persons and the restitution of property and
land. The information we are receiving on that subject
is appalling. The restrictions on access to populations
seeking to return to their homes imposed by the regime
on the United Nations are unjustifiable. They are proof
that the regime wants to leave its hands free to pursue its
repressive strategy without hindrance and that in reality
it is hostile to the return of refugees to their homes.
The United Nations must be able to provide objective
follow-up on that essential subject. France warns the
international community against the exploitation of the
refugee issue by the regime and its supporters, which in
the face of all the evidence seeks to reverse the burden
of proof.

Turning now to the political process, I would like
to stress the urgency of moving forward despite the
inertia and delaying tactics. On behalf of France, I
would like to welcome the Special Envoy's efforts to
reach an agreement on a constitutional package through
numerous contacts with Syrian and international actors.
We will support any agreement on the constitutional
committee that is credible and balanced, both in its
composition and in the operating regulations it provides
for. It is up to the Special Envoy - and him alone - to
tell us when he considers that those two conditions are
met. Such an agreement seems to us to be within reach.

However, the political solution cannot be reduced
to the constitutional committee alone. In that spirit, we
also support the Special Envoy's efforts to implement
all the elements of resolution 2254 (2015). A credible
political process requires three complementary
elements in particular - a national ceasefire, which I
just discussed; confidence-building measures to create a
neutral and secure environment; and the holding of free
and transparent elections. It is crucial for the Special
Envoy to continue to be proactive on all those elements.

I would like especially to stress the urgency of
implementing confidence-building measures, including
unilateral measures, such as measures that would result
in progress regarding prisoners and missing persons,
forced conscription and the reform of property laws.
The third release of prisoners under the auspices of the
Astana group underscores once again the need to go
beyond the strict reciprocity imposed by the regime and
move to a new level under the auspices of the United
Nations. We welcome the priority given by the Special
Envoy to that issue.

It is our collective responsibility to continue to exert
pressure on the Syrian regime to encourage it to really
engage in a credible political process. That is primarily
the responsibility of Damascus' sponsors. For its part,
France, together with the European Union, will continue
to impose sanctions on the regime and refuse to finance
the reconstruction of the country or normalize relations
with Damascus until there is credible and irreversible
progress towards a political solution, which alone will
put an end to the Syrian tragedy.

With social anthropologist Laetitia Atlani-Duault, I
expressed here in the Chamber the fear that the Syrian
tragedy would be the downfall of the United Nations
and everything it represents (see S/PV.8434). I continue
to think that. After all those years of Security Council
failures in Syria, it would be yet another grave moral
and political failure to turn the page today and look
elsewhere out of fatigue or cowardice. First, it would
be a serious error in judgement to think that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. Secondly, for perhaps the first
time in eight years, we believe that we have a narrow
but real window of opportunity to put an end to the
conflict. We cannot allow that window to close. We
have therefore a responsibility as members of Security
Council to switch off our automatic pilots, build on our
points of convergence and finally seize hold of peace
in Syria.

