I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We appreciate his unstinting efforts under very challenging circumstances. I also thank Ms. Mustafa for her briefing. China's position on the Syrian issue has been consistent. We have supported a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process from the very beginning. We encourage and support the Special Envoy in making every effort to promote political dialogue and enhance mutual trust among the parties concerned. We hope the ceasefire appeals by Secretary-General and the Special Envoy will be accepted by all parties to the conflict so as to foster an enabling environment for negotiations. We are pleased to learn that the Constitutional Committee will hold its third round of consultations by the end of August, and we look forward to seeing more progress therein. It could become a window of opportunity if the Syrian parties engage constructively with each other and with the United Nations Special Envoy under the Constitutional Committee framework. China welcomes the convening of the Astana virtual summit on | July and the joint statement released thereafter by Iran, Russia and Turkey. The joint statement contains many positive elements related to the situation in Syria, including standing against separatist agendas, opposing the illegal seizure and transfer of oil revenues that belong to Syria, and rejecting all unilateral sanctions. China would be happy to see the Astana process continuing to contribute to the political process in Syria. With regard to the economic situation in Syria, we are deeply concerned by the bleak picture painted by the Special Envoy. The devaluation of Syrian currency and soaring food prices are exacerbating the grave humanitarian situation in Syria and further hurting the Syrian people across the country. The World Food Programme and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization have repeatedly sounded the alarm on food insecurity in Syria. The reasons behind the suffering of the Syrian people are self-evident. Years of economic blockade and illegal sanctions have worsened the socioeconomic and humanitarian situations in Syria, undermined the livelihoods of the Syrian people, and caused tremendous hardships for innocent civilians, in particular women and children. At this critical time, the unilateral sanctions have further compromised the capacity of Syria to ensure access to food, essential health supplies and medical support in response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. These sanctions are inhumane and totally unacceptable. The international community must take actions to help the Syrian Government cope with these economic and humanitarian challenges. We urge relevant countries to respond actively to the appeals of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy on immediately lifting unilateral sanctions. We also request the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to assess the humanitarian impact of unilateral sanctions as an integral part of its humanitarian reports. Those who claim that unilateral sanctions have not harmed Syria should join China and many other countries in requesting a report of the Secretary-General on the issue. We welcome the efforts of relevant parties aimed at maintaining the ceasefire and promoting stability in Syria. The international community must be alerted to and keep an eye on terrorist activities in the north-west of the country. We should not allow terrorist groups to take advantage of the current situation. The Security Council should support the Special Envoy's call for effective, cooperative and targeted counter-terrorism efforts. We call on relevant parties to launch negotiations and take concrete counter-terrorism actions . The future of Syria must be decided by the Syrians without foreign interference. It is fundamental that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria be respected and upheld. China will continue to support the good offices of the Special Envoy in fulfilling his mandate set out in resolution 2254 (2015) and work with the international community for a lasting peace in Syria.
