Mr. Cordeiro (Brazil): Brazil was a sponsor of the
draft resolution just adopted by the Council, extending the
mandate of the Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH) until March 2000. We are confident that the
General Assembly will shortly approve the establishment of
a new integrated mission in Haiti to assist in the critical
areas of police training, the electoral process, justice and
human rights, which are vital for the consolidation of
democracy in the country.

The establishment of the new International Civilian
Support Mission in Haiti (MICAH) will allow for the
conclusion of the Security Council's peacekeeping
involvement in Haiti. International assistance will from
now on concentrate on the transition to peace-building
through a long-term support programme with the direct
participation of the donor community and United Nations
bodies and agencies, including the Bretton Woods
institutions. With this perspective in mind, the decision
taken by the Council today will allow the necessary time
for a smooth transition until the new mission becomes
fully operational.

The transition to new forms of international
assistance for Haiti responds directly to the concerns
expressed in resolution 1212 (1998), adopted by the
Security Council one year ago. We are pleased to note the
instrumental and very effective contribution made by the
Economic and Social Council in helping to shape this
new model for the United Nations presence in Haiti. We
take pride in the fact that it was at the initiative of
Ambassador Celso Amorim that a specific invitation to
the Economic and Social Council to contribute to the
designing of a long-term programme of support for Haiti
was included in resolution 1212 (1998).

Brazil was also one of the five members of the
Advisory Group that prepared the recommendations
approved by the Economic and Social Council in response
to that invitation. We are of the View that this test case
has opened the way to further strengthen the collaboration
of the two Councils in addressing questions related to the
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building in post-
conflict situations.

Haiti finds itself at a critical juncture. The adoption
of this resolution will send a powerful message that the
international community remains committed to assisting
the Haitian people. It is also an expression of our resolve
to ensure consistency and continuity in the efforts to
support long-term stability for Haiti.

Finally, we want to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Canada, together with the other members of
the group of the Friends of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, for having led that process in close consultation
with the Government of Haiti.

 

