Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is an honour and a
pleasure to see you, Madame President, once again
here with us in the Security Council to preside over
this important meeting.

The importance of this meeting has been made
obvious by the statements that we have heard from the
Secretary-General, whose presence in the Council this
morning we welcome, and from his Special
Representative for Iraq, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.
Those statements have been made pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003).

We are happy to note that the United Nations
operations in Iraq continue to serve as the eyes and ears
of the international community. The incisive analysis
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/715) and
of the statements we have heard today reflect that
adequately. We appreciate, in particular, Mr. Vieira de
Mello's statement and would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for all the
United Nations and related agencies that have worked
in Iraq throughout the difficult days before resolutions
1472 (2003) and 1483 (2003) were adopted to continue
to provide for the basic needs of the Iraqi people.

The civilizations of the Tigris and the Euphrates
have over the millennia enjoyed close ties with the
Indus valley civilization. The peoples of Pakistan and
Iraq were bound by ties of history, faith, culture and
close cooperation, in the days before repression and
war afflicted that great and dynamic country.
Throughout recent months, Pakistan has always been
guided by the interests of the people of Iraq at every
stage of the Council's deliberations. On 27 March,
following the conflict, my delegation stated here that
the principles that must guide the Council include the
following: respect for the political independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Iraq and its neighbouring
States; the right of the Iraqi people to choose their own
political destiny and form of governance in exercise of
their right to self-determination; non-intervention and
non-interference in their internal affairs; permanent
sovereignty and control over their natural resources;
respect for the religious and cultural traditions of the
people of Iraq and the sanctity of holy places that are
among the most venerated in the Islamic world; and the
right of the Iraqi nation to economic and social
reconstruction.

We believe that those principles remain the
framework and the broad objectives that must continue
to be promoted by the Security Council and the
international community. We believe that the
restoration of internal peace and stability in Iraq is in
the interest of the Iraqi people, the countries of the
region and the international community.

In Iraq today, there are enormous challenges:
security, governance, restoration of basic services,
reconstruction and justice. But, as in any crisis, those
challenges are accompanied by opportunity: the
opportunity to revive Iraq to its former potential and
promise as a leading nation in the Arab, Islamic and
developing world. The Iraqi people, who have suffered
long, deserve no less.

Following the recent conflict, the Security
Council has sought to realize those objectives.
Resolutions 1472 (2003) and 1483 (2003) affirmed the
basic principles of the policies that must guide all of
us, including the Coalition Provisional Authority, in the
process of providing humanitarian and other help to the
Iraqi people and securing the earliest and full
restoration of Iraq's sovereignty and political
independence. The Secretary-General's report reflects
developments from the perspective of the United
Nations. We commend the efforts deployed in very
difficult circumstances by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, his deputy and various
United Nations agencies, particularly the World Food
Programme - as noted by the Secretary-General in his
report - which has reactivated the public food
distribution system. That is no mean achievement,
given the massive dependence of the Iraqi people on
the public rationing system.

In his report, the Secretary-General has noted that
the primary concern in Iraq remains the restoration of
internal security, which is threatened mainly by
organized and unorganized crime and violence. General
lawlessness has resulted in the looting and sabotage of
key infrastructure. Attacks by those who are presumed
to be loyalists from the previous regime or opponents
of the Coalition Provisional Authority are also
impeding the stabilization efforts. In the words of the
Secretary-General, "[The lack of security] affects
every aspect of life in Iraq today in a fundamental
way" (S/2003/715, para. 28). The establishment of
internal security is a prelude to, and a precondition for,
the normalization of the political, economic and social
conditions in Iraq. We believe that in promoting such
security, certain essentials must be borne in mind.

First, a strengthened indigenous mechanism is the
sine qua non for halting looting and sabotage, which
engender uncertainty and fear and prevent
humanitarian operations and the rehabilitation of basic
services.

Secondly, security operations need to be
conducted in ways that are sensitive to the welfare and
sentiments of the Iraqi people and sensitive to their
cultural and religious values.

Thirdly, to move the popular sentiments in Iraq
from suspicion to trust and from scepticism to hope, it
is essential to expedite the process of transition to
representative governance by the Iraqi people.

Security is, of course, the responsibility of the
Coalition Provisional Authority. United Nations
assistance in building and training Iraqi police and
security forces can be promoted and enlarged under the
provisions of operative paragraph 8 of resolution 1483
(2003). That resolution, as we noted on 21 May, also
opens the door to the friends of Iraq to contribute to the
welfare of the Iraqi people, including for the creation
of an environment of peace and security in the area.
Clearly, such contributions from Iraq's friends, who
share common values with the people of Iraq, should
be in response to the wishes and desires of the Iraqi
people themselves.

Paragraph 9 of resolution 1483 (2003) envisaged
the early creation of an Iraqi interim authority. In his
report, the Secretary-General emphasized "[the] need
for an Iraqi body, widely accepted as representative, to
be established so that the key issues facing Iraq can
begin to be addressed by Iraqis themselves" (para. 106).

Pakistan believes that the formation of the
Governing Council is a welcome first step in the
direction of returning governance and restoring
sovereignty to the people of Iraq as soon as possible.
We welcome the presence here of Mr. Adnan Pachaci,
Mr. Chalaby and Ms. Aqeela al-Hashemi, members of
the Governing Council, at our meeting today.

The Security Council, in its resolution 1483
(2003), expressed its resolve that the day when Iraqis
govern themselves must come quickly. In that context,
the Secretary-General has also indicated the need to set
out a clear and specific sequence of events leading to
the end of the military occupation of Iraq. The
establishment of a recognized representative
Government by the people of Iraq is the eventual
destination of the political process envisaged in
resolution 1483 (2003). The United Nations is well
placed to assist the Iraqi people in this process. We
hope that the Coalition Provisional Authority, in
coordination with the United Nations, will chart a
course of events leading up to the full and early
restoration of Iraq's sovereignty. The United Nations
engagement with the process would enhance its
legitimacy and credibility in the eyes of the
international community and, more importantly, in the
eyes of the Iraqi people themselves.

The economic independence of the Iraqi people
constitutes a fundamental element of their national
sovereignty. The administration of Iraq's economic and
natural resources is a trust that was given to the
Coalition Provisional Authority under resolution 1483
(2003) as a temporary measure due to the exigencies of
the situation. The administration of Iraq's resources
must be transparent and consistent with the provisions
of international law and resolution 1483 (2003). In
particular, we would like to indicate that the Security
Council, in paragraph 12 of resolution 1483 (2003),
decided that the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board would not only advise, but would also monitor
the transactions of the Development Fund through its
auditors. We hope that that consideration will be fully
reflected in the revised regulations of the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board.

Secondly, the provision of basic services has a
direct and reciprocal relationship with the
establishment of security. The Iraq oil-for-food
programme has catered to the needs of the Iraqi people
for many years. We need to consider how to retain the
basic operational capacity created under the oil-for-
food programme to deliver basic human needs and
reconstruction requirements to the Iraqi people.

Iraq faces a gigantic task of economic and social
reconstruction and rehabilitation. We believe that the
United Nations is best suited to lead and to coordinate
international efforts in this direction.

Pakistan has maintained that the Security
Council, in its deliberations on Iraq, has broadly
reflected the sentiments of the world's peoples. The
Security Council and the United Nations have
demonstrated extraordinary unity after the war to move
the situation towards normalization. Resolutions 1472
(2003) and 1483 (2003) represented sincere endeavors
on behalf of the Council and the international
community to come together to protect and promote the
interests of the Iraqi people. The Secretary-General and
his Special Representative have already made a
significant contribution to that end.

They must be provided full support for the
realization of the ongoing tasks listed in paragraph 98
of the report and for exploring ways and means to
broaden the contribution of the United Nations in the
areas outlined in paragraph 99 of the report. Pakistan
stands ready to extend all possible assistance and
cooperation to the Iraqi people to realize their
aspirations to maintain their unity, restore their
sovereignty, regain control over their national
resources and re-establish relations of fraternity and
friendship with all their neighbours and other States of
the region.

