Mr. Bellingham (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for calling this important
debate. I would also like to congratulate Germany for
the exemplary way it has presided over the Security
Council during this month.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy for his statement and for the tireless
work of the United Nations in support of peace for all
of the Sudan. I would also like to thank Vice-President
Machar Teny-Dhurgon and Ambassador Osman for
their statements, in which they reaffirmed their
commitment to good relations between their two
countries, whose futures are so closely intertwined. I
was especially impressed with the remark made by the
representative of the Sudan a moment ago that links are
as strong as ever between north and south, for they are
all Sudanese.

The birth of South Sudan, on 9 July, was a
historic event for both the newly born State and for the
Republic of the Sudan. Along with colleagues from
around the world, United Kingdom Foreign Secretary
William Hague was present at Juba to share in that
joyous occasion.

As a witness to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) in 2005, the United Kingdom bore
witness to the statesmanship that brought an end to
50 years of bitter civil war. Since then, as members of
the Security Council all of us have witnessed the
leadership shown by both parties, which delivered a
peaceful referendum on the future of South Sudan and
brought us to this momentous meeting today.

The United Kingdom and the United Nations
stand ready to assist the new State of South Sudan in
delivering security and prosperity for the people. We
recognize that needs are great, and time short, to make
a real difference in the lives of those who have waited
so long to realize the hope of a better life.

The establishment of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, which will work with
the wider United Nations family and the international
community to support the Government of South Sudan,
is an indication of our collective commitment to the
South Sudanese people.

The United Kingdom remains equally committed
to assisting the Government of the Sudan in delivering
security and prosperity for its people, including our
engagement on Sudanese national debt and our support
for United Nations peacekeeping and development
assistance to the Sudan.

But even as we recognize the extraordinary
achievement that the Sudan and South Sudan have
made in separating peacefully, many issues of Vital
importance to their people remain unresolved,
including citizenship, wealth and oil sharing and
border demarcation. As other speakers have stressed,
those must be resolved without delay. I therefore
welcome the commitment of both Governments to
pursue negotiations urgently, with the support of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
under the excellent leadership of former President
Mbeki. In that context, I also welcome the intention of
the United Nations to provide advice to the Security
Council on the implementation of the parties' 29 June
agreement on the management of the border and on the
role of the United Nations mission in Abyei.
As we meet to celebrate the friendship between
South Sudan and the Sudan, I am particularly
concerned about the people of Abyei and Southern

Kordofan, who continue to suffer the agony of conflict
and displacement. In Abyei, as a number of other
speakers have made clear, more than 113,000 people
have been displaced. With the rains setting, in, it is
vital that the Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
in Abyei, supported by the forthcoming deployment of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
be implemented in full and without delay, so that those
displaced can return home.

In Southern Kordofan, the continued fighting and
the hindering of humanitarian assistance to populations
in need are completely unacceptable. The United
Kingdom is also deeply concerned about reports of
ongoing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in this continuing conflict, reportedly
including aerial bombardment, extra-judicial killings,
forced displacement and arbitrary arrests and detention.
We unreservedly condemn that ongoing violence, and
call on the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement-North to agree an
immediate ceasefire.

Furthermore, we urge the Government of the
Sudan to grant immediate and full humanitarian access
throughout Southern Kordofan. We reiterate our
concern about the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan, whose mandate to protect
civilians and ensure humanitarian access is, sadly,
needed more than ever before at this time. In both
Abyei and Southern Kordofan, the parties must work
urgently to find lasting solutions that put the interests
of local populations at their heart.

In, Darfur too, a comprehensive peace agreement
is urgently needed. We remain deeply troubled by the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation and
urge all parties to cease fire immediately and to work
to create the necessary conditions for peace to succeed.

The challenges facing both the Sudan and South
Sudan are immense. On the other hand, the
opportunities for cooperation to transform the lives of
all Sudanese are equally great, as the Ambassador of
the Sudan pointed out. It remains the goal of the
Council, which has engaged so assiduously in support
of peace during the past year, to support both the
Sudan and South Sudan in achieving stability and
prosperity as two peaceful and economically successful
States living side by side in friendship. The primary
responsibility for the future of their peoples lies with
them. We therefore urge both Governments to show
now the leadership that delivered both the CPA and the
historic events of last Saturday.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Vice-
President Machar Teny-Dhurgon on the Council's
recommendation that the General Assembly should
welcome South Sudan as the newest Member of the
United Nations to work in partnership with the Sudan
and all Members to uphold key United Nations values
and principles, including peace, tolerance, the rule of
law, transparency and accountability. I am confident
that South Sudan will uphold those values and thus,
with pride, take up its place in the world community.

