Mr. Sveinsson (Iceland): Our leaders have just
agreed on the Sustainable Development Goals to be
fulfilled by 2030. This forward-looking vision of hope
makes it clear that sustainable development, peace and
security are tightly related.

However, the Arab Spring, which raised so many
hopes just a few years ago, has given way to a situation
that, for many, amounts to a living hell. A large part
of the population of Syria has either been displaced in
their own land or has left its country altogether, driven
out by vicious attacks from Government forces or by
rebel groups. Libya is fragmented and achieving unity
between the disparate factions is proving very hard.
Iraq is divided. War rages in Yemen. The Palestine/
Israel situation and the unresolved Western Sahara/
Morocco dispute continue to fester. Security, human
rights and the rule of law are heavily compromised in a
string of countries in the region.

Across the region extreme terrorist forces, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, succeed
in exploiting the situation, bringing further chaos and
misery. In addition, they pose a major threat to other
countries within and beyond the region, not least
through the spread of foreign terrorist fighters. The
fatal attraction of violence and extremist doctrines to
some young people in our societies presents a further
challenge.

Meanwhile neighbouring countries struggle to
address the massive humanitarian challenges. Turkey,
Lebanon and Jordan deserve praise for giving support
and safe havens to many millions. There has been a
marked increase in the number ofpeople from the region
trying to find refuge in Europe. But these numbers
are small compared to the millions of refugees in the
countries of origin and their neighbouring countries.

Iceland is determined to do its part in helping to
address the humanitarian aspects of this man-made
catastrophe. We believe it is most urgent to steer
assistance to the region. By improving the life of the
millions of displaced in the region, we will reduce the
desperation that drives them into the hands of traffickers.
The Icelandic Government has allocated $16 million to
supporting the vital work of frontline United Nations
institutions. We will also take an increased numbers of
refugees to Iceland.

Allow me to commend the Secretary-General for
holding the side event on migration today.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. I
would like to join others in urging the members of the
Security Council to renew their efforts to find ways
to act together and put differences aside. I take note
of the Secretary-General's observation in his recent
report on the future of United Nations peace operations
(S/2015/682). It states that his envoys find themselves in
situations where they search for ways to initiate political
processes even as Member States and regional actors
reinforce military and financial support to opposing
sides. The only way highly complex conflicts of the
type we see in this region will be resolved is through
united and concerted action by the Security Council.

