The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council for the month of May, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Christoph Heusgen,
Permanent Representative of Germany, for his service
as President of the Council for the month of April. I
am sure I speak for all the members of the Council
in expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador
Heusgen and his team for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Investing in peace: improving safety and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers

Letter dated 30 April 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/359)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guatemala, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, the
Sudan, Thailand, Ukraine, Uruguay, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Lieutenant
General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho, Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg, Director of the
Challenges Forum International Secretariat.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations; and Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.

Before we begin the consideration of the item on
the agenda, allow me to congratulate all Muslims in the
world on a Ramadan Kareem.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/359, which contains a letter dated
30 April 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Indonesia addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and presidential statements
addressing peacekeeping.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of peacekeeping as one of the most
effective tools available to the United Nations in
the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council reaffirms the basic
principles of peacekeeping, such as consent of the
parties, impartiality and non-use of force, except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate, and
recognizes that the mandate of each peacekeeping
mission is specific to the need and situation of the
country concerned, and that the Security Council
expects full delivery of the mandates it authorizes.

"The Security Council welcomes efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General to mobilize
all partners and stakeholders in support of more
effective United Nations peacekeeping through his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and recognizes
the added value that the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations has in
relation to training and capacity-building.

"The Security Council welcomes the United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, the United
Nations Chiefs of Defence Conference and the
United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit to
strengthen support to peacekeeping operations,
including in the area of training and capacity-
building, and underscores the importance of
fulfilling the pledges made by a number of
Member States at the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial in 2019.

"The Security Council looks forward to
the Secretary-General's annual briefing, due in
September 2019, further to resolution 2378 (2017)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2019/4.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antenio Guterres, and give him
the floor.


