Mr. Otunnu: First of all, the representative of the
Russian Federation made the point that some of the ideas
I put on the table go beyond the responsibility of the
Security Council. He is entirely right. I presented a broad
menu of ideas and possible initiatives, hoping very much
that the Council will provide the critical leadership, but
acknowledging that there are other actors within and

 

outside the United Nations whose own responsibilities and
mandates will necessarily be engaged.

Secondly, I very much agree with the observation
made that, in our advocacy work, in our undertaking of
initiatives, humanitarian action should necessarily be
consistent with the principles and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. That is the spirit in which I am
conducting my own work.

Thirdly, the point was made quite rightly when I
called for engaging the business community and
encouraging it to develop a voluntary code of conduct.
First, it has to be voluntary. No suggestion is being made
here to impose or to regulate the activities of business
entities. Secondly, this is not entirely unprecedented; there
are other areas in which an industry has begun to self-
regulate and to have some codes of conduct. My suggestion
would be to encourage this in the particular context of
particularly unacceptable abuses in situations of conflict,
where the activities of the business community provides a
certain machinery and fuels the abuse against civilian
populations. I also hope very much that this in fact might
constitute one element that can help to concretize the
Secretary-General's very important appeal, made a few
days, for a compact between the United Nations and the
business community.

Fourthly, the question was asked about my position on
the imposition of sanctions. Well, the impact of sanctions
on children is very much an integral part of my mandate
and, indeed, my Views have been well expressed elsewhere.
I did not want to repeat them here, but indeed I am very
much concerned about the impact of sanctions on children.
I have been deeply engaged with Mwalimu Nyerere in the
context of Burundi. I am delighted the sanctions have been
lifted and have some ideas about other sanctions situations.

I also agree very much with the point that has been
made that it is so important that humanitarian action not be
politicized, in the sense of not being exploited for political
purposes independent of the protection of the civilian
population. This would give humanitarian action a very bad
name and in the long term would jeopardize the protection
precisely of those around whom we seek to build a wall of
protection.

Where do non-State actors come into the picture? The
question was asked by the representatives of the
Netherlands and Gambia. In my own work, I have made it
my obligation to engage all entities in situations of conflict
whose actions have an impact on children, for better or for
worse, without prejudice to their political or juridical
status, but with a view to getting them to take measures
that can provide the broadest possible protection to
children. Thus, in Sri Lanka, I did make contact with the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam; in Sudan, I made
contact with the Sudanese People's Liberation Movement
and will do so again in a few weeks; in Sierra Leone,
with the Civil Defence Forces, a paramilitary group in
that country.

Finally, let me say again that the situation of
internally displaced persons is grave. It is an important
challenge to the international community. There is some
urgency about developing an agreed framework more
systematically to provide protection to this especially
affected category of vulnerable persons.

In conclusion, let me just say how much I appreciate
this initiative, your personal presence here today, Sir, and
the very important commitment and leadership which
Canada, your country, and you personally have been
providing in this area. I look forward to working very
closely with you to try to translate some of these ideas
into concrete measures on the ground that might make a
small difference to the protection of civilians, especially
children and women.
 

