Mr. Patriota (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the
outset to convey to you, Madam, our warm and brotherly
welcome to New York and to commend you for having
proposed a Security Council debate on today's very
timely theme.

(spoke in English)

I thank you for inviting me to participate in this
important debate in my capacity as the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The theme for this debate is
intrinsically linked to the Peacebuilding Commission's
mandate and its objective to build lasting and durable
peace and to prevent relapse into Violent conflict.

Inclusion is a central aspect of peacebuilding.
War and conflict within countries mar society's social
fabric with deep rifts and hatred. Mending these
ruptures often requires dialogue involving warring
parties and non-military groups, as well as mechanisms
to allow broader engagement in political processes,
social structures and development strategies. Political
exclusion is often a key factor behind the relapse into
violent conflict. Political exclusion is particularly
dangerous when it coincides with other forms of
inequality, for example along social, cultural, judicial
or economic lines. Grievances related to exclusion,
inequalities or outright discrimination i perceived
and real - are often at the root of armed conflict.

Competition over control of natural resources has
been shown to have a particularly negative impact
on the likelihood of violent conflict. There are many
situations where the benefits from natural resources are
unequally shared within a society and only a few are
benefiting. Groups seeking to control natural resources
exploit these grievances in order to create political
strife and fuel armed conflict.

These challenges highlight the interdependence
among security, justice and developmental initiatives in
the promotion of peace. The mutually reinforcing nature
of development, peace and security, and human rights
are well recognized and were central to the thinking
behind the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. This action, taken at the World Summit in 2005,
sought to reinvigorate and reinforce the broader United
Nations peace and security architecture.

Recognizing the interdependence between these
distinct approaches should not lead us to suggest that
the Council should take on responsibilities regarding
development matters. Other bodies, such as the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, are perhaps in a better
position to explore those issues, in conjunction with
United Nations-mandated development organizations. It
does, however, emphasize the need for us to coordinate
our approaches and work with greater synergy.

The Peacebuilding Commission is well positioned
to provide advice on issues that touch on the concerns
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
such as ways in which inclusive socioeconomic
development contributes to peace and security and
reduces the risk of emergence or relapse into violent
conflict. The Commission's advisory function to both
the General Assembly and the Security Council should
be fully utilized to this end. The upcoming review of
the peacebuilding architecture should help us in further
reinforcing this role of the Commission.

I would like to point to a few cases where the
Peacebuilding Commission has contributed to more
inclusive societies.

In Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission worked
closely last year with the Government of Burundi, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the country team to promote a more inclusive political
environment. Despite concerns about some isolated
security incidents involving the youth wings ofpolitical
parties, these joint efforts have helped to promote
greater trust among the Government of Burundi,
political parties and civil society. The deepened
political dialogue involving Government and political
parties contributed to the consensual adoption ofa road
map for free, transparent, inclusive and peaceful 2015
elections, a code of conduct for the upcoming elections,
and a new electoral code, which was adopted by the
National Assembly in April 2014, before being ratified
by the President. Currently, the electoral process
continues, and the voters registration phase ended
with about 3.7 million registered. The Commission
continues to encourage all stakeholders to maintain
an environment conducive to peaceful elections and to
reject violence as a way for achieving political goals.

In Guinea, the Commission supported the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa to facilitate a dialogue between the
Government and political parties. The dialogue process
resulted in an agreement that laid a solid foundation
for successful and inclusive parliamentary elections in
2013. Although there are still considerable challenges
ahead, the Parliament, inaugurated in 2014, may be
considered inclusive and representative of the political
groups of Guinea.

In Guinea-Bissau, the Peacebuilding Fund, in
collaboration with the Commission, has supported the
set-up of the first ever Women Situation Room - the
Case de Veille - which has greatly contributed to
increase women's representation and participation
in the monitoring of the Presidential and Legislative
elections.

In Sierra Leone, the Government and the
international community have shown that a rapid
recovery from war is possible. Sierra Leone has
established political stability, restored basic security,
reinvigorated democratic processes, built important
national institutions, and generated economic growth.
In the process, it has also proved that the United Nations
can tackle complex peacebuilding and development
challenges in a coordinated fashion. It has demonstrated
that investment by international and regional partners
in peace can reap significant dividends.

Let me stress the importance of gender-based
inclusion as a key element in every peacebuilding effort
in war-ravaged societies. In this context. I wish to point
out that the Commission has also called specifically for
the inclusion of women in peacebuilding and political
processes and economic recovery, including through a
political declaration adopted in September 2013 and a
special event in September 2014.

In Liberia, the Commission has advocated strongly
for an inclusive reconciliation process. The statement
of mutual commitments, which the Commission
concluded with the Government of Liberia in November
2010, highlighted inclusive reconciliation as a priority.
On this basis, the Commission actively supported the
launch of Liberia's National Reconciliation Road Map
in 2013 after a two-year consultation process.

The Commission has drawn attention to the
possible political implications of the Ebola epidemic in
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as the disease has
threatened to erode social cohesion and undermine
the functioning of key State institutions. An inclusive
recovery process that addresses perceived inequalities
among groups and reinforced key political institutions
will be important to protecting the gains made in the
peacebuilding processes.

In its third informal interactive dialogue with
members of the Security Council in July 2014, the
Commission underscored the importance of focusing
attention on inclusive political processes that would
reinforce national ownership, rebuild the fabric of
fractured societies and establish a new social contract.
This should be the cornerstone of our collective efforts
aimed at building lasting peace in countries emerging
from conflict.

As the General Assembly and the Security
Council prepare to conduct the 10-year review of the
peacebuilding architecture this year, we should seize
the opportunity to ensure that the United Nations
response lives up to the aspirations ofmillions ofpeople
in countries emerging from conflict. The relevance
and effectiveness of the United Nations must be
assessed against its ability to help create the necessary
conditions for inclusive security, human rights, justice
and economic development.
