Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
debate on the question of Afghanistan. Likewise, I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin,
for his statement, as well as for the welcome expressed
to me.

Afghanistan faces an arduous task in restoring
stability and rebuilding the country. Recently, thanks
to the efforts made by the Government and its people,
Afghanistan has registered noticeable progress in
terms of building and reconstruction, and the transition
process has entered a critical stage.

In order to build an Afghanistan of stability
and prosperity in which different communities live
in harmony and, ultimately, realize the goal of an
Afghanistan governed by Afghans, we need to support
the long-term continuing efforts of Afghanistan and all
parties concerned. Continuing support and help from
the international community will be required.

I wish to emphasize the following points.

First, China welcomes the recent adoption of two
important laws, the electoral law and the structure
law; the appointment of the head of the Independent
Election Commission; and the fact that the country
has arrived at the stage of nominating candidates for
the presidency. We hope that all Afghan parties will
continue their dialogue and consultations, address their
differences appropriately and promote preparations for
the elections so as to ensure their success. That will be a
milestone in the process ofa fully successful transition
and transformation in Afghanistan.

Secondly, with regard to the frequent occurrence
of security incidents in Afghanistan, which have
resulted in large numbers of civilian casualties, China
wishes to register its concern. We call on all parties
to observe international humanitarian law and related
international law.

The Afghan National Security Forces have entered
the final stage of preparations before they can take
over security responsibilities. We hope that all parties
concerned will adopt a responsible attitude, hand over
security responsibilities to the Afghan Government, and
focus on building the capacity of the Afghan military
and police so as to ensure the successful completion of
the security transition.

Thirdly, China supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned national reconciliation process, with a view to
achieving peace and stability. We support the active
role played by the High Peace Council in the promotion
of national reconciliation and welcome the provision of
additional support by Pakistan and other countries of
the region. We hope that the international community
will support and work with the Afghan Government and
people in their efforts to create an enabling external
environment for the reconciliation process.

Fourthly, peacebuilding in and the reconstruction
of Afghanistan will require strong support from the
international community. The international community
must respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan and honour its
commitment to support Afghanistan, in accordance
with the priorities set out in the national development
strategy for Afghanistan, and support the strengthening
of its capacity for autonomous economic and social
development.
China supports the United Nations in general and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in particular with respect to its playing a leading role in
the coordination of international efforts to help resolve
the Afghan question and rebuild the country.

Fifthly, China supports Afghanistan in its efforts
to strengthen its friendly relations with neighbouring
countries, conduct regional cooperation and actively
tackle such common challenges as terrorism and
narcotics. China will host the fourth Ministerial meeting
of the Istanbul Process in Beijing next year, thereby
further strengthening efforts to promote cooperation
among the countries of the region and peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan and in the region.

At the same time, related regional cooperation
initiatives should respect the concerns of the countries
ofthe region; make full use ofthe Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and other regional organizations; and be
conducted on the basis of consensus, through extensive
consultations.

China has long been committed to developing
strategic partnerships with Afghanistan. We follow
closely and have been actively involved in the peace
and reconstruction process in Afghanistan. China
will continue to provide assistance to Afghanistan
to the extent of its ability and to play a constructive
role in realizing peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan.

