Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council on
Afghanistan, a country very much at the forefront of
Canadian minds.

We thank the Secretary-General for his frank and
forthright report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2007/152). Progress there is undeniable. Afghans
have their own parliament; refugees have returned in
large numbers; women are starting their own business
and sending their daughters to school. Yet we cannot
afford to mince words about the real and pressing
challenges that continue to confront Afghanistan.
Insurgency-related violence, driven in part by a
tolerance for weak governance and corruption,
represents a real obstacle to the development of
political, social and economic rights in Afghanistan.

I would like to echo the Secretary-General's
words of gratitude to his Special Representative, Tom
Koenigs, and his determined and courageous staff in
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I would also like to thank Mr. Koenigs and
Mr. Costa for their very helpful briefings today.

The United Nations is the bedrock of the
international community's engagement in Afghanistan.
We look to UNAMA to guide the international
community in its efforts to help Afghans rebuild their
country.

Canada is committed to the emergence of a
stable, secure, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan.
Both Canada's development assistance - more than
$1.2 billion over 10 years - and our force contribution
- 2,500 troops in the south - are a testament to that
commitment. Since the Secretary-General submitted
his last report on Afghanistan (S/2006/727), Canada
has increased its funding by up to $200 million,
making Canada Afghanistan's third-largest bilateral
donor. We have deployed a squadron of tanks and
support personnel to southern Afghanistan.

Canada appreciates the generous contributions of
our many partners in that country, and we appeal to
those who can do more, to do more. There is no
shortage of need in that brave country that is struggling
to reconstitute itself after decades of violent conflict.

Canada welcomes UNAMA's decision to make
2007 a year of focus on the provinces. That means a
year of focus on the Afghan people, for the vast
majority of Afghans - at least 90 per cent - live in
the cities, towns and villages outside Kabul. The
Afghan Government, working with the international
community, can and must build central institutions and
cultivate national policies. But we cannot lose sight of
the millions who live outside of the capital.

What does focussing on the provinces mean in
practice? It means that the Afghan Government and the
international community, including UNAMA, must
make greater efforts to extend their presence and
programming into the provinces. Focussing on the
provinces also means nurturing sound governance there
- in provinces, districts and communities. Afghans
have known tyrannical leaders, and they have
experienced the oppression of gun-barrel politics.
Today Afghans are seeking leaders who will provide
them with security; who will foster the conditions
necessary for modest prosperity; and who will
acknowledge their right to determine their own
destinies. From governors to provincial councils to the
Afghan National Police, there must be mechanisms in
place to ensure the integrity of officials, and, where
leadership falters, qualified and capable Afghans must
be encouraged to come forward.

In that vein, Canada hopes that the senior
appointments panel - both a short-term Compact
benchmark and a key element of the Action Plan on
Peace, Justice and Reconciliation - will lead to better
governance. Canada is working with the Afghan
Government to establish a secretariat to support that
panel.

Focussing on the provinces also means rolling out
national-level programmes in the provinces. The
international community, through its 25 provincial
reconstruction teams, must work with the Afghan
Government to ensure even, country-wide
reconstruction and development. The National
Solidarity Programme, which aims to strengthen local-
level participation in the country's development
process by building the capacity of community
development councils, is an excellent example of
programme implementation at the grassroots level.
Canada is a strong supporter of that programme, and
only two weeks ago we pledged up to $55 million in
additional funding for it through the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund.

(spoke in French)

For UNAMA, focussing on the provinces also
means expanding the United Nations presence country-
wide. We welcome UNAMA's stated intention to
maintain its regional offices as well as to increase the

number of its provincial offices this year, including
new offices in Day Kundi and Ghor provinces.
However, as the Secretary-General makes clear in his
report, UNAMA's expansion requires concomitant
resources. UNAMA, with the support of the
international community, must ensure that its offices
are adequately staffed and that its staff members have
access to the security they require to venture outside
the wire and effectively undertake their outreach and
coordination functions.

Canada is proud to be part of a truly international
effort to help the people of Afghanistan. We are among
the more than 60 countries contributing to
Afghanistan's development and reconstruction. We are
in the good company of 36 nations, serving as part of a
United Nations-authorized, NATO-led mission to
stabilize the country.

In conclusion, Canada will continue to do its
utmost to support the United Nations and UNAMA,
which play a vital role in ensuring the success of the
international community's efforts in Afghanistan.

