The President (interpretation from Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

The Government and people and China express their
profound condolences on the passing of His Highness
Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa, Amir of the State of
Bahrain. His Highness made a significant contribution to
peace and development in Bahrain and his region as well as
to the friendly relations between China and Bahrain. I
should like to request the representative of Bahrain to
convey our heartfelt sympathy to the family of His
Highness.

We are pleased to see that the situation in Sierra
Leone is finally improving, thanks to the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and, in particular, the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG). The Chinese Government firmly supports the
elected Government of Sierra Leone and appreciates the
dual track policy pursued by President Kabbah and his
determination to achieve national reconciliation through
dialogue. We urge the rebels to recognize unconditionally
the legitimate Government, headed by President Kabbah,
put an end to the atrocities against civilians, lay down their
arms immediately and take part in a dialogue with the
Government in good faith so as to avoid further bloodshed
and conflict.

We call upon the countries concerned to abide strictly
by international law and to genuinely respect the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity
of Sierra Leone. China is gravely concerned about outside
support for and participation in the rebel forces. We
should like to reiterate the importance of paragraphs 7
and 8 of the draft resolution before us and emphasize our
support for the necessary measures to be taken by the
Security Council in this regard. The United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) is a
concrete embodiment of the Security Council's support
for the Government and the people of Sierra Leone. We
support the extension of the mandate of UNOMSIL.

In response to the appeal by Sierra Leone and
ECOWAS, China has provided emergency assistance to
the people of Sierra Leone and the ECOWAS members
concerned, in the form of, respectively, material for
civilian use and materiel. We will continue to provide
help as far as we are able, through bilateral channels.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1999/262) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President (interpretation from Chinese): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1231 (1999).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.45 pm.

