Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Nigeria for
scheduling today's meeting and we join colleagues in
expressing condolences over the passing away of the
Force Commander of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

We Wish to comment today on the Security
Council's work in August and in July, when we had
our presidency. We see the wrap-up sessions as an
opportunity to critically examine how the 15 Council
members can work together more effectively to
deliver better results from the broader United Nations
membership that we represent.

Over the last two months, not everything has gone
the way we would have liked. But we have seen some
striking examples of what the Council can do when we
achieve unity. The unanimous adoption of the resolution
2231 (2015) on 20 July (see S/PV.7488), endorsing the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear
programme, demonstrated this fact, on an issue of
great importance to international peace and security.
On 17 August, we adopted a critically important
presidential statement on Syria (S/PRST/2015/15),
expressing support for the United Nations Special
Envoy's approach on the way forward (see S/PV.7504).
It was an all too rare example of the Council coming
together on an issue of the highest priority.

To achieve unity and the strongest outcomes,
all 15 Council members should be able to contribute
fully. Each of us has interests and perspectives that can
add value. We are not naive about the dynamics that
persist among permanent members and the difficulty
in reaching consensus, but we believe that an inclusive
approach to decision-making maximizes the chances of
achieving unity and of having the Council speak with
one voice.

New Zealand supports looking at how to improve
the Council's decision-making practices. During
our presidency, we encouraged interactive and frank
discussions on a range of topics, including in informal
formats outside of the United Nations. We convened a
working breakfast for Permanent Representatives at the
start of July and hosted a separate informal discussion
where we encouraged members to speak freely about
Council decision-making.

In the Consultations Room, in addition to the
scheduled programme of work, we believe Council
members should talk about matters as the need arises.
One of the most dynamic discussions we have had
since joining the Council was a discussion in July on
the Secretary-General appointment process. We know
there are different Views within the Council, which is
one of the reasons that we raised it.

We appreciated the Secretary-General briefing
members in person on his response to the latest
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
encourage strongly such updates by the Secretary-
General on issues of high importance.

One of the features we saw in July and this
month has been the value of discussions under "Other
matters" 4 for example, of Burundi and Guinea-
Bissau. Some of those discussions were initiated by
Council members, others by the Secretariat. We see
that both as good use ofthe Council's time and as a way
to ensure the Council's close monitoring of situations.
These can become substantive discussions, and it is part
of efforts to improve our working methods. We would
be interested in considering how to make optimal use of
the time available under "Other matters", and for there
to be more transparency when topics have been raised
for discussion in advance.

Finally, we congratulate you, Madam President, on
your presidency. We consider the month to have been
very well run and we have appreciated the tone and
interactivity of the discussions. For the coming month,
we wish the Russian Federation every success with its
presidency.

