Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
considers that the resolution that has just been adopted
unanimously is a good resolution for the following
reasons. The resolution strengthens the role and
authority of the Security Council. That was the main
and constant objective of France throughout the
negotiations which have just concluded. That objective
was reflected in our request that a two-stage approach
be established and complied with, ensuring that the
Security Council would maintain control of the process
at each stage.

That objective has been attained: in the event that
the Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) or the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reports to
the Security Council that Iraq has not complied with its
obligations, the Council would meet immediately to
evaluate the seriousness of the violations and draw the
appropriate conclusions. France welcomes the fact that
all ambiguity on this point and all elements of
automaticity have disappeared from the resolution.

As we wished, the resolution we have just
adopted also gives the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC and the Director General of IAEA a clear
mandate and stronger authority to carry out their
mission. Their teams will be able to have immediate
and unrestricted access to all sites they wish to inspect.
They will be able to hear, at their convenience, all Iraqi
leaders involved in activities covered by the resolution.

Multinational composition will guarantee impartiality.
They will have all the technical and logistical
arrangements necessary to carry out their tasks.

Naturally, the inspectors will have to count on the
complete cooperation of the Iraqi authorities to verify
that Iraq does not have weapons of mass destruction
and to ensure its disarmament. To begin with, Iraq
within seven days must unambiguously state its
decision to apply in full this resolution and to
cooperate actively with the inspectors. It must within
30 days provide a declaration which will facilitate their
work.

France is fully confident that Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei will make full use of the new powers they
have been given and that they will rigorously and
professionally discharge the essential responsibilities
entrusted to them by the Security Council. With their
mandate and greater authority, their teams must now
proceed immediately to Iraq to resume inspections.

In the course of the day, France, Russia and China
will make public a joint statement stressing the scope
of the text of the resolution just adopted.

This resolution represents a success for the
Security Council and the United Nations. That success
must now become a success for peace. As President
Jacques Chirac of France said yesterday, all of France's
diplomatic efforts in recent weeks were directed
towards giving peace a chance. In other words, those
efforts sought to achieve the peaceful disarmament of
Iraq. France's goal is to work tirelessly to ensure
stability in the region.

It is against that backdrop, and through collective
responsibility, that the efforts of the international
community to disarm Iraq should be carried out. War
can only be the last recourse. The rules of the game
spelled out by the Security Council are clear and
demanding and require the unfailing cooperation of
Iraqi leaders. If Iraq wants to avoid confrontation it
must understand that this is its last opportunity.

