Ms. Mueller: Events in Yemen over the past several
weeks have shown yet again just how volatile and
devastating this war is. Its impact is seen most clearly
in the suffering and injustice inflicted on millions of
civilians. For months now we have advocated progress
on five key priorities to reduce the suffering in Yemen.
The Security Council endorsed those priorities in its
resolution 2451 (2018).

I would like to review where these five priorities
stand today, specifically: first, respect for international
humanitarian law; secondly, unhindered humanitarian
access; thirdly, funding for the United Nations response
plan; fourthly, the economy; and, fifthly, the urgent
need for peace.

First, with regard to respect for international
humanitarian law, unfortunately, the conduct of
hostilities in Yemen continues to have devastating
consequences for civilians and civilian infrastructure.
As we heard, fighting in Aden earlier this month
between Government forces and forces affiliated
with the Southern Transitional Council resulted in
300 killed or injured, civilians among them. For days,
residents were trapped in their homes as clashes,
including using heavy weapons, raged in densely
populated neighbourhoods. Houses were damaged or
destroyed, and the pipes of a major water system were
damaged, temporarily restricting the water supply to
200,000 people.

Violence has since subsided in Aden, although
tensions remain, but fierce fighting continues
elsewhere, including in Abyan last night. Last week,
strikes on a family home in Hajjah killed 12 civilians,
including six children; another 16 were wounded. The
week before that, an attack on a market in Sa'ada killed
or injured 40 people as they shopped for food and other
necessities. Eighteen children were among the Victims.

The images from those and similar incidents are
the stuff of nightmares. De-escalation across Yemen is
urgently needed, ideally through a nationwide ceasefire
that would end all violence.

But ceasefire or not, all parties must uphold
international humanitarian law. All feasible steps
must be taken to avoid harm to civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Such steps include verifying targets,
taking precautions in the choice of weapons and
cancelling an attack if it is expected to cause
disproportionate civilian harm.

The second point relates to humanitarian access.
Let me begin with some good news. After months of
discussion, the World Food Programme (WFP) and
Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities have now signed an
agreement that includes detailed technical procedures
to protect food aid from being diverted. The agreement
will also strengthen the methods used to identify the
people who need food assistance. Delays in finalizing
the agreement have meant that the WFP had to, as a
last resort, suspend food assistance to 850,000 people
in Sana'a city two months ago. Distributions are
now restarting.

As mentioned by the Special Envoy, Ansar Allah
authorities have also approved plans for a United Nations
assessment of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. After years
without maintenance, the tanker is at risk of rupturing.
It is storing an estimated 1.1 million barrels of oil,
and a spill would create a major environmental and
humanitarian disaster. The United Nations assessment
team arrived in Djibouti today and is scheduled to
travel to the tanker next week. Cooperation and support
from all stakeholders are key to this work.

While we welcome these steps forward, we
must also emphasize that many problems remain
unresolved. Humanitarian agencies continue to face
severe restrictions. In the north, Ansar Allah-affiliated
authorities have imposed more than 50 formal directives
and dozens of informal directives in recent months.
These directives at times overlap or contradict each other.
They are further complicated by a continuous stream of
unofficial changes and new policies. Currently, more
than 100 humanitarian projects are awaiting agreement
by Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities in the north.

In Government-controlled areas, official
regulations are less heavy, but delays persist in getting
humanitarian projects up and running. Allow me
to cite a specific example. The multi-donor Yemen
Humanitarian Fund currently has 39 projects awaiting
clearance. Those projects are ready to assist 2.5 million
people across the country through cholera programmes,
emergency food, nutrition and protection services.
Thirty-two of the 39 projects are stuck with Ansar
Allah-affiliated authorities in the north, while the rest
are awaiting approval by the Government of Yemen. On
average, they have been stalled for more than 90 days.

It is difficult to understand why such lengthy delays
are necessary in a severe emergency. International
humanitarian law requires all parties to take steps to
facilitate humanitarian relief for civilians in need.

Beyond bureaucratic impediments, agencies also
continue to face movement restrictions, interference
and harassment, as well as insecurity.

However, despite these challenges, the United
Nations and partners are staying and delivering.
As tensions rose in Aden in early August, the World
Health Organization and UNICEF, working with health
authorities, vaccinated nearly 400,000 people against
cholera. When clashes erupted the following week,
more than 300 United Nations staff remained in Aden,
and they will continue to do so. A regular United
Nations flight arrived in Aden yesterday, bringing in
additional humanitarian workers.

Yemen remains the world's largest humanitarian
operation, with food, water, health care and other services
being provided across the country. Humanitarian
agencies working through the United Nations response
plan are assisting an average of 12 million people every
month. But much of this is about to stop.

That brings me to my third point, namely, funding
for the aid operation. Since last month's briefing
(see S/PV.8578), there has been no major increase in
funding for the 2019 response plan. Only 34 per cent of
plan requirements have been met. At this time last year,
the humanitarian response plan was 65 per cent funded,
thanks to generous contributions from the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, as well
as many other donors. That funding saved millions of
lives. Since the pledging conference six months ago,
nearly all donors have paid most or all of their 2019
pledges. Some have paid even more. But the largest
donors, Yemen's neighbours in the coalition, have so
far paid only a modest share of what they promised.

Essential programmes are now closing down. The
Council heard last month about the cancellation of
vaccination campaigns, supplies for health facilities
and cholera prevention programmes. The cuts are now
much deeper. In the next few days, water and sanitation
programmes will stop in four governorates, leaving
300,000 displaced people at extreme risk of cholera. By
the end of September, such programmes for a further
1 million people will also stop. In September, we will
be forced to shut down life-saving programmes for
2.5 million malnourished children. As an immediate
consequence, more than 23,000 babies suffering
from severe malnutrition - babies whose lives could
otherwise be saved - will risk death.

This is a tragedy because we know that, with
adequate resources, we can save millions of lives and
reduce people's suffering. We know that we can roll
back cholera because we did it last year. A smart, highly
effective cholera response saw new cases plummet from
1 million in 2017 to 380,000 in 2018. But new cases
have already exceeded halfa million this year. We have
also recorded more than 800 deaths, more than five
times as many as we saw in the same period last year.
We also know we can prevent famine, because we
are doing it right now. A new assessment has found
that the risk of famine, although still very serious,
might be receding in some places. This comes after we
doubled food aid in areas with the worst hunger and
expanded other programmes. Without funding, we will
lose this initial progress and the risk of famine will
again intensify.

And we also know that the United Nations and our
partners are uniquely placed to deliver positive results.
Our programmes reach all 333 districts across Yemen.
Our nationwide presence and relationships enable
us to assist people in all locations based strictly on
their needs.

Independent third-party monitoring confirms that
the overwhelming majority of our aid goes where it
is supposed to. When concerns emerge, we act. The
Council saw this in June when the WFP suspended
food aid in Sana'a over diversion concerns, which have
now been addressed. Individual agencies also maintain
rigorous internal controls. United Nations agencies
commissioned eight internal audits this year, and three
more are planned.

The fourth point is the economy - a key driver
of humanitarian needs that is getting worse. Yemen's
currency is again losing value, sinking to YRI600 to the
dollar, versus YRI215 before the crisis. A recent report
by the International Monetary Fund predicts further
depreciation, with inflation rates up to 45 per cent. That
means prices of food, fuel and other essentials - almost
all of which must be imported - will rise even higher
for ordinary Yemenis. Many people already cannot
afford current prices.

In the past, substantial injections offoreign exchange
through the Central Bank of Yemen have stabilized the
exchange rate. We hope Yemen's partners will again
provide that support. At the same time, we understand
that the Government is considering new regulations on
commercial fuel imports. Fuel is essential to running
generators, distributing food to markets and carrying
out many other activities. Its availability is also a key
determinant for the prices of food, water and other
essentials. The use of any mechanism to regulate those
imports risks worsening the humanitarian situation.
The final point is peace. Only a political solution in
Yemen can sustainably address the country's enormous
humanitarian crisis. The Council recognized that
important link in resolution 2451 (2018). We call on all
stakeholders to support the Special Envoy's efforts to
end the conflict as swiftly as possible. Peace is needed
now more than ever.

