The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, Without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/603, containing the nineteenth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Members of the Council also have before
them document S/2005/614, which contains the text of
a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to a vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1628 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

