Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian):
I join other speakers in expressing my appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting,
which deals with a very important issue.

The Arab world is living through radical and
painful transformations. Their impact is already being
felt and will be felt for quite a long time, both in the
region and globally. Of particular concern are the
attempts to instigate inter-ethnic and interreligious
discord on a global scale. It is necessary to stand in
the way of those whose actions insult the feelings of
believers and set people of different religions against
one another. It is equally unacceptable to respond to
provocations with acts of terror, which can have no
justification, especially when diplomats and United
Nations personnel are the targets thereof.

The process of change is caused by the aspirations
of people to a better life and justice and to realize their
political rights and freedoms. We share and understand
those feelings. They are in line with the philosophy
underlying Russian foreign policy, which is based on
the assumption that all peoples should determine their
own destiny independently.

The developments in the Middle East and North
Africa confirm once again the need to respect the key
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, above
all the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
non-interference in their domestic affairs and the
non-use or threat of force.

Speaking today at the Kremlin, President Vladimir
Putin emphasized that the primacy of international law
must be ensured in the international arena and within
States. The path to a lasting solution to problems
in that respect is through extensive dialogue and the
achievement of national reconciliation.
Today the strife that has engulfed the Arab world
is concentrated in the situation in Syria. We condemn
all acts of violence and violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, whoever the
perpetrator may be - the Government of Syria or
the armed opposition. However, a significant share of
responsibility for the continuing bloodshed rests upon
those States that are instigating Bashar Al-Assad's
opponents to reject the ceasefire and dialogue and at the
same time demanding the unconditional capitulation
of the regime. Such an approach is unrealistic and, in
fact, encourages the use of terrorist tactics, to which the
armed opposition is resorting to more and more often.
The refusal by some members of the Security Council
to condemn those terrorist acts is of deep concern
and calls into question the fundamental role of the
Security Council in countering terrorism in all of its
manifestations.

There can be no doubt that military methods,
and especially outside military interference, pose
serious threats to regional security, with unpredictable
consequences. A sustainable settlement can be achieved
only through negotiations and a quest for compromises
that take into account the interests of all religious and
ethnic groups of Syrian society.

There is a basis for achieving that goal: the
communique of the action group, endorsed in Geneva
on 30 June as follow-up to resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012) and the Kofi Annan plan. That
communique reflects a consensus among all Security
Council permanent members, members of the League
of Arab States, Turkey, the European Union and the
United Nations Secretary-General. We strongly believe
that the Geneva communique is still appropriate and
relevant.

In that connection, I wish to call attention to the
adoption today by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa - the
BRICS group - of a joint statement that objectively
assesses the way out of the Syrian crisis and supports
the Geneva communique as a basis for such actions.
It is the basis for achieving consensus in the Security
Council, the lack of which has been noted by some of
our colleagues. The Geneva communique is objective
and is the most realistic basis for such a consensus, in
particular since all five permanent members signed it.

We hope that the Geneva consensus will also help
Lakhdar Brahimi and his team to explore ways to
overcome the crisis. We welcome any other constructive
proposals on coordinating the international community's
actions that could compel all Syrian parties to put an
end to the violence and come to the negotiating table.
In that context, we see some potential in the initiative
of the President of Egypt, Mohamed Morsy.

Today as never before, many problems have
accumulated on the political map of the Middle East.
To date, no significant progress has been made in
addressing them. There is no doubt that the political
transformations that have been launched must be
carried out to their logical end, taking into account
the views of all groups of society in order to prevent
the recurrence of turmoil. It is also clear that without
modernization in the economic and the social spheres,
it is hardly possible to make the Arab peoples feel
that change is for the better and become immune to
extremist attitudes.

One resource to explore in that regard is the
responsible and targeted cooperation of the international
community. It is essential that all outside players provide
help to strengthen positive processes in the Arab world,
including through mechanisms such as the Deauville
Partnership with Arab Countries in Transition.

Interaction with members of the League of Arab
States is among the strategic priorities of Russia's
foreign policy. Our country has never had any colonial
interests in the Middle East or North Africa and has
never unleashed wars for resources in those areas or
imposed its configuration of the political map of the
region. From the beginning our presence there has
been aimed at promoting communication among
nations and the coexistence of the various cultures and
religions - what is commonly now called the dialogue
of civilizations.

Based on many years of friendship and partnership
between Russia and countries ofthe Arab world, we are
today promoting reasonable and mutually respectful
dialogue on the whole range of regional issues and are
negotiating new forms of interaction. The Russian-
Arab Cooperation Forum has been established as a
framework for implementing trade, economic, cultural

and humanitarian projects. The Russian-Arab Business
Council has also been launched.

We believe that the League of Arab States should
play a concrete role in overcoming the challenges
facing the Middle East and North Africa. It has in its
arsenal a thorough knowledge of national psychology,
traditions and historical experience and the capacity to
formulate common goals for the region. The League's
effectiveness will significantly increase as it builds its
anti-crisis measures on the basis of giving priority to
dialogue, mediation and peacekeeping, as provided for
under the United Nations Charter. In general, we believe
that it is essential to strengthen the overall coordination
of the efforts of League and the United Nations.

We share a common position with members of
the League of Arab States, namely, that despite the
dramatic nature of the Arab Spring, such processes
should not preclude the pursuit of ways to settle long-
standing problems in the Middle East. First of all, that
means achieving a just settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the existing international legal basis, which,
as we know, includes the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted
at the League ofArab States summit in Beirut in March
2002 and supported by the Security Council. Russia
resolutely calls for intensified efforts by the Middle
East Quartet mediators, in close cooperation with the
League of Arab States, for an early resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli talks. We believe that it is a serious
mistake that the Quartet was unable to hold a ministerial
meeting on the sidelines of the general debate of the
current General Assembly session.

The recent outbreak of tension in the region, the
attacks against foreign embassies in a number of
countries and the death of American diplomats in Libya
have again affirmed the need for an uncompromising
fight against terrorism. It is essential that terrorists
who are attempting to benefit from the transformation
process be unanimously banished by the international
community everywhere, be they in Libya, Iraq, Yemen
or Syria.

There should be no double standards. All States
without exception should ensure the careful and
respectful treatment of the historical, cultural and
religious values of all peoples and should refrain from
insulting the feelings of believers. The most important
task is to prevent the proliferation of new threats from
emerging in the shadow of today's transformation
processes: radicalization ofthe public mood, instigation
of inter-religious and intra-religious clashes, and
growth in the uncontrolled traffic of drugs, weapons
and militants.

A significant added value could be created by
the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery in the Middle
East. That issue was raised by the Secretary General of
the League of Arab States, Mr. Nabil Elaraby. Russia
will continue to promote the earliest implementation
of that important initiative and support the efforts of
countries of the region and the League of Arab States,
which should naturally play a leading role in convening
a conference on the issue.
