Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today's briefers for their contributions to our discussion.
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix provided
us with a strategic outlook that reveals the broader
perspective that the Security Council needs in its
deliberations. The Police Commissioners' follow-up
briefings gave us a picture of the everyday challenges
and achievements of police officers in the field. I
would also like to thank the presidency for inviting
Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona, who shared with us the
highly valuable perspective of a host nation, crucial
to building partnerships, which from the perspective
of United Nations Police is the key element to
understanding current and emerging challenges and
eventually delivering efficiently on the mandate of the
missions of the United Nations.
The importance of the United Nations Police in
peacekeeping was highlighted in the 2016 external
review of the functions, structure and capacity of the
United Nations police mandated by resolution 2185
(2014), and recently reiterated in the Secretary-General's
report assessing the Police Division (S/2018/1183).
It is also reflected in one of the themes of this year's
United Nations Police Week in its vision of the United
Nations Police as the system-wide service provider.
And while we may see that growing importance as an
improvement in the system, it comes with a heavy load
oftasks and responsibilities for the Police Division here
at United Nations Headquarters. In that regard, my first
question is for the leadership of the Police Division.
Is the United Nations Police already well equipped in
terms of numbers and quality to provide that service?
And what are the three capabilities or tools that are
most needed to take on that task?

For my second point, I would like to touch on
the responsibility to protect and the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and to ask whether the Police Commissioners
can already see results for them on the ground. That
said, and bearing in mind the commitments that were
made by police-contributing countries a year ago, I
would be interested to hear ifthe Police Commissioners
have the necessary capabilities and skills at their
disposal to carry out their missions' mandates
effectively. I am referring in particular to such crucial
capabilities as language and communications skills, as
well as the meaningful participation of female police
officers in community policing. But I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix, who has already responded
to my question.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize the importance
of the role of the police component in contributing to
resolving crises and sustaining peace. Unfortunately,
we do not have unlimited resources, and the mandated
tasks of police, which can be instrumental, should
therefore be a part of a systematic approach, which
would help to more effectively utilize missions' limited
resources through a synergy effect.

