Allow me to extend my warm congratulations to you, Mr. President, on the Niger's accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September. I would like to wish you and all your colleagues every success in the conduct of the work of the Council, and I take this opportunity to reiterate Cete d'Ivoire's ongoing support. I also congratulate Ambassador Djani on the outstanding work accomplished during the Indonesian presidency of the Council last month. I welcome the effective participation of Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), and Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary- General for Africa, and commend them on the relevance of their contributions to this open debate. And, finally, I note with satisfaction the presence of Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and Chair of the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie. My delegation welcomes the holding of this open debate on the theme "Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and_ subregional organizations: role of the International Organization of la Francophonie". It comes at a very opportune time in the context of the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the OIF. It would also like to underline the eminent role played by the Republic of the Niger in the creation, on 20 March 1970 in Niamey, of the organization, which promotes, inter alia, peace and solidarity. Since then, the OIF's 88 member States and the 300 million francophones spread over the five continents celebrate 20 March of each year as the International Day of la Francophonie. Fifty years after the creation of the OIF, the values of humanism, democracy and respect for the diversity of cultures and languages that it promotes are more relevant than ever in the light of the profound changes that humankind has undergone. These transformations, which are complex and irreversible, and their consequences for peace, security and development in the world can only have a dynamic and beneficial effect in the framework of strengthened multilateralism through cooperation among nations, the United Nations and subregional and regional organizations. Because it brings together peoples from five continents, there is no doubt that the OIF has an international perspective, which not only allows it to be fully cognizant of their realities but also gives it the legitimacy necessary to promote their deepest aspirations in international forums. It can therefore develop multifaceted cooperation with the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, as well as play a supporting role in the implementation of their strategic priorities. In its 50 years of existence, the OIF has undeniably accumulated a great deal of experience. This gives it a comparative advantage in carrying out the tasks assigned to it, namely, the promotion of plurilingualism and cultural diversity; the promotion of peace, democracy and human rights; support for education and research; the promotion of economic cooperation in the service of sustainable development; the prevention and resolution of conflicts; and peacebuilding. With this comparative advantage, the OIF is able to engage with the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in multifaceted and mutually beneficial cooperation, in particular in the fields of conflict prevention, peacebuilding, health, education, gender promotion and the fight against climate change. I would like to note here, among other things, the support of the OIF for African regional and subregional organizations in the operationalization of early- warning and crisis-management mechanisms, the prevention of radicalization and violent extremism, and the strengthening of the role of women in the processes of crisis recovery and peacebuilding. It is unanimously agreed that the increase in the number of unilateral initiatives is one of the major trends of recent decades. This undermines the commitment made by the signatories to the San Francisco Charter in 1945 to promote dialogue between States and multilateral approaches to the challenges of our time. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, today's open debate gives us an opportunity to call for the strengthening of multilateralism, with a view to devising effective collective responses to contemporary challenges, including that represented by the coronavirus disease. The strong multilateralism that we hope to see must be based on respect for and the effective implementation of the principle of multilingualism. This is a sine qua non for a common understanding and equal participation in the quest for consensual solutions to current problems in the areas of peace, security and development. That is why Cote d'Ivoire is also campaigning for respect for multilingualism in peacekeeping operations, which, in our view, remain the most effective tool available to the United Nations in its strategy for prevention, conflict management and peacebuilding. French-speaking countries contribute approximately 41 per cent of the uniformed personnel of United Nations peacekeeping operations, while the francophone space currently hosts nearly half of the 16 ongoing peacekeeping missions in the world. Cete dIvoire, which is firmly committed to multilateralism, reaffirms its full support for the initiatives of the International Organization of la Francophonie, which is one of the major international institutions working to build a peaceful and united world. It will continue with its commitment to promoting the values embodied by the OIF through close cooperation with your country, Mr. President, the Niger, as well as with all other Member States and observers. That is the reason why my country accepted the honour bestowed upon it of chairing the Group of Francophone Ambassadors to the United Nations and why it initiated, along with other Member States, the francophone platform in the Security Council, with a view to maintaining an ongoing dialogue among the Permanent Representatives of OIF member States. In conclusion, I would like to express my deep conviction that the OIF has the attributes necessary to claim a prominent place in the international institutional architecture and play a key role in strengthening the links between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in order to effectively contribute to the achievement of our common objectives.
