Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the African Union Commission, 1 would
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
Republic of Senegal's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. And I would like
to welcome the notable presence in the Council this
morning of Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Senegal, in a reflection of
the unwavering commitment of his country, one of the
Organization's largest contributors of troops to the
maintenance of peace and international security, and of
its determination to make a substantial contribution to
the work of the Council.

I would also like to thank those ministers who
travelled to New York to be here today, as well as Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Ms. Michaelle Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Mr. Arthur Boutellis for their briefings.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate our admiration for
the men and women who struggle daily, in extremely
difficult conditions, in order to implement the mandate
entrusted to them, and to pay heartfelt tribute to those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in fulfilling their
mission under the banner of the United Nations.

Today, peacekeeping is evolving in highly complex
and often hostile situations. In dealing with various
asymmetric threats, including the proliferation of
non-State armed groups and rising terrorism and
violent extremism, the conduct of peacekeeping, which
has been through several transformations, is still
struggling to adapt to the increasing complexity of
security environments. Except for a few notable cases,
peacekeeping work is still underpinned by the formal
principles of impartiality, neutrality and the limited
use of force. Today's debate comes at the right time
for us to identify areas we should think about with the
goal of adapting and modernizing this valuable tool in
order to enable our Organization to tackle the emerging
challenges and fulfil its mission more efficiently.

In that regard, while recognizing the validity
of the statement in the 2015 report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations that "United
Nations peacekeeping missions... are not suitedto engage
in military counter-terrorism operations" (S/2015/446, 
p. 45), we must continue our effort to arrive at the right
balance between preserving important aspects of our
traditional principles, on the one hand, and the growing
need to use force in order to tackle armed groups that
fly in the face of all fundamental rights, on the other.
That effort should also take into account the principle
of complementarity, as provided for in Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, and which highlights
the importance of making judicious combined use
both of the universality of the United Nations and the
advantages that regional organizations offer.

Given their proximity to and familiarity with
conflicts occurring in Africa, the African Union (AU)
and its regional mechanisms have shown a renewed
determination to display the necessary leadership and,
together with the United Nations, to contribute to our
collective security, as laid down in the Charter. The
experience of the African Union - which, should it
need emphasizing, has enabled the emergence of an
African model for peace operations - highlights the
need to rethink the cooperation model between the
United Nations and the AU with a View to strengthening
peacekeeping's effectiveness. Based essentially on the
principle of non-indifference to human suffering, what
distinguishes our model is that it deploys missions
with robust mandates whose main tasks are usually
protecting civilians, neutralizing armed and terrorist
groups and promoting the authority of the State. The
African Union believes in intervening as quickly as
possible in order to save lives, contain violent conflicts
and help stabilize security situations in order to create
the conditions necessary for the United Nations to
deploy its peacekeeping operations at a later stage.

In mandating the deployment since 2003 of more
than 70,000 uniformed personnel and about 1,500
civilians in nine operations, the African Union and its
regional mechanisms have shown their determination
to play their part to the full and make a significant
contribution to collective security efforts in Africa.
In that regard, the Heads of State and Government of
the African Union recently decided to take on greater
responsibility for financing its peace operations and
to meet the commitment made in 2015 to finance
25 per cent of the cost of African Union-led peace
support operations.

Those developments reflect the importance of
working to consolidate a strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, based on
the sharing of responsibilities and the resulting costs.
That Vision is particularly legitimate given the fact
that the sustainable financing of peace and security
in Africa is not merely an African priority but an
international strategic imperative, given the complex
and interconnected nature of the threats we are seeing
to peace and security. We therefore hope to be able to
rely on the unanimous support of Security Council
members in enshrining the principle of burden-
sharing and authorizing funding from the United
Nations budget amounting to 75 per cent of the costs
of operations conducted by the African Union with
the Council's consent. We hope to see the ongoing
preparations culminate in the Council's adoption of a
resolution during the Senegal presidency.

