Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing and his
hard work to prepare for political progress in Syria.
We have before the Security Council today a very rare
thing - a brief window of opportunity to advance a
political solution in Syria. We should take it. History
will be unforgiving if we fail to do so.

The United States has sought every opportunity
to prevent the Al-Assad regime and its Russian and
Iranian allies from pursuing a military end to the
conflict in Syria. We have long called for a credible,
inclusive constitutional committee that will begin the
essential work of drafting a new Syrian constitution.
That committee will lay the groundwork for free
and fair elections in Syria, supervised by the United
Nations and open to all eligible Syrians, including
those who were forced to flee their country during the
present conflict. The United States has worked long
and hard for this progress in Syria, as have some others
on the Security Council. That said, the United States
did not always support Russia's January proposal for
such a committee. We had concerns that that initiative
would undermine the Geneva process. We had concerns
about Russia's good faith. We had doubts about whether
Russia intended to support a political transition in Syria
and whether the proposed constitutional committee
was a way for Russia to assert its influence over Syria
rather than to blaze a path to peace, because, frankly,
Al-Assad, Russia and Iran have the most to gain from
pursuing a military end to the Syrian war. De-escalation
zones have been established and ignored by Russia and
the Al-Assad regime. Accountability has been resisted.
Villages have been levelled. Humanitarian assistance
has been denied. Weapons of mass destruction have
been used. So yes, we had concerns.

In the eight months since the announcement, the
United States has consulted with other Security Council
members. We felt that if there were an opportunity
to move towards a political solution, we should do
everything possible to make it work. Today there is a
consensus in the Security Council that a constitutional
committee should be convened in Geneva immediately
by the United Nations Special Envoy, as he wishes to
do. We join in this consensus. Our Syria small-group
partners have also rallied behind that idea. Egypt,
France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United
Kingdom support the creation of such a group to map
Syria's political future without delay, but it is starting to
look as though our concerns may have been warranted.
We see the Al-Assad regime using the same delaying
tactics that have stalled the political process in Syria
for years.

The Special Envoy has worked hard to prepare
a diverse and credible list of Syrians to serve on the
constitutional committee. The candidates are drawn
from all parts of Syrian society. Many of them are
experts in the law and the process of drafting a new
constitution, and, just last month, Turkey and Russia
announced an agreement in principle on lists ofpossible
members of the committee, but now the Al-Assad
regime is objecting to those lists. They now want veto
power over the United Nations process. They have at the
eleventh hour invited the Special Envoy to Damascus
next week for new consultations after months of not
engaging. We welcome Special Envoy De Mistura's
offer to brief the Council on his Damascus trip as soon
as possible, and we hope that such briefing will take
place before the end of this month.

The Syrian representative to the United Nations
has told the Council that Damascus rejects Russia's
own Sochi declaration that launched the constitutional
committee. Syria rejected Russia's diplomatic initiative.
Let us therefore be clear about what Al-Assad is up to.
This is not a last-ditch attempt at diplomacy. This is
another obvious attempt to delay the United Nations
effort to forge a political consensus and a political
solution. There can be only two purposes for these
delaying tactics, neither of which speak well of the
motives of Al-Assad and his Russian friends. Either
they are attempting to create an unbalanced committee
that will rubber-stamp the regime's positions, or
they are attempting to forestall the vital work of the
committee, which is the critical work of establishing
self-government for the Syrian people. Let us remember
what is at stake if the Syrian regime and the Russian
Federation delay the creation of the committee. There
will be no progress on the new Syrian constitution,
no progress towards free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections, and no progress on a political
solution. This moment of calm and opportunity, which
has created the time and space for political progress,
could well evaporate.

The United States does not share the view that
a November launch of the committee is rushed or
premature. Quite to the contrary, delay risks disaster.
We have the lists of participants. The Security Council
has had the road map for a political settlement since it
adopted resolution 2254 (2015), in 2015. The Special
Envoy has every authority to convene the committee
and tells us that he is ready to do so. We believe that
he should. Special Envoy De Mistura should set a date
for the first meeting of the committee, issue invitations
and move ahead with talks, and he should do so without
delay. While some in this Chamber are in no hurry to
move forward on the political process, there are 6 million
refugees who cannot return home without progress
on the 2254 process. The constitutional committee is
only a very early step towards this. There are 3 million
Syrian civilians in Idlib whose fate also hangs in the
balance. The Syrian and Russian jets are grounded,
for now. The heavy weapons have been removed from
Turkey and Russia's demilitarized zone, for now. The
ceasefire in Idlib has given us a window of opportunity,
but it is a window that could close at any minute.

We remind the Council that resolution 2254
(2015), which was adopted without opposition in this
Chamber, explicitly supports a nationwide ceasefire
to accompany and reinforce the initial steps towards
political transition. The United States has been clear;
any military escalation in Idlib or beyond remains
unacceptable and would gravely threaten efforts to find
a peaceful political solution to this crisis. The Syrian
people have been silenced for too long. We have a
unique opportunity to forge a political solution to one
of the most bloody and destructive wars of our lifetime.
This moment of opportunity will not last long, based
on all that we have seen in Syria over the past years. I
urge my colleagues to resist further delays and take this
historic opportunity.

