In recent months, I have had the honour to serve as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), on Somalia, and Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), on Iran. Belgium has had the privilege to serve those three bodies for two years, and I thank the Council for giving me the opportunity to share my observations on that mandate as we prepare to welcome and hand over to new incoming members. It has been an honour to serve as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In carrying out that task, I was able to draw, first, on the excellent work done by the Netherlands, which was followed by Belgium as Facilitator and, secondly, on the unwavering support of the Secretariat. During my term, my aim was to support and improve the implementation of the resolution on behalf of the Security Council, in line with the three guidelines inherited from my Dutch predecessor: first, facilitating dialogue among the parties; secondly, transparency in our work; and, thirdly, promoting trade within the supply chain. We are all aware of the current difficult context of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and resolution 2231 (2015) - the United States withdrawal, Iran's successive disengagements and the United States position on the former resolutions of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) with regard to Iran. In those circumstances, Belgium has done its best to play its role as an honest broker among the various parties. I am convinced that maintaining the framework intact paves the way for diplomacy. As I leave this role, I am more convinced than ever that we need the Council's common response to issues of international peace and security, and the Plan of Action is one such flagship response and one of the great success stories of nuclear non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy. It is a cornerstone of multilateralism, peace and international security. I can therefore only encourage all Member States and regional and international organizations to take appropriate action to support and strengthen its implementation. Belgium also chaired the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I have built on the work of my predecessor, Sweden, to pursue a proactive and ambitious work plan. The continued undermining of international humanitarian law is deeply worrisome, and children are the first victims. That is unacceptable, and we share the responsibility to address it urgently. The unity of the Security Council and its strong support for the mandate of the Working Group have been a constant encouragement. Over the past two years, we have adopted resolutions on almost all country situations, including those where the Council itself remains divided, such as Myanmar and Syria. With two presidential statements - S/PRST/2020/3, adopted in February in the presence of the King and Queen of Belgium, and S/PRST/2020/8, adopted in September under the Nigerien presidency of the Council, we have strengthened the focus on attacks on schools and the protection of children in mediation processes. We must continue to improve the impact of the Working Group. A closer follow-up of the resolutions, both in New York and in the countries concerned, at the initiative of our bilateral embassies for example, remains necessary. Similarly, the direct engagement of the Working Group with the country task forces and the authorities of the countries concerned should, in my view, be maintained and further developed. The same applies to regular country visits, such as the one we organized to Mali in December 2019, and to raising the awareness of civil society. We must also preserve the integrity and impartiality of the listing mechanism. The mandate on children and armed conflict cannot be limited to the Working Group alone and the Council must continue to mainstream child protection throughout its work by ensuring a dedicated capacity in United Nations missions and by emphasizing child protection during meetings and country visits. I thank all members of the Council for their commitment to the work on children and armed conflict. I would like to express my particular gratitude to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, led with dedication and wisdom by Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, as well as UNICEF, the Department of Peace Operations and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for their valuable and close collaboration. Together, they represent what I would call the United Nations and the Security Council at their best. I will disseminate a more detailed overview of lessons learned and recommendations later, through the President of the Council. Finally, over the past two years, we have seen the progress regarding sanctions on Somalia. For example, the partial lifting of the arms embargo on the Somali authorities has been extended. As for the terms of the embargo, they have been clarified and consolidated into the single resolution 2551 (2020). In addition, following the recommendations of the Panel of Experts, the Council also decided to place under embargo certain products used for the manufacture of explosives, for which an implementation assistance note has been drawn up and is available to all Member States on the Committee's website. The Committee met informally on 10 occasions under the Belgian presidency, including meetings by video-teleconference, and dealt with more than 50 notifications. The Committee held two dialogues with the Somali authorities, not to mention the working visit to Mogadishu organized by the presidency in January 2020. It should be noted that the Committee has become more interested in the financing capacities of Al-Shabaab, and ways to reduce them, because of the excellent investigative and analytical work of the Panel of Experts. The relationship between the Panel of Experts and the Somali Federal Government has been a focus of attention throughout our mandate. We have all contributed to strengthening this mutually beneficial working relationship. It is my hope that this cooperation will continue and grow even stronger. As sensitive issues are sometimes addressed, I would like to commend the commitment shown by the Somali Federal Government in its dialogue with the Committee and the Panel on these issues. I would like to stress one final point. The term "sanctions regime" is unfortunate. It should be recalled that the Council does not sanction Somalia, but rather sanctions those who pose a threat to peace and security in Somalia - that is a crucial difference. Moreover, the sanctions regime is also evolving to adapt to current threats. In conclusion, it is a tool to support peace and security in Somalia. It can only be improved with the cooperation of all with a view to achieving its objectives more quickly. Lastly, I would like to make two more general remarks and one more specific one. First, throughout its mandate, Belgium has attached particular importance to respect for procedural guarantees - "due process" - in the context of the implementation of the various Security Council sanctions regimes. In that regard, we hope that the members of the Council can commit themselves to continuing to make United Nations sanctions more effective by examining ways to have fairer and more transparent procedures. Secondly, it is worth noting the heavy workload involved in chairing a subsidiary body, especially for missions with smaller teams. Belgium therefore advocates a more equitable distribution of the chairmanships of subsidiary bodies among elected and permanent members of the Council. Thirdly, and more specifically, Belgium has chaired on an interim basis another subsidiary body, the United Nations Compensation Committee (UNCC), which addresses the reparations owed by Iraq to Kuwait since the war between those two States. It is a subsidiary body of the Council that is unfortunately often somewhat neglected because it is located in Geneva and is a claims commission of an actuarial nature. However, I would like to mention it today, because it is likely that the next Chair will oversee the final payment of said reparations and, consequently, the termination of the UNCC, which will undoubtedly require an ad hoc resolution of the Security Council. In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude for the dedication and professionalism of the Secretariat colleagues, whose support has been crucial. I wish my successors every success. We will ensure, through close cooperation, a smooth transition of our mandates and remain at their disposal during this phase and beyond. Finally, let me draw the Security Council's attention to the best practices guide for Chairs and members of United Nations Sanctions Committees, prepared by Belgium and other Member States. We hope that this guide will be a useful tool for preparing future Chairs and their teams.
