Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We would like to align
ourselves with the statement to be made later on behalf
of the European Union. I should like to make a few
points on behalf of Sweden.

Let me begin by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto for his excellent briefing today and for the
work done by him and his team. We also very much
appreciate the presence of Mr. Rabbani here today.

Impressive progress has been achieved over
the past 15 years in consolidating Afghanistan's
democratic institutions and protecting human rights
and civil liberties for the Afghan people. At the same
time, persistent high levels of violence remain a major
concern. As highlighted by the Secretary-General, the
increase in sectarian attacks is very troubling. Civilians
in Afghanistan continue to disproportionately shoulder
the burden of the conflict. The statistics suggest that
their burden is not getting any lighter. The year 2016
saw record levels of civilian casualties in Afghanistan,
including an increase in the number of women and
children killed or injured. We have to try to stop this
together, and we call on all sides to do their utmost to
protect the civilian populations as a matter of priority.

Building peaceful and inclusive societies is not
easy. It takes patience, courage and determination
from all parties. A politically negotiated settlement to
the conflict in Afghanistan is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace. It is therefore imperative that both
sides take steps urgently to engage in dialogue to reach
a political settlement and end violence. Those with some
influence over the Taliban have a special responsibility
in that regard.

Regional tensions continue to undermine long-
term stability and economic growth in Afghanistan.
Sustained and constructive engagement by countries in
the region will be essential for a long-term solution. All
stakeholders, especially neighbouring countries, must
assume their responsibilities and work together towards
a sustainable peace. The Kabul process to foster a
genuine peace and reconciliation should be supported,
including by the United Nations and all other bodies.

We fully support the Government's efforts to put in
place a reform process to ensure strong and independent
institutions and a robust democratic process. We have
high expectations of the Government's reform agenda
and for its delivery. The upcoming elections are one
key element of that effort. We welcome the fact that
a date for district council and parliamentary elections
has now been set. The United Nations has an important
supportive role to play, but the main ownership and
responsibility to ensure meaningful elections of course
rests with the Afghan authorities.

Since 2002, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played an essential
role in support of the Afghan people. We welcome the
UNAMA strategic review and its recommendations,
in particular its important emphasis on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. That emphasis is
an acknowledgement that the conflict in Afghanistan
is not over. Despite our efforts, including the tireless
work of UNAMA and the whole of the United Nations
system, the country has not yet entered a post-conflict
phase. Therefore, a continued focus on supporting
peace efforts remains a key priority. With the new
United States strategy, there is now an opportunity for
enhanced diplomatic and political efforts.

Concrete measures must be taken to strengthen the
implementation of the national action plan on women
and peace and security. As recommended by the
Secretary-General, UNAMA has an important role to
play in supporting an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process that includes women, in line with
the Constitution. We further welcome the intention to
relocate the Senior Gender Adviser to the Office of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, as outlined
in the strategic review, and we appreciateUNAMA's
integrated reporting on these issues.

In order to fulfil the important responsibility
of the United Nations in Afghanistan, the UNAMA
leadership and the United Nations country team should
make full use of the review and fully implement its
recommendations. They should do so in the spirit of
the One United Nations initiative and the sustaining
peace agenda by working in a coordinated fashion for
peace, development, human rights and humanitarian
assistance. Socioeconomic improvements and service
delivery throughout the country continues to be
critical to maintaining support and momentum for the
peace process.

Sweden's support to the people of Afghanistan has
remained firm for over three decades. In line with the
Secretary-General's approach, we have adjusted our
policy and our very concrete support to focus more
on conflict prevention and peacebuilding, including
through mediation training for Afghan women. I would
like to assure Afghanistan's Minister for Foreign
Minister Affairs that, as the Afghan people enter
this next phase in efforts towards peace, they can
count on my country's continued support for State-
and peacebuilding efforts towards a prosperous and
peaceful Afghanistan.

