Mr. Toriello (Sao Tome and Principe): Mr. President,
let me congratulate your delegation on having organized
this important debate, and allow me to go straight to the
point.

What can be said about war that has not already
been said by eminent and prominent personalities
throughout human history? Therefore, I do not see
much left to say about it, and I do not see what I could
say about war that has not already been said by other,
much more expert speakers here.

For that reason, allow me, then, to express my
modest opinion by respectfully saying that war is
something about which we must do a great deal, notjust
lecture. War must be eradicated by finding definitive
and immediate solutions aime at putting an end to it
once and for all. Otherwise, how we can define the
human species as "homo sapiens"? Sapient in what way?
About annihilating ourselves because of our greed for

power and other selfish reasons? About generating the
thousands of other miseries that come with war?
Yes, surely we are sapient about all of the misery
we are able to generate because of our lack of wisdom.
But I wonder if we are indeed aware of what war has
been doing to humanity since the dawn of history.
Facts speak for themselves, and the facts prove that we
human beings are not at all aware of what we are doing
to ourselves; otherwise, we would not wage war.

Allow me, then, to highlight the fact that there is
a huge difference between being "conscient", which
means physically alert, and being "conscious", which
means being morally responsible for the actions we men
perpetrate - if not to say that man, by his conduct,
places himself at the lowest level of the evolutionary
scale of life. That is not my statement but a statement
by scientists.

On that basis, and before it is pointed out that I am
perhaps philosophizing and not in line with the theme,
allow me once again to highlight the necessity of
finding practical solutions besides the sometimes too-
cautious talks which are part of diplomacy, a righteous
part of it indeed - but they are not enough. We should
not forget that, even as we are meeting to lecture or hold
discussions, or for whatever good reason and with the
best of intentions, thousands and thousands of people
are continuing to die in the name of diplomacy. I may
therefore be able to contribute a little to the discussion
by modestly expressing my views on it. That may
stimulate some reflection about our humanity, which is
often forgotten in the name of diplomacy, which seems
to be supporting materialistic achievements more than
human spiritual growth and social wealth.

Although we all know that peace starts within an
individual, regrettably the facts show that the nature of
man is more prone, when confronted with differences,
to employ violent, aggressive actions rather than choose
peaceful solutions.

Thus this is the time to be very honest and ask
ourselves: "Do men and Governments really wish to
end wars, poverty and all kinds of misery?" If that is
so, then why are we not able to translate into practice
what we keep talking about here and there? Why do we
let prevail all the speculation and types of exploitation
which these negative events generate and which
harm our social system? Why do we not make use of
our science and knowledge to save and preserve life,
instead of spurring wars by fabricating weapons of
mass destruction?

In short, the facts show that it is all a game of
power, speculation and interests. So I would ask, in
such a scenario, what to do? As I prepare to relinquish
the floor, let me reiterate that unless the world's leaders
opt for the politics of essentiality, encompassing a more
holistic vision of life, over politics of interest alone,
conflicts and wars will continue to ravage the planet.
The true nature of mankind, which is spiritual, will
have to prevail over its predominantly materialistic
vision, as the whole of man's life should not be ruled by
financial dictates. That reflects an indisputable truth
that shows the faults ingrained in our human systems of
governance, which adopt schemes ruled by speculating
legislations and based on a culture of tolerance, instead
of being grounded in a balanced distribution of the
world's resources and respectful confrontation more
than tolerance.

This unbalanced distribution and tolerating
mentality ends up, in the long run, generating hostility
and conflicts rather than promoting peace and
socioeconomic development. In truth, those should be
the lessons of war.

I will conclude by saying that, as a person speaking
in the name of many others like me, we do not dream
of having a good car, a big house or a rich mundane
life, although there is nothing wrong with longing for
such things once we have established a peaceful and
wealthy global societal system. Our dream is to end
wars and to coexist in harmony in this very moment.
Peace should therefore not remain just a cultural event
or a diplomatic debate; it requires us to exercise our
responsibility as sentient beings.

