Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
current situation in Afghanistan is at a critical stage,
with many important issues on the political agenda
this year. China supports the reconciliation process in
Afghanistan and the country's efforts to improve its
security environment, advance its reconstruction and
participate in regional cooperation and development.
China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the continued
implementation of its mandate in order to provide
assistance to Afghanistan in the relevant areas. China
sincerely hopes that lasting peace and long-term
development can be achieved in Afghanistan, which is
not only in the vital interest ofthe people ofAfghanistan
but is also of critical importance to security, stability,
development and prosperity in the region.

China appreciates the efforts made by Indonesia
and Germany as the co-facilitators of the consultations
that led to consensus on resolution 2460 (2019).
China voted in favour of the technical roll-over of the
UNAMA mandate. The mandate remains unchanged.
UNAMA will continue to provide Afghanistan
with support in a peaceful reconciliation process,
elections, regional cooperation, reconstruction and
humanitarian assistance. China actively participated
in the consultations on the resolution on the technical
roll-over and has made a number of reasonable and
constructive suggestions and proposals with regard to
the reconstruction of Afghanistan, the fight against
terrorism, the reconciliation process and regional
cooperation. China supports the technical roll-over
so that UNAMA can continue its work. However,
that should be only a temporary arrangement on
which members of the Council should continue
thorough consultations.

In his statement, the representative of the United
States referred to the Belt and Road Initiative. However,
his remarks were at variance with the facts and fraught
with prejudice. Therefore, I would like to emphasize
the following points.
First, the Belt and Road Initiative has been widely
welcomed by the international community. In the six
years since the Initiative was put forward, 123 countries
and 29 international organizations have signed
cooperation agreements to jointly develop the Initiative.
Participants agreed to adhere to the principle ofbuilding,
sharing and actively implementing cooperation projects
to promote interconnectedness and bring development
opportunities to participating countries.

Secondly, the Belt and Road Initiative is conducive
to Afghanistan's reconstruction and economic
development. Under the framework, China and
Afghanistan will continue to strengthen cooperation
in various fields, promote economic and social
development in the country and integrate Afghanistan
into regional development. China and Afghanistan are
actively implementing a memorandum of understanding
on the Initiative to promote efforts in the areas of trade
and transportation, energy, health and communications
and cooperation in other fields.

Thirdly, the Belt and Road Initiative emphasizes
openness and transparency. In building the Initiative,
China and other countries adhere to the principle
of a market economy led by businesses and abide by
general international and market rules. A total of 27
countries, including China, have developed the Guiding
Principles on Financing the Development of the Belt
and Road Initiative, which outline clear provisions for
building a transparent, friendly, non-discriminatory
and predictable financing environment, with an
emphasis on promoting sustainable economic and
social development.

Fourthly, the Initiative is one of economic
cooperation aimed at achieving shared development
and prosperity. It has nothing to do with geopolitics.
All countries are welcome to participate and share in
the opportunities it affords.

The Council failed to reach an agreement on the
extension of the substantive content of the resolution
because of the persistence of differences, one of which
is that one member in particular repeatedly refused to
accept the consensus in the Council for many years
and the constructive opinions put forward by others,
which poisoned the atmosphere for consultations. That
is obvious and cannot be denied.

