Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate, which
allows us to address all the issues related to the Middle
East in a spirit of dialogue. Because the conflicts in
the region have common roots and are interlinked, this
cross-cutting approach is relevant as a complement to
the individual issues on the Security Council's agenda.
I welcome the participation of the Secretary of State of
the United States, Mr. Pompeo, and I fully endorse the
incisive analysis presented by the German Secretary of
State, Mr. Michaelis. I also wish to associate myselfwith
the statement to be delivered by the Charge d'affaires
ad interim of the Delegation of the European Union.

First, I would like to come back to the extent of
the challenges facing the region. First, I am thinking of
the security challenges resulting from the persistence
of the terrorist threat, despite the territorial victory
over Da'esh in Syria and Iraq. Beyond the military
response, the challenge of violent radicalization will
not be solved without the implementation of inclusive
political solutions, accompanied by an increased effort
for the stabilization of liberated territories and for
reconstruction where the political conditions are met.
France will also continue to mobilize so as to dry up
the sources of terrorist financing, in accordance with
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted last March.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery to State and non-State
actors is a threat to all, to which we must provide
collective responses. I would like to reiterate here
our vigilance with regard to compliance with the
prohibition on the use of chemical weapons, given that
both the Syrian regime and Da'esh have used them.
France also reaffirms its full commitment to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). There is
currently no alternative to prevent nuclear proliferation
in Iran. As we have already had occasion to say, we
deplore the American withdrawal from the agreement.
The remaining participants, including France, remain
committed to preserving the JCPOA and continue to
comply with their commitments.

We are extremely concerned about Iran's recent
actions in breach ofits obligations under the agreement.
There is no legal provision authorizing non-compliance
with any part of its commitments. That is why we
must all work to preserve this agreement and achieve
Iran's return to full compliance with its obligations.
France remains resolutely committed to this goal, in
collaboration with its partners. Beyond that, we must
build together a long-term strategy, which cannot
be reduced to a policy of pressure, sanctions and
containment. Only a comprehensive approach will make
it possible to resolve the various outstanding issues on
nuclear energy after 2025-2030, on the continuation of
Iran's ballistic activities and on regional stability.

Secondly, I am thinking of the political challenges
facing the region, which is plagued by conflicts that
threaten its stability and as a result of which the civilian
population is the first to suffer. We see this in Syria and
Yemen, where violations of international humanitarian
law are daily occurrences. The intensification of
the Syrian and Russian bombardments in Idlib is
particularly worrying in this regard. I therefore
reiterate France's call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and the full implementation without delay
of the Sochi agreement between Russia and Turkey.
France, like Germany, believes that the coordination of
the so-called small group and the Astana group would
facilitate progress.

In Yemen, rapid, full and unhindered humanitarian
access to all populations must be ensured and the
Stockholm Agreement implemented. Beyond that,
Yemen requires an urgent resumption of political
dialogue without preconditions.

In this context, beyond an emergency crisis
response, we must work towards pluralistic and inclusive
political solutions that guarantee the region's stability
in the long term. The priority must be to prevent new
conflicts and to de-escalate them through dialogue.
That imperative is particularly important given the
current tensions in the Gulf. In that regard, we must
work with the States of the region, which are on the
front line, with our international partners and within the
framework of the multilateral organizations concerned
in order to establish an inclusive and balanced dialogue
and, in the longer term, confidence-building measures,
such as ensuring the freedom of navigation in straits.

We must also promote the development of
inclusive political solutions under the auspices of the
United Nations. We must work to bolster strong State
institutions that respect the rule of law and human
rights, and protect freedoms and all components of
pluralistic societies in the Middle East. In that regard,
I would like to encourage the Iraqi authorities to
continue their efforts to rebuild the areas liberated from
Da'esh and reconcile all Iraqis. In Syria, only a credible
political solution will be able to reduce the destabilizing
potential of the crisis and allow for lasting peace.
Women must participate fully in the peace process and
in the implementation of those political solutions - it
is a moral imperative and an additional opportunity to
maintain peace and security.

I would like to reiterate France's commitment to
multilateralism, the role of the United Nations and
respect for international law. Any unilateral decision
that deviates from international law significantly
weakens the order based on international legality and
compromises our collective ability to successfully
conclude peace processes.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate that lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians can be achieved
only through a just and balanced solution, based on
the establishment of two States living side by side in
security, within recognized borders, with Jerusalem
as the capital of both States, in accordance with
internationally agreed parameters and the resolutions
of the Council. In that connection, we support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, whose work on behalf of
Palestinian refugees is essential for regional stability.

The Council has a critical role to play because
it is the main guarantor of international law. Among
other things, it must call on all belligerents in conflicts
to respect applicable law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to provide
unanimous support for the efforts of the United Nations,
including by supporting the Council and the Special
Envoys and Representatives of the Secretary-General.

France will continue to defend multilateralism
as a way of ensuring and maintaining international
peace and security. It is by calling multilateralism
into question that today we weaken our security,
particularly with regard to international institutions,
mechanisms and instruments that combat impunity and
non-proliferation.

In conclusion, France has no intention ofrenouncing
its principles or its commitment to responding to the
crises in the Middle East, or its desire to see the Council
play a greater role in addressing them. The Middle
East is a traumatized region, with too many countries
devastated and societies ravaged by the scourge of war,
from which our important Organization has the primary
duty to protect us. The people of the region aspire to
live in peace and security. That requires us to learn
from the past and, above all, to not repeat our mistakes.
It is urgent that we stop this destructive violence. We
can do so if we use the dynamics of competition and
the balance of power among nations in order to seek
collaborative and just solutions and implement a policy
of balanced dialogue so that the countries and the peoples
of the region can find points of convergence, define the
modalities for sustainable neighbourly relations and
opt for non-violent, pluralistic exercise of power. That
begins with the adherence to, and implementation of,
all the relevant Council resolutions.

