The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Italy.

Italy views with satisfaction the adoption of today's
Security Council resolution to extend for another 180 days
the suspension of some sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). That is
why, as members of the Contact Group, we co-sponsored
the resolution.

We believe that lengthening the period of exemption
from 75 days to 180 days sends Belgrade the clear message
that its constructive and cooperative role in the latest
developments in the peace process in the former Yugoslavia
is being recognized and appreciated. These developments
led to the Geneva understanding of 8 September on some
agreed basic principles, which represent a step forward on
the still long and difficult road to a comprehensive political
solution. The longer period of suspension of the
sanctions - from two and a half months to six months -
will certainly encourage Belgrade to continue to exercise its
powers of persuasion to help induce the Pale leadership to
make a serious and constructive commitment to negotiation.
The framework for a cessation of hostilities within
Sarajevo, signed by the Bosnian Serb authorities and
witnessed by Belgrade's highest authorities, represents
another encouraging step in the right direction.

After months and months of stalled negotiations and
untold suffering and misery for the civilian population in
the former Yugoslavia, the situation finally seems to offer
a glimmer of hope.

I wish to recall the steadiness and consistency with
which my Government has always sought to apply the
policy of incentives and disincentives towards the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), decided
on last year by the Security Council. We believe that,
given the new windows of opportunity opening up in
these days, the time has come to place the accent on the
incentives in order to further encourage Belgrade to create
the proper conditions for its progressive reintegration into
the international community as a fully fledged member.
In our opinion, today's resolution must be seen within
such a context and from such a perspective.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration

of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pm.
