Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her briefing on the report of
the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons
(S/2017/1025).

Sixteen years ago, the General Assembly adopted
by consensus the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In that
landmark achievement of the international community,
we committed to concrete actions to reduce illicit
trafficking in small arms. The United States remains
fully committed to implementing the Programme
of Action, as well as the 2005 International Tracing
Instrument. We have worked, and will continue to work,
side by side with other countries and international and
regional organizations to combat the illicit small arms
trade. Indeed, we continue to be a leading donor in
this field, including through our conventional weapons
destruction programme, which has provided over
$2.9 billion in assistance to more than 100 countries
since 1993.

Yet the international community as a whole
continues to struggle with challenges in implementing
existing commitments on small arms, and we see
the consequences on a range of issues before the
Security Council. More needs to be done, whether it
be on tackling arms smuggling in Central Africa or
on small arms falling into the hands of terrorists and
criminal groups. It is tempting to hold more meetings
to negotiate more international commitments, but
that approach misunderstands the problem. Rather
than trying to identify every perceived gap in the
international normative framework, we just need more
countries to implement those basic commitments that
we adopted back in 2001. Progress will be incremental;
many countries are only now taking first steps, such as
implementing arms tracing.

The Secretary-General's report gives some cause
for optimism. As noted in the report, the Security
Council has adjusted the mandates of United Nations
missions to tackle the problem of small arms. Cote
d'Ivoire, for example, is a success story in which the
Government, with United Nations support, is better
securing its stockpiles and has successfully traced a
weapon recovered from an illicit trafficker. We can
learn from those experiences and, as appropriate,
mandate United Nations missions to build capacity on
stockpile security and small arms management.

Unfortunately, we have some concerns about the
Secretary-General's report. When discussing issues
related to domestic misuse of small arms in non-conflict
settings, the report goes beyond its remit. Additionally,
we are disappointed by the Secretary-General's
continued advocacy for the use of the International
Small Arms Controls Standards (ISACS). Despite the
name, those guidelines are generally not standards.
Unlike the International Ammunition Technical
Guidelines, which were drafted by Government experts,
ISACS were created by a small group of self-selected
experts. In some cases, the authors cherry-picked from
existing instruments and developed those new so-called
standards in an arbitrary and opaque manner, without
referring to existing best practices.

Promoting the ISACS guidelines has resulted in
some unusual situations. In Somalia, we understand that
a United Nations representative advised local officials
not to use regional marking standards developed by
States parties to the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. Although those standards met the requirements
of countries in the region, the United Nations said that
they were not "ISACS compliant". Given the diversity
of views, we hope that future reports will more aptly
characterize ISACS as voluntary guidelines and not as
practical standards.

We also note with concern references to the tracing
of small arms ammunition. Although it is possible to
assess the original manufacturer of a given round of
ammunition from lot markings and other identifiers,
that is not the same thing as tracing, which is the
systematic tracking from the point of manufacture
or importation to the point at which an item became
illicit. Just noting that a rifle round was produced in a
given country, often legally, does not explain how that
round ended up illegally in the hands of a criminal or
a terrorist.

The United States takes the illicit trafficking of
ammunition very seriously, but measures to combat
the illicit trafficking of ammunition differ from those
needed to prevent the illicit trade in the weapons
themselves. That is why the United States supported
a General Assembly resolution establishing in 2020
a group of governmental experts to discuss problems
arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus.

The United States will continue to take concrete
and effective steps at the national, regional and global
levels to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We welcome today's discussion and urge all
countries to join us in strengthening the implementation
ofour existing commitments and obligations in the field.

