Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany welcomes
resolution 2202 (2015), just adopted by the Security
Council, which endorses the 12 February package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements of September 2014. The Security Council
has thus sent a clear signal that it is ready to assume
its responsibility at this crucial juncture in the conflict
in and around Ukraine to ensure the comprehensive
implementation of the package of measures for
implementation of the Minsk protocol of 5 September
and the Minsk memorandum of 19 September 2014,
which remain, in their entirety, the unalterable legal
and political basis for the conflict settlement process.
We hope that the endorsement of the Minsk agreements
by the Council will have a strong stabilizing effect on
the situation on the ground and contribute to the strict
and full implementation of the ceasefire and to the
follow-on political process.

According to current reporting by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, thus far the
ceasefire has been largely holding, with the most
deplorable exception of Debaltseve, as outlined in the
Council's press statement (SC/11784). The continuing
attacks threaten not only the ceasefire, they also
undermine the political settlement process as agreed
upon in the framework of the trilateral contact group
and as endorsed by the Normandy format Heads of
State and Government in Minsk.

Against that background, today's resolution is
of the utmost importance. The resolution conveys a
stern message to those who violate the ceasefire. The
ceasefire spoilers must know that they are opposing the
resolve of the international community.

Germany reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
68/262, on the situation in Ukraine. I would also like
to reiterate our condemnation of the illegal annexation
of Crimea, which we will not recognize. It is our clear
understanding, in the context of this resolution, that
the territorial integrity of Ukraine means territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.

