Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): My delegation wishes
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
We are sure that the Council's business will benefit
tremendously from your wisdom and experience. May I
also extend our warmest congratulations to Ambassador
Nabil Elaraby of Egypt on his excellent stewardship of the
work of the Council last month.

The Zimbabwean delegation is most grateful to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting on the situation in Angola.
We are also thankful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, for his most informative report on the peace
process in that country.

The Government and the people of Zimbabwe have
continued to watch and witness developments in the
brotherly country of Angola with immense interest and deep
concern, as well as with boundless good will. Whilst we are
fully convinced that the Bicesse and Lusaka accords,
together with other subsequent frameworks of
understanding, provide a sound basis for a solution in
Angola, we cannot help getting worried at the pace at
which the overall peace process has been evolving. Taking
into consideration the readiness of the people of Angola to
return to peace, the current and prolonged no-war-no-peace
situation in that country is no cause for comfort.

In this regard, we are encouraged to note recent
commendable measures, such as the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law; the completion of the quartering of the rapid
reaction police; the adoption of the framework agreement
on military matters; the beginning of the process of
incorporating UNITA military personnel into the Angolan
Armed Forces; the second phase of the withdrawal of the
Angolan Armed Forces from forward positions; some
progress in the quartering of UNITA troops; and UNITA's
submission of proposals to change the status of its radio
station.
On the other hand, we are informed in the Secretary-
General's report that the pace of the already much-delayed
quartering of UNITA troops has decreased significantly;
that significant numbers of UNITA troops arrive at the
quartering camps with hardly any weapons at all; that there
is a high number of desertions from the quartering areas;
and that UNITA has not yet handed over to UNAVEM. III
personnel its heavy weapons, rocket launchers, anti-aircraft
artillery, armoured personnel carriers and tanks,
communications and engineering equipment or vehicles
used for military purposes. The Secretary-General makes
it clear in his report that there will be no quartering
exercise to talk about until those important parts of the
UNITA arsenal are brought in and all regular, commando,
engineer, support and other units of UNITA are cantoned
or otherwise accounted for.

The Secretary-General's report also states that:

"If the peace process is to succeed, the parties,
especially UNITA, must show greater readiness to
implement, in good time, the commitments they
have entered into". (S/1996/503, para. 39)

We call upon the international community in general, and
the troika of observers in particular, to use their good
offices to add impetus to the peace process, in the
interests of the people of Angola.

We agree with the Secretary-General's observation
that the demobilization and socio-economic integration of
former combatants is an essential precondition for lasting
peace in Angola. We therefore look forward to his
recommendations on this issue, as promised in his report.

The Government of Zimbabwe recognizes with great
appreciation the commendable efforts of all those
Governments, non-governmental organizations and other
agencies that have come to the assistance of the people of
Angola in their hour of need through the provision of
humanitarian aid in its multifarious forms. We can only
encourage them to continue doing everything possible to
sustain their current and future efforts.

Finally, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation with regard to the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III.

