Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): As Chair ofthe Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, I am very pleased to commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, for his detailed briefing on the situation in the Central African Republic and to warmly thank him and his entire team for their hospitality and support during our visit to Bangui from 11 to 14 February. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate Lieutenant General Balla Keita, head of the military component of the Mission. I believe that today's meeting of the Security Council will be the last with him in that capacity. He has conducted and completed his mission with energy, devotion and professionalism. That is what I heard when I was in Bangui. I would like him to know that we are very grateful because the mission in Bangui is not the easiest. A detailed report of that visit was transmitted to you, Mr. President, earlier today. I will therefore limit my statement to three points. The first concerns the elections. The upcoming presidential, legislative and local elections, scheduled to begin in December, will be crucial for the future of the country. All of those with whom I spoke during my visit - including the President of the Central African Republic, the Prime Minister, Cabinet members and the representatives of the institutions of the Central African Republic and of civil society - expressed to me their unanimous and firm commitment to the holding of free, transparent, credible and inclusive elections, within constitutional deadlines. However, WA the organization and success of those elections will depend on several factors. First, the funding of the elections is managed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which estimates that $41.8 million will be required. To date, we are still $20 million short. I thank the European Union, which has pledged $17 million, as well as UNDP and the Government of the Central African Republic, which have each provided $2 million. Preparations for the elections must respect the timetable set by the Constitutional Court. They have begun, but funds are urgently needed. I therefore plan to continue my work with our partners in the Central African Republic in an effort to underscore the importance of disbursing funds as soon as possible. I am pleased to announce that the Kingdom of Morocco plans to help fund the elections, as it did in 2015. Its total contribution will be announced shortly. Secondly, during my various meetings, I stressed the importance of inclusive elections, encouraging the Government to ensure the participation of internally displaced persons and refugees. That call was well received by all my interlocutors, who, without exception, committed to that goal. That goal also applies to women and young people, who are not sufficiently aware of the importance of that process, as reflected by the low registration rate of that segment of the population. That is why mobilization efforts are so important. Thirdly, MINUSCA has finalized a_ security plan for the elections, which has been submitted to the national authorities. The post-electoral period will be key and require close monitoring if we are to consolidate the gains achieved. My second point concerns the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, which is advancing steadily, despite the many provisions that have yet to be implemented. Indeed, all stakeholders are aware that there is no alternative to the agreement. As highlighted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, important legislation set forth in the agreement, such as those relating to political parties, decentralization and the status of former Heads of State, has been finalized and will be adopted shortly. In addition, the justice sector policy for the period 2020-2024 has been adopted.The growing ethnic polarization, particularly among the armed groups, fuelled by the use of hate rhetoric disseminated through social networks, radio and the written press, is a source of concern and a contributing factor to the volatility of the security situation. In recognition of that problem, MINUSCA is working closely with the Government to defuse what I might call a time bomb, so to speak, and calls for calm and strict compliance with the peace agreement. In my capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, I have raised this question with State authorities at the highest level, who have assured me of their commitment to that effort. I take this opportunity to pay a special tribute to Central African civil society, in particular youth and women's representatives. Their thirst for peace and their commitment deserve recognition. The same is true of the forum of women parliamentarians. I was quite moved by the courage of those elected women, ready to risk it all in the face of the numerous roadblocks erected by the armed groups, in order to carry out their mandates. One parliamentarian in particular made a deep impression when she assured me that she was prepared to travel by motorcycle to her constituency more than 600 kilometres from Bangui, braving every danger in order to raise awareness of the importance of participating in the upcoming elections. My third point concerns the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. As highlighted this morning, over the past year significant progress has been made in the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, with the enhanced support of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the European Union, as well as that of MINUSCA, the United Nations country team and the bilateral partners of the Central African Republic. We have focused on the rule of law, given its importance for the people. In that regard, we welcome the verdict of the Bangui Court of Appeal, condemning the Bangassou militiamen for their abuses against the civilian population and, more specifically, United Nations Blue Helmets. Two leaders have been given a life sentence of forced labour. The verdict demonstrates the progress made in strengthening the entire criminal justice system in the Central African Republic. The Special Criminal Court is pursuing its investigations with the aim of starting trials in early 2021, but is also facing difficulties with recruitment and funding. That progress should encourage us to maintain our political, financial and institutional support for the Special Criminal Court and the judicial system as a whole. In that regard, the bill creating the commission on truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation has also been finalized. We must ensure that it prohibits impunity for serious human rights violations. Finally, I take this opportunity to commend the exemplary work of the Peacebuilding Fund in the Central African Republic. During my visits, I was able to see first-hand the positive impact of the projects financed by the Fund in the Central African Republic. On my latest visit, I was impressed by the clearly evident role the Fund plays as a catalyst in the country. Its investments in transhumance projects, support for mixed units and the participation of young people in political life will encourage other donors, which have contributed up to 100 times the amount initially disbursed by the Fund. In conclusion, allow me to share some observations with the Security Council. First, the upcoming elections will be a historic moment and an opportunity to achieve sustained peace in that country. It would be a pity if we cannot ensure adequate conditions because of a funding shortfall, which could jeopardize the efforts and sacrifices of the United Nations and the significant investments made by the international community thus far in the Central African Republic. I therefore join my friend, Mr. Ndiaye, Special Representative of the Secretary- General, in appealing to all countries and partners of the Central African Republic to contribute in order to meet the country's budgetary needs as soon as possible. Secondly, MINUSCA needs the firm support of the Security Council and human and financial resources for the implementation of resolution 2499 (2019), in order to be able to continue to secure the country and support the Government both for the elections and for the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. Thirdly, the monitoring mechanisms put in place for both the political agreement and the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan are very complex and are exerting heavy pressure on the Government, whose capacities are limited. It would therefore beadvisable to reflect on how to simplify the monitoring processes and further optimize the coordination of partners upstream in order to more effectively and efficiently support the Government's efforts. Fourthly, the exemplary partnership between the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States symbolizes the potential of the partnership between the United Nations and regional organizations, particularly the African Union. As such, it should serve as a model. Partnership with international financial organizations is also crucial and will ultimately make it possible to implement many structural projects. Finally, I would like to send a message of hope and an appeal for continued mobilization in support of the Central African Republic. The international community has indeed done a great deal for the country. Although the people are not sufficiently enjoying the dividends of peace, the foundations have been laid for a return to stability, provided that the current level of support can be maintained. I am confident that the Security Council will continue to give full attention and political support to that country. The Central African people, who have suffered so greatly, now legitimately aspire to stability, peace, development and, above all, a better life.
