The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the rapidly
deteriorating situation in the Central AfricanRepublic.

We face a profoundly important test of international
solidarity and of our responsibility to prevent atrocities.
A country in the heart of Africa is descending into
complete chaos before our eyes. The situation requires
prompt and decisive action to place the protection of the
people of the Central African Republic at the centre of
our attention. That is why the Secretary-General issued
a strong warning to the Council last week, and that is
why he has asked me to present a more detailed report
today on the findings of the technical assistance team
that has recently returned from the Central African
Republic, and on our observations on these findings.
In the past few days, he has also been in contact with
African leaders, who have expressed their concern over
the situation and the need for a robust international
response to it.

As the report before the Council (S/20l3/677)
shows, the country faces a desperate security situation.
There is a breakdown of law and order. The population
is enduring suffering beyond imagination. As we see
far too often, women and children are at the greatest
risk. The use of child soldiers is rising. Sexual violence
is growing. There are widespread reports of looting,
illegal checkpoints, extortion, arbitrary arrests, torture
and summary executions. The Secretary-General is
particularly concerned over the alarming increase in
intercommunal Violence. Traditional harmony among
communities has been replaced by polarization and
widespread horror. The manipulation of religious
affiliations for political purposes has fuelled never-
before-seen sectarian violence between Muslims and
Christians, particularly in the north-west and south-
east of the country.

Former Seleka elements are deemed responsible
for most humanitarianman rights violations against the
civilian population. Yet we are also deeply concerned by
abuses by "anti-balaka" - well-organized self-defence
or vigilante groups. This confrontation may develop
into a conflagration. The influence of religious leaders
to prevent violence is diminishing as the conflict has
brought to light years of the marginalization of and
discrimination against the northern, predominantly
Muslim population.

I welcome the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Babacar Gaye, and the
transitional authorities to establish mediation and
reconciliation committees and take other steps to find
practical solutions and to defuse tension in Bossangoa
and elsewhere. As recognized by the Council in
resolution 2121 (2013), the human rights capacity of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic is sorely inadequate. It is also
hampered by a lack of access in the present security
situation. We welcome the upcoming deployment of a
United Nations human rights monitoring missionand
a planned joint mission by the offices of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict.

In his report, the Secretary-General calls for urgent
measures to end the pervasive impunity and to ensure
accountability. I appeal to the Council to respond to this
end by considering accountability mechanisms, such
as a commission of inquiry and/or targeted sanctions.
At the same time, humanitarian needs are escalating.
Virtually the entire population of 4.6 million people
has been affected by the emergency. One out of three
people in the country is in dire need of food, protection,
health care, water, sanitation and shelter.

Access to populations in need remains difficult, and
funding is woefully short. The consolidated appeal of
$195 million has received less than half of the funding
required. And the needs keep rising. Our humanitarian
colleagues have developed a six-point action plan at the
global, regional and national levels, and I call for an
urgent response to this humanitarian crisis.

The restoration of security, law and order is a
precondition for addressing the political, human
rights and humanitarian problems. The capacity of the
country's armed forces and security services to prevent
and confront such threats is virtually non-existent.
According to the Ministry of Defence, nearly 7,000
of the Forces armees centrafricaines have returned
to Bangui but are neither deployed nor operational.
Former Seleka units have assumed the responsibility of
the national defence and security forces. Some 5,000
former Seleka are to be integrated into the security
services.

However, there is no agreed plan or budget for
the reconstitution of the national security forces. The
Central African Republic is becoming a breeding
ground for extremists and armed groups in a region that
is already suffering from conflict and instability. If this
situation is left to fester, it may develop into a religious
and ethnic conflict with long-standing consequences, or
even into a civil war that could spread into neighbouring
countries. It is critical for the international community
and the Council to act now.

The need for decisive action is also essential
for ensuring that preparations for the elections can
proceed in accordance with the transitional charter. As
reiterated by the Council and the International Contact
Group, the elections should be held within 18 months of
the inauguration of the Head of State of the Transition,
that is, by February 2015. We have no time to lose.

In response to 2121 (2013), the Secretary-General
dispatched an interagency technical assessment mission
to the Central African Republic from 27 October to
8 November, led by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, who is
present here today. The mission was tasked to develop
options for international support to the African-
led International Support Mission for the Central
African Republic (MISCA), including its possible
transformation into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, subject to appropriate conditions on the
ground and to the decision of the Security Council.

We thank the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), who
were a critical part of the mission, and we are gratified
that the African Union is represented here today by
Ambassador Ayebare. We also welcome the presence
here today of the Secretary-General of ECCAS,
Mr. Ahmad Allam-mi. I also thank the authorities of the
Central African Republic for welcoming the mission,
and am pleased to see them represented here today. The
African Union and ECCAS agree that there is an urgent
need for the international community to act, and that
a United Nations peacekeeping mandate with a robust
mandate will be required.

As I mentioned earlier, in recent days the Secretary-
General has had productive discussions with the African
Union Commission Chairperson, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma,
President Deby Itno of Chad and Mr. Ahmad Allam-mi
to underline his deep concerns about the situation and
his agreement with them that a strong peacekeeping
force is needed in the Central African Republic.

While in the country, the mission listened to a
wide range of national and international stakeholders,
who were unanimous in their calls for rapid action,
including the deployment of an effective and impartial
force to protect civilians, deter human right violations,
restore security and prevent the occurrence of mass
violence. The technical assessment mission observed
that, despite its best efforts, the capacity of the
ECCAS-led peacekeeping force - the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX) - to protect civilians is seriously limited.
While the recent deployment of MICOPAX has had a
deterrent effect in some locations, some contingents are
perceived as siding with particular communities based
on religion. MICOPAX troops are also struggling with
limited logistical support, with a shortfall in equipment
and means of communication, and with mobility
constraints. Significant external support would
therefore be required to enable MISCA to implement
its mandate and stabilize the situation.

The report before the Council presents five options
for international support to MISCA: first, bilateral and
multilateral support arrangements; secondly, United
Nations support funded through a trust fund, in addition
to a bilateral and multilateral support; thirdly, limited
United Nations support, funded through assessed or
voluntary contributions combined with bilateral and
multilateral support; fourthly, a comprehensive United
Nations support package funded through assessed
contributions; and fifthly, the transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

The majority of those with whom the mission
met called for the fifth and last option - a United
nations peacekeeping operation. Support for this
option has also been requested by a number of civil
society organizations. The transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation with an
estimated strength of 6,000 troops and 1,700 police
personnel would lay the foundation for transparent,
accountable and resilient institutions. A United
Nations peacekeeping operation would ensure a
multidimensional integrated approach and, we would
hope, enhance the international community's ability to
apply political leverage.

Since the mission was deployed and the Secretary-
General's report was issued, the Head of State of the
Transition has written to inform the Secretary-General
of his request for assistance from France. The Head of
State of the Transition has characterized the current
situation as a threat to international peace and security.
The virtual meltdown in the Central African Republic
requires a coherent, integrated and multidimensional
response that would address both the root causes
and the present manifestations of the crisis. In the
Secretary-General's assessment, the response must
be commensurate with the complexity of the crisis
and the protection needs of the population. It must be
robust and prevent what has a high potential to result in
widespread atrocities.

The Secretary-General has recently renewed
the commitment of the United Nations to upholding
our responsibilties whenever there is a threat of
large-scale violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. He is committed to bringing such
serious violations to the attention of the appropriate
United Nations bodies, in particular when national
authorities are unable to respond. Reporting to the
Council today is part of that commitment to placing
rights up front, as fundamentally laid down the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

We believe that a United Nations peacekeeping
operations will be needed in the Central African
Republic. However, the transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation would
require some lead time for necessary preparations. We
therefore urge the international community not only to
support MISCA in as comprehensive and predictable
a manner as possible, but to also to begin considering
the option of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

The people of the Central African Republic have
hardly ever had the opportunity to fully experience
peace and security. They need our help. Some call this
a forgotten crisis. The world is haunted by the horrors
of crises spiralling into atrocities as we have watched
from a distance. The United Nations, the African Union,
ECCAS and the Central African Republic authorities
all recognize the urgent need to stop this crisis from
escalating beyond control. It is now for the Council to
decide how it can best contribute to this goal.

