Mr. King (United Kingdom): I would like to join
others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
for his briefing this morning and in extending thanks to
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2004/669),
which provides a most useful update on progress
towards the completion of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement that the representative of the Netherlands
will make shortly on behalf of the European Union.

Like others, we are pleased to welcome the
significant progress that has been made in a number of
important areas. We commend the Government of Timor-
Leste for its work and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNMISET for their efforts. We
particularly welcome the support being provided for
new measures needed to deal with problems in the
justice sector, including the establishment of a judicial
training centre. We also welcome the support for the
Timorese police force following their assumption of
full responsibility on 20 May, including the preparation
of a skills development plan. We also commend
UNMISET for its efforts to coordinate its assistance to
the Timorese police with other bilateral assistance
programmes such as, for example, the United Kingdom
and Australian police training programme.

We welcome the continued progress of the
Serious Crimes Unit as well as the work of the
Commission on Reception, Truth and Reconciliation on
the development of recommendations for policy and
programmes. That said - and as noted in the
Secretary-General's report - more needs to be done in
a number of areas. We would particularly like to see
further progress over the next few months in
developing further capacity and structures in the public
administration and also in developing further the
capability of the armed forces.

Again, as the Secretary-General notes, the full
cooperation of Member States remains important. Like
others, we are disappointed about the recent
overturning of convictions by the Ad Hoc Human
Rights Tribunal of Indonesia in Jakarta and about the
failure of the ad hoc tribunal process to deliver justice.
The United Kingdom looks forward to working with
the Secretary-General to devise a mechanism to ensure
accountability for the serious crimes committed in
1999. We commend the continued efforts of Timor-
Leste and Indonesia towards reaching agreement on the
land border, and we hope that early progress will be
made in finalizing arrangements for management of the
border area.

We welcome UNMISET's plans to support
Timor-Leste in resolving emerging issues as Timor-
Leste moves towards self-sufficiency, thus helping to
ensure a smooth end to UNMISET's remit. In that
respect, we look forward to the review of UNMISET
later this year and to discussion of possible changes to
the future tasking and responsibilities of UNMISET as
needs and priorities evolve.

