Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and the 12 countries that have aligned themselves
with this statement.

May I first thank you, Mr. President, for having
arranged this debate. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh and our
colleagues from civil society, Mr. Van Tongeren,
Mr. Bartoli and Mr. Gounden, for the insights that they
have bought to our discussion. It is good that we
should hear those statements before contributing
ourselves.

The European Union has cause to be grateful for
the role that civil society has played over the past two
decades in contributing to the prevention of violent
conflict and peacebuilding throughout the world,
including within the European Union's own
neighbourhood. We recognize the contribution that
civil society makes to strengthening democracy and

promoting human rights, both within individual nations
and at the global level. Civil society plays an essential
role in all phases of the conflict cycle.

Let us be frank: there are different views among
members of the Council on the legitimacy of some
civil society organizations and on the role that such
organizations should be allowed to play in comparison
with that played by Governments. The European Union
believes that all United Nations Member States should
accept the legitimate right of civil society to express
views, make recommendations and express concerns
and disagreements with Governments, even though at
times that may be a difficult process. It is through such
genuine dialogue that democracy is strengthened and
that Governments are better able to meet the needs of
their people.

We should ensure - post-summit - that we all
do more to prevent conflict. In that respect, the United
Nations itself needs to be much more active.
Governments and civil society must work closely
together to reduce the risks of violent conflict breaking
out. International and regional organizations must also
engage purposefully with civil society if they are to be
effective in addressing and managing conflict. With
that objective in mind, the EU strongly supports many
of the recommendations of the Cardoso report on
United Nations-civil society relations, published one
year ago.

Local civil society's understanding of points of
tension can give useful early-warning indicators. For
example, civil society can draw attention to violations
of human rights, which can often be an early indication
of incipient conflict. The EU believes that the new
Human Rights Council should have clear means for
interaction with civil society and that the High
Commissioner for Human Rights should continue to
engage with civil society regularly.

Interaction between civil society and the
international community is vital if we are to carry out
our responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity - as recognized, for the first time, at
last week's summit. Civil society can also help reduce
hostility and begin the rebuilding of trust between
different groups that might otherwise resort to fighting.
In particular, the role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, as we have just heard, is vital in
rebuilding the peace after conflict, just as resolution
1325 (2000) underlined.

For its part, the EU has given considerable
resources to supporting civil society in its role in
preventing and resolving conflict and in post-conflict
peacebuilding. In the Sudan, the European Centre for
Development Policy Management, supported by the
international non-governmental organization,
Saferworld, has facilitated capacity-building for civil
society in both political dialogue and development
programming. In Nepal over the past three years, the
European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights
has undertaken microprojects on empowerment and
human rights education.

The EU has had a long-term confidence-building
programme in Georgia, aimed at building capacity
among a range of peacebuilding non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). We also work closely with
many international and national NGOs in developing
strategies on conflict prevention and work on what to
do about fragile States.

I would like to say a few words about the first
Global Conference on the Role of Civil Society in the
Prevention of Armed Conflict and Peacebuilding, about
which Mr. Van Tongeren has already spoken to us. The
Conference set out principles for the engagement of
civil society in this field and agreed a wide-ranging
agenda for action. We particularly agree with the
Conference recommendation for a structural
mechanism for consultation with civil society and the
new Peacebuilding Commission. Like the three
representatives of civil society and many other
speakers, the European Union believes that proper
interaction between civil society and the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission will better permit the
Commission to do its work. We need to profit from the
experience and views of those working on the front
line. We also agree that the Peacebuilding Commission
might, in due course, play its own part in supporting
States, at their request, when they are on the verge of
lapsing or relapsing into conflict.

The paper circulated as food for thought for this
meeting raised the question of collaboration between
the Security Council and civil society in the
development of conflict-prevention strategies.

When Security Council missions visit regions at
risk of conflict, they should take time for meetings
with local civil society, as Council missions to Africa
have done in the past two years.

The Security Council should also continue, in our
view, discussions with civil society here in New York.
The Arria formula meetings are extremely useful for
that purpose. Those meetings bring the Council reliable
and independent information about the situation on the
ground in a particular area of tension, and often new
ideas for possible resolutions.

In addition to the Arria meetings, the Council
should also consider inviting representatives from civil
society to address it during its debates. We should do
that more frequently.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
European Union's interest in seeing the dialogue
between the Security Council and civil society
strengthened. Let us be brave enough to listen to points
of view from across the spectrum, because through this
dialogue we will make better policies and have greater
opportunities to ensure that those policies become
effective. We all share an interest in the prevention of
conflict, and civil society can and does make a vital
contribution. We should recognize it and benefit from
it.

