Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the
Slovak Republic and Slovenia, as well as the associated
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, declare that
they align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the situation in Iraq, as evidenced by the extraordinary
meeting of the European Council held yesterday to
discuss the ongoing crisis over that country. On that
occasion the members of the European Council also
met with Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the
President of the European Parliament, Mr. Pat Cox.

The European Union reaffirms the 27 January
conclusions of its General Affairs and External
Relations Council, as well as the terms of the public
demarche of 4 February 2003 to Iraq, which remain
valid.

The European Union believes that the way the
unfolding of the situation in Iraq is handled will have
an important impact on the world in the coming
decades. We are determined to deal effectively with the
threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

We are committed to the United Nations
remaining at the centre of the international order. We
recognize that the primary responsibility for dealing
with Iraqi disarmament lies with the Security Council.
We pledge our full support to the Council in
discharging its responsibilities.

The European Union's objective for Iraq remains
full and effective disarmament from weapons of mass
destruction in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations Security Council, in particular
resolution 1441 (2002). We want to achieve this
peacefully. It is clear that this is what the people of
Europe want. War is not inevitable. Force should be
used only as a last resort. It is for the Iraqi regime to
end this crisis by complying with the demands of the
Security Council.

The European Union reiterates its full support for
the ongoing work of the United Nations inspectors.
They must be given the time and resources that the
Security Council believes they need. However,
inspections cannot continue indefinitely in the absence
of full Iraqi cooperation. This must include the
provision of all additional and specific information on
the issues that have been raised in the inspectors'
reports.

Baghdad should have no illusions. It must disarm
and cooperate immediately and fully. Iraq has a final
opportunity to resolve the crisis peacefully. The Iraqi
regime alone will be responsible for the consequences
if it continues to flout the will of the international
community and does not take this last chance.

The European Union recognizes that the unity
and firmness of the international community, as
expressed in the unanimous adoption of resolution
1441 (2002), and the military build-up have been
essential in obtaining the return of the inspectors.
These factors will remain essential if we are to achieve
the full cooperation we seek.

The European Union will work with Arab
countries and the League of Arab States. We will
encourage them, separately and jointly, to bring home
to Saddam Hussain the extreme danger of
miscalculation of the situation and the need for full
compliance with resolution 1441 (2002). We support
Turkey's regional initiatives with the neighbours of
Iraq and Egypt.

In this regional context, the European Union
reiterates its firm belief in the need to reinvigorate the
peace process in the Middle East and to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We continue to support
early implementation of the roadmap endorsed by the
Quartet. Terror and violence must end; so must
settlement activity. Palestinian reforms must be sped
up. In that respect, President Arafat's statement that he
will appoint a prime minister is a welcome step in the
right direction.

The unity of the international community is vital
in dealing with these problems. The European Union is
committed to working with all our partners, especially
the United States, for the disarmament of Iraq, for
peace and stability in the region and for a decent future
for all its people.

