Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The outcome of today's ministerial-level
meeting of the Security Council demonstrates the
international community's resolve to establish the truth
regarding the serious crime that resulted in the death of
an outstanding Arab statesman, the Prime Minister of
Lebanon, Rafik Hariri. From the very outset Russia has
supported and continues to support the activities of the
International Independent Investigation Commission,
under the leadership of Mr. Mehlis, to investigate that
terrorist act.

From the very first days of work on the text of
the draft resolution, we tried, together with other
Council members, to ensure that it reflected clearly the
main objective proclaimed by the sponsors themselves:
to help the Commission resolve the difficulties
encountered in carrying out its investigation. We have
supported all of the resolution's provisions regarding
the need to ensure Syria's honest cooperation with the
international investigators, in conformity with
resolution 1595 (2005). At the same time, we have
consistently endeavoured to rid the text of any
provisions having nothing to do with the investigation
of Rafik Hariri's assassination.

We note that the sponsors were able to take into
account to a significant extent the proposals of Russia
and other Council members who were trying to ensure
that the resolution not be political, that it not go
beyond the context of cooperation with the
investigation and that it not contain any baseless
threats or cast doubt on the universal principle of the
presumption of innocence.

I recall that the initial version of the draft
resolution provided for an unprecedented procedure
that would have automatically imposed sanctions
against suspects purely at the discretion of the
Commission thereby depriving the Security Council of
its prerogatives under the Charter of the United
Nations. Our joint efforts enabled us not to allow such
a very dangerous precedent to be established. The final
text just adopted provides that sanctions against
individuals will be considered - or should be
considered - by the relevant Security Council
committee - that is, on the basis of consensus.

It is extremely important that the sponsors agreed
to our proposal that the resolution reflect the need for
peace and stability in the region and for peaceful
means to achieve a settlement. Of course, the
resolution's final text is not ideal, but its main benefit
lies in the fact that we all were able to focus on the
main point: to show the resolve of all Council members
to establish the truth.

In any case, the differences among Security
Council members that arose during our work on the
text must not be viewed as a pretext for non-
compliance with the resolution's main requirement:
full and faithful cooperation on the part of all States
with the Commission. Of course, that applies first and
foremost to Syria. We note that we have received from
Damascus the relevant assurances, including at the
highest level. The Syrian leadership has decided to
establish a national investigation commission that will
work in close cooperation with the Mehlis
Commission. As emphasized in the resolution just
adopted, that decision should be supplemented with
practical action in the near future.

We will carefully follow further developments in
the work of the Mehlis Commission and will continue
to lend it our support. We are convinced that the
Commission will act professionally, objectively and
strictly within the framework of its mandate. That will
ensure an impartial investigation that should not only
help us find the truth, but also to reinforce stability in
Lebanon, to normalize its relations with Syria and to
improve the situation in the Middle East as a whole.

