Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I convey to you, Ambassador Vassilakis, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July. We wish
you every success in presiding over the Council, and
are certain of that success, knowing your abilities and
talent. Secondly, we wish to thank and congratulate the
Ambassador of France, Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sabliere
and his entire delegation for their excellent work in
presiding over the Council last month. I wish also to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Danilo Turk, for the information he has
provided the Council on the situation in Bougainville.

We join the other members of the Council in
welcoming the successful conclusion of the provincial
elections and the establishment of the Autonomous
Bougainville Government. Those are important
milestones in the peace process on the island, leading
to a new stage in the process of implementing the
Peace Agreement.

In that context, we congratulate the Government
of Papua New Guinea and the Government and the
people of Bougainville on their efforts to advance the
peace process and fully to comply with their mutual
obligations. We urge all sectors of Bougainville to
support the work of the recently established
Autonomous Bougainville Government, led by
President Joseph Kabui.

We cannot fail to mention the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) and its
predecessor, the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), and to congratulate them on
their efforts and their work to keep the process on track
over the years. We also express our gratitude to the
countries of the region and to the donor community for
their important contribution to those efforts.

In these circumstances, it is possible to say that
this stage of the United Nations political participation
in Bougainville has successfully concluded, leading to
a new phase of consolidating the achievements; here,
the development and humanitarian agencies will
complete the cycle and take a leadership role.

In the light of the progress that has been
achieved, we are pleased to note that the prerequisites
for the exit strategy for UNOMB have been fulfilled
and that the Mission is preparing to close its offices on
the island. We believe that the contribution of UNOMB
and that of its predecessor, UNPOB, throughout the
process attest to the considerable impact that a limited
United Nations presence with a clearly defined
mandate can have in the search for a solution to a
regional conflict. We believe that in this case the
results achieved provide a good return on the
investment made by the international community over
the years.

Finally, we encourage continued international
support for the efforts of the Government of Papua
New Guinea and the people of Bougainville as they
continue to work towards the consolidation of lasting
peace, reconstruction and economic development.

