Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, for their briefings on the recent situation in
Kosovo. I would also like to welcome Mr. Ivica Daeic',
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, to New York.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/461), and would like to join others in expressing
our deep concern about the recent situation in the field.
Today, I would like to bring three points to the attention
of the Council.

First, Indonesia calls for the cessation of political
hostilities in the region. We reiterate the call of
resolution 1244 (1999) for all parties to engage in
peaceful dialogue to resolve the political conflict. It is
imperative for the parties to refrain from provocations
and political hostilities, which are not constructive and
do not contribute to creating an environment that is
conducive to dialogue. Allegations and inflammatory
rhetoric can only add salt to the wounds. Ultimately, all
parties must fully commit to peaceful means, through
dialogue and negotiation. But we need more than good
will to start a dialogue; we need sincerity to build trust
instead of provocations and trade wars. Each party must
refrain from any action that could exacerbate tensions
and undermine efforts toward normalization, including
the imposition ofimport tariffs.

Secondly, the Government of Indonesia upholds
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia as a
Member of the United Nations, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.

Thirdly, I would like to once again reiterate
the important role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Indonesia
greatly appreciates UNMIK's multipronged approach
to engaging grass-roots communities through various
forums, conferences and trust-building projects. We
also welcome UNMIK's support for the participation of
young people in decision-making processes and cross-
community dialogue. Young people are the future.
We have to place our trust in the young generation
while maintaining a positive attitude and setting aside
political or ethnic interests. We also support trust-
building efforts, as explained by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tanin. Town hall debates on
key issues, cross-community engagement, religious
tolerance programmes, languages, gender equality
and human rights programmes certainly contribute to
closer engagement.

Despite the positive progress made by UNMIK
in this area and many others, we are deeply saddened
by the fact that several UNMIK staff members have
been arrested and injured by the authorities in northern
Kosovo, as mentioned by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin and Under-Secretary-General
De Serpa Soares. Those actions are clearly a violation
of international law and the immunities granted to
international United Nations staff members.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about the
heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina, as
well as his view on the importance ofresuming dialogue
between the parties under the auspices of the European
Union - as many have stated this morning - without
further delay in order to bring unity back to the region.
It has been many months and far too long since the last
meeting between the two parties, under the auspices
of the European Union. It should be clear that peace
will be sustained only if there is reconciliation, and
reconciliation will happen only if both parties sit
together, at the same table, with trust, confidence and
faith in the whole process of political dialogue.

We regret the use of inflammatory rhetoric and
statements, including in this Chamber, which certainly
does not help the situation. There is an urgent need and
hope to find durable peace for the peoples involved. I
share the view that it is important for all of us to find a
solution and to avoid any further statements that do not
contribute to creating a conducive environment.

