Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Turkey has aligned itself with
the statement delivered today by the observer of the
European Union. I now wish to make a statement in my
own capacity, and I should like to thank the Nigerian
presidency for organizing this timely debate. In our
View, the role of regional organizations in meeting the
contemporary challenges of global security is crucial
and needs to be further highlighted.

Today, threats characterized by their transnational
nature - such as terrorism, organized crime,
sectarianism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, climate change, poverty, and the
uncontrolled and involuntary mass movement of
people - are constantly evolving. Thus, peace and
security can no longer be achieved solely through
military means, since some of these challenges are
not necessarily of a military nature. We need to
employ a broader combination of policies to confront
contemporary challenges. We believe that regional
organizations have a significant contribution to make
in this regard.

As stated in the excellent concept note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared by your presidency, Madam President,
regional organizations are increasingly focusing on
contemporary challenges that have a direct impact on
regional and global security. Aware of this fact, Turkey
has been promoting and actively taking part in the
activities of regional organizations in its region such as
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
NATO, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Black Sea Economic Organization, the Organization of
Economic Cooperation, the Council of Europe, the D-8
and the Turkic Council.

In line with our objective of contributing to stability,
security and prosperity beyond our neighbourhood,
we have also strengthened our relations with regional
organizations throughout the world, in Africa, Asia
and Latin America alongside the enhancement of our
bilateral relations with countries in these regions. In
Africa, Turkey as a strategic partner of the continent
since 2008 actively supports various United Nations
and African Union peace operations by providing funds
and personnel. We also contribute to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund and the Commission's work.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) contributes greatly to democracy, peace and
stability in West Africa through its efforts in Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso and other countries.

We support the peacekeeping activities of ECOWAS
and other regional actors in Africa. In this regard, we
have provided grants to the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali Trust Fund and the Mali Peace
and Security Fund. We have also made a donation to
the projects developed by the United Nations Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
in Africa for the Central African Republic, ECOWAS
and the African Union.

In East Africa, we follow closely the integration
process in the East African Community (EAC). We
believe that full integration of the member countries of
EAC will boost the development in the region and unfold
new potentials. We consider the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to be a key factor in attaining
peace, stability and sustainable economic development
in the region.

In Asia, establishing more institutional ties with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which we view
as the key regional organization, is our priority. We also
enhanced our relations with the Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation as a dialogue partner. In Latin America,
in addition to the Organization of American States, the
Association of Caribbean States, the Central American
Integration System and the Pacific Alliance, in which
Turkey has observer status, we have institutional
relations with the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community and the
Common Market of the South.

As regional organizations are more and more
active in the international scene, the enhancement
of cooperation among the regional organizations and
coordination between regional organizations and the
United Nations are crucial in order to create synergies
and to achieve better results, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. We are glad to observe
the positive developments in recent years concerning
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union to find solutions to several conflicts in
Africa. Turkey, whether through bilateral, regional or
international channels, will do its utmost to contribute
to peace and security in its region and beyond.

