Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council today and to thank you, both for
presiding over this important debate today and for the
excellent contribution that Japan's delegation makes to
the Council's work. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the ministerial and other
participants today for sharing their particular insights.
It has been especially valuable to hear the perspectives
of countries taking important steps on the long and
challenging path to rebuilding themselves.

Peacebuilding is at the heart of this Council's
work. In some senses, everything we do in this Council
is about building peace. We give it different labels,
depending on the specific task at hand. But conflict
prevention and peacekeeping are all part of this broader
goal of sustainable peacebuilding, and it tests every
resource - political, security and development - that
the United Nations can deploy. As the minister from
Sierra Leone said earlier today, we need to look at the
rebalancing of resources between conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The ultimate goal for
us should be to strengthen the capacities of countries
emerging from conflict to drive forward their own
recovery processes and address the very difficult
governance, security and development challenges they
face.

As we discussed in the Council debate in January
under the French presidency, the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding is not a linear one.
Countries at risk of relapsing into conflict need to be
able to provide sufficient security and access to justice,
and be able to resolve conflicts peacefully to allow for
the departure of peacekeeping troops. International
support for that process is not just about offering
barracks and boots. Integrating combatants who were
previously fighting each other in a new army, ensuring
the discipline of that new army and then putting it
under proper civilian oversight can be daunting tasks
for a new Government overseeing a fragile peace
pI'OCGSS.

Those elements alone are insufficient. Successful
peacebuilding needs real progress on providing basic
services and economic recovery. That must start as
soon as possible after a peace agreement is reached.
Delivering that requires leadership and vision from
within the country itself. The United Nations, and
in particular the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, has a key role in bringing the
United Nations system and the wider international
community systems - political, security and
development efforts - behind a common nationally
owned strategy.

So how can the United Nations and the broader
international community deliver more effectively? In
the coming months, I believe, we should focus on three
issues. First, we need to improve the speed and quality
of deployable civilian experts to help build national
capacities. As the Secretary-General said earlier today,
the recently launched review of civilian capacities
needs to generate practical solutions.

Secondly, we need greater clarity on the roles and
responsibilities within the United Nations and a
strengthened partnership with the World Bank. That
will allow us to make the right investments in order to
achieve more timely and predictable responses in such
areas as support for re-establishing the basic functions
of a State.

The conclusions of both those strands of work
need to be included in the Secretary-General's follow-
up report on peacebuilding. That report should include
a frank assessment of what is, and what is not, working
on the ground.

Thirdly, we need a Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) that has real impact on the ground. The PBC's
focus should be on helping countries to address the
barriers to peacebuilding and on getting clear
commitments from Governments and the international
community about what needs to be done in a defined
period of time to help achieve that. And we need the
PBC to have a much more distinctive voice when
providing advice. The Council should have an
opportunity to listen to that advice when discussing
peacebuilding and peacekeeping issues. The PBC
review provides an opportunity for us to establish that
practice.
The Council was due to visit the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this weekend. Unfortunately,
that has had to be postponed for climactic reasons. But
we hope we will be able to reinstate that visit soon. We
think that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
be a real test of the international community's ability to
move from a primarily peacekeeping presence to a
broader peacebuilding role. That will require the
United Nations system, the international financial
institutions and the wider international community to
play a more significant role in helping to restore a State
and to support it in addressing critical peacebuilding
needs.

History is littered with collapsed or faltered peace
processes, some of which are due to underlying
governance and rule of law issues not being addressed.
When such threats emerge, the Council needs to be
able to react rapidly to prevent further deterioration.
The United Kingdom supports the draft presidential
statement that is before the Council.

