Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, Nepal congratulates
and commends the Indonesian presidency for convening
this important debate to accord peacekeeping the
priority it deserves.

With a contribution of over 140,000 troops and
police since 1958, Nepal is proud of being a reliable
and credible partner of the United Nations in its
peacekeeping operations. However, this unwavering
stand has its own cost. In its journey of peacekeeping,
Nepal has lost 74 brave compatriots in the noble
cause of international peace and stability. This loss
always reminds us of the importance of training and
capacity-building to ensuring the safety and security of
the peacekeepers.

In that context, my delegation wishes to make the
following points concerning the safety, security and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers:

First, the mandates of peace missions should be
clearly communicated to the peacekeepers on the
ground and clear expectations of their performance
must be spelled out.

Second, the mandates and the peacekeepers'
capacities must be continuously aligned in View
of evolving ground realities, with the Secretariat
deploying mobile training support teams of experienced
peacekeepers from troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs), as may be necessary, to provide
training on the mission-specific mandates, rules of
engagement and the use of force, among other things.

Third, mission-specific performance indicators
should be drawn in the light of the mandates, ground
realities and timely availability of appropriate resources,
as well as obstacles and shortfalls.

Fourth, performance should be considered as
a leadership responsibility and mission leadership
should be held accountable for the whole-of-mission
performance, as well as for monitoring the performance
of the troops and police. Accordingly, the outstanding
performance of the peacekeepers should be rewarded to
boost their morale.

Fifth, at no time should the absence of national
caveats make any contingent prone to unreasonable
tasking, deployments, rotations or scapegoating.
Performance should be the primary basis for the rotation
of contingents from different TCCs/PCCs.
Sixth, the gender perspective should be incorporated
into training, and specific training should be developed
for female peacekeepers. Zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse should be strictly ensured.

Seventh, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations should be revitalized to make it more
effective in providing policy guidance to peace
operations, considering current peacekeeping
challenges. Similarly, the Department of Peace
Operations and the Department of Operational Support
should assume an active role in ensuring common
standards of the peacekeeping training provided by
different national, regional and international training
centres. In this regard, Nepal offers its national
peacekeeping training centre to serve as a regional
centre of excellence in its region.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
urgency of timely reimbursement to the TCCs/PCCs,
without which capacity-building and improving the
performance of peacekeepers would be affected in a
highly adverse manner.

