Mr. Ayafor: Madam President, at the outset, I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of November. I thank you
for this unique opportunity granted to me as Chairman,
on behalf of the Panel of Experts on Liberia, to address
the Security Council at its public meeting today. I also
thank Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia, for his
introduction of the Panel's report.

Following the adoption of resolution 1343 (2001)
on 7 March 2001, the Secretary-General on 23 March
announced (S/2001/268) the appointment of a Panel of
Experts with a mandate to, among other things,
investigate violations of the newly tightened arms
embargo on Liberia, the ban on exports of Liberian
diamonds, and the travel ban on senior members of the
Government of Liberia, its armed forces and their
spouses and other individuals providing financial and
military support to armed rebel groups; collect
information on compliance by the Government of
Liberia with the demands to expel all members of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) from Liberia, cease
all financial and military support to the RUF, cease all
direct or indirect imports of Sierra Leone rough
diamonds, freeze funds or financial resources
controlled by the RUF in Liberia and ground all
Liberian registered aircraft; further investigate possible
links between the exploitation of natural resources,
other forms of economic activity in Liberia and the
fuelling of conflict in Sierra Leone and neighbouring
countries, in particular those areas highlighted by the
report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1306 (2000) concerning Sierra Leone;
collect information linked to the illegal activities of the
individuals referred to in the report of the Panel of
Experts on Sierra Leone; and, finally, collect
information concerning any other alleged Violations of
resolution 1343 (2001).

In carrying out its mandate, the Panel requested
specific information from the relevant countries,
through their Permanent Missions to the United
Nations, regarding certain arms shipments, the
movement of suspicious aircraft used for the illegal
transportation of arms and ammunition, and other
aspects of the mandate. In each country, Panel
members interviewed Government authorities and,
where relevant, diplomatic missions, civil society
organizations, aid agencies and private sector firms.
They also contacted a number of individuals suspected
of being involved in the violations of sanctions as well
as individuals whose names have been the subject of
interest in recent months in connection with the crisis
in the subregion. The Panel travelled extensively to
countries which evidence led it to. Some countries
volunteered information and invited the Panel to verify
it. In others, the Panel cooperated with the authorities
to obtain details on certain activities taking place
within their jurisdiction.

There has been a great deal of mystique attached
to several places in the subregion of Liberia, Guinea,
Sierra Leone and cote d'Ivoire. The Panel visited all
such areas where it was humanly possible. The Panel
also received useful cooperation and assistance from
several international organizations, such as
INTERPOL, the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), and made proper use of their
expertise. The Panel used high evidentiary standards
throughout its investigation. Wherever possible, it also
considered putting allegations to those concerned in
order to allow them the right of reply.

During the investigation, where possible, the
Panel shared the relevant information and cooperated
with the States concerned for further thorough
investigation at their level. Where appropriate, the
Panel also brought the information collected during the
course of investigation to the attention of authorities to
allow them the right of reply, as requested in paragraph
20 of resolution 1343 (2001). A significant number of
countries came forward with useful information on
individuals behind certain shady companies and their
financial transactions. To satisfy the oft-repeated
rhetoric of "Where is the evidence?" "If you have
evidence, show it", the Panel traced and reconstructed
the entire sequence of events, starting from the origin
of weapons to their end destination, using documentary
evidence and the direct eyewitness accounts of the
persons involved.

Concerning the planes involved in supplying
illegal arms in Liberia, the Panel has in its possession
copies of contracts signed by the contracting parties,
requests and permission for overflight and landing,
flight plans, cargo manifests, airway bills, documents
showing the owners or operating agencies of the
aircraft involved, pilots' logbooks, and insurance
documents for the cargo and the planes concerned.

In collecting all this evidence, the Panel was able
to identify the most important networks supplying
Liberia and the RUF, and to give an analysis of the key
players in those networks - suppliers, transport
agents, brokers, suppliers of forged documents and
organizers at the receiving end of the arms pipeline.
The Panel was also able to document how, and through
which bank accounts, those arms shipments were
financed.

In mid-April, when the Panel embarked upon its
mandate, there were active hostilities in the three Mano
River Union countries: Guinea, Sierra Leone and
Liberia. Six months on, there are significant signs of
improvement in the situation. Welcome regional
diplomatic efforts are under way to further advance
bilateral relations between the three members of the
Mano River Union, although there is still active
conflict in Lofa County, Liberia, and the possibility of
Sierra Leone gravitating back into conflict if the RUF
does not want to release its hold on some of the best
diamond areas. In order to curtail the support for RUF
rebels who are still unwilling to give up their interests
in diamonds for a lasting peace agreement in Sierra
Leone, Liberia's total disengagement from the RUF
must be ensured.

There has been a proliferation of the use of non-
State actors in conflicts in the Mano River Union
countries. These groups obtain weapons from State
supporters; from their trade in diamonds, alluvial gold,
cocoa and coffee; and from their military actions. Their
actions have had destabilizing consequences, and can
again destabilize the region. The junction of the
borders of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone has been
the fault zone where these groups have thrived.

The Panel remained cognizant of the
humanitarian situation before and after the imposition
of the sanctions on Liberia, and was fully aware of the
concerns of Member States in that respect. The Panel
also kept in mind the overall intentions of the Security
Council to further the peace process in Sierra Leone
and neighbouring countries.

This report covers in great detail the findings on
the role of transportation in arms-trafficking,
fraudulent aircraft registrations, the dynamics of the
diamond trade, the misuse of end-user certificates, the
misuse of Liberian Government revenue derived from
maritime, logging and other forms of economic
activity, violations of the travel ban and other
violations of the resolution. Despite the Liberian
Government's public statements of having complied
with the arms embargo, a steady flow of new weapons
continues to enter the country. In that respect, the Panel
has documented five detailed case studies on such
sanctions violations.

In addition to the findings indicated in the report,
the Panel has collected evidence that was not included
in the report because it did not meet the high
evidentiary criteria set by the Panel. In such cases,
further investigation will be required to collect
incontrovertible evidence to support the case. This
includes the case of the supply of ammunition to non-
State actors in the subregion.

In its report, the Panel has delineated a series of
specific recommendations for all the areas covered in
the report. Timely implementation of those
recommendations will go a long way in furthering the
peace process in the subregion and in maintaining the
momentum observed thus far.

As indicated earlier, the Panel travelled
extensively and covered 36 countries. This has earned
the Panel a reputation as the most travelled Panel of the
United Nations, and probably the most expensive too.
This travel was necessitated by Panel members'
decision to verify every possible detail of the cases that
were investigated. In many of the countries to which
the Panel went, information-sharing and cooperation
led to visible changes in the behaviour of the
trafficking networks. Airline companies had to move
their operations, some key individuals changed
addresses or phone numbers, and some operations were
stopped. This was a part of the search for peace in the
region; what price tag can we place on peace and
security?

During the Panel's presentation to the Committee
on 19 and 25 October 2001, the Panel shared as much
evidence as possible with the members of the
Committee. However, should the need arise, and should
time permit, the Panel members are available for any
further questions and/or clarifications required.

Lastly, permit me to mention that this report
would not have been possible without the dedication,
courage, determination, tenacity, endurance,
understanding, cooperation, sense of sacrifice and
accommodation, friendliness and, above all, team spirit
of the members of the Panel. May I further take this
opportunity to extend appreciation for the support
received from the United Nations Secretariat, the
Security Council Committee on Liberia, the United
Nations Resident Coordinators and United Nations
Development Programme officials in almost every
country the Panel Visited and the Governments and
individuals that provided substantial and helpful
information to the Panel during the investigation.

