Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank Mr. Lacroix, Mr. Mogae and Ms. Mueller for
their clear and, may I say, disquieting briefings.

Seven years ago this month, an overwhelming
majority of the people of South Sudan voted in favour
of independence. They voted for an independent,
peaceful and stable future. Now, seven years later,
irresponsible political leadership in South Sudan has
created a conflict that the people of that country did not
vote for. Despite the strong support of the international
community, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
currently millions of people are living in urgent need
of food assistance and millions more are displaced, as
Ms. Mueller just mentioned. Only one conclusion is
possible: the political leadership of South Sudan has not
had the interests of its own people at heart.

As others have said, we welcome the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access of 21 December. We thank the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU) for their tireless efforts to
establish the Agreement.

However, within hours the first violations of the
Agreement were reported, and more violations have
been reported since, as Mr. Mogae just said. To make
things worse, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) faces continued obstruction while
attempting to report on the violations. These violations
and restrictions are unacceptable. They raise the
issue of enforcement and that of the consequences of
non-compliance, as Mr. Mogae just said.

I will focus on three key issues for a sustainable
peace in South Sudan: apeace agreement, accountability
and humanitarian access.

First, concerning the issue of a peace agreement,
the revitalization process led by IGAD is the most
urgent challenge. We should put pressure on those who
stand in the way of peace and undermine this process.

We continue to fully support the efforts of IGAD
and call on all actors to engage constructively in the
second round of the High-level Revitalization Forum.
Experience has shown that such engagement will not
take place without strong and united encouragement
from the international community. This especially
includes neighbouring countries. We support the
recent statements issued by IGAD, the AU, the United
Nations, the Troika and the European Union. This, of
course, includes the call for serious consequences for
those who obstruct the peace process and violate the
cessation of hostilities.

The situation in South Sudan has reached a
critical point. The international community, including
the Council, must respond with the strongest
possible pressure.

This brings me to my second point, the issue of
accountability. There can be no lasting peace without
justice. We cannot wait for the guns to fall silent before
we start holding to account those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights, especially horrible crimes of sexual violence, as
was mentioned just now.

The establishment of a hybrid court, as agreed by
the South Sudanese parties in 2015, is an essential step
to address impunity and bring about justice. We urge
the authorities of South Sudan and the African Union
to establish the court as soon as possible.

My third point concerns the issue of humanitarian
access. Despite the 9 November presidential decree
to allow unhindered movement, access on the ground
has not improved, as Ms. Mueller just highlighted.
Humanitarian organizations continue to face
unacceptable bureaucratic, operational and physical
obstacles in trying to provide assistance to those
most in need. For donors such as the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, this is unacceptable, and it should be
unacceptable for all members of the Council.

In addition, we are extremely concerned by the
interim report of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan,
which concluded that starvation has been used as a
weapon of war in Wau county and surrounding areas.
We call on the Government of South Sudan and all other
parties to allow quick, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to all people in need. This includes respect for
the full freedom of movement of UNMISS, whose work
is essential to facilitate humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, the key to South Sudan's future is,
of course, in the hands of the people of South Sudan
themselves. But the people of that country, especially
women and children, continue to need our steadfast
commitment as a Council to make their call for peace
heard. Their voice is indispensable to the future of the
country. The Council must stand by the people of South
Sudan. We have to show that there are consequences,
including sanctions, for every actor who continues to
choose fighting over dialogue, conflict over peace,
obstruction over cooperation.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will support
any measure that reduces the possibility of violence,
including an arms embargo. Let me reiterate that we
urge all the parties in South Sudan to allow UNMISS to
do its work. The Security Council should see to it that
UNMISS has the capacity to do so.

From that perspective, we look forward to the
discussion on the renewal of the UNMISS mandate in
March. It is our responsibility as a Council to ensure
that the political leadership of South Sudan has the
interests of its people at heart.

