Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. F edotov and Mr. Djinnit for their briefings
and for their commitment to tackling this challenge.

Traditional trading routes across the Sahel and
West Africa have been vital to livelihoods in the
region for centuries. However, those same routes,
now exploited by drug traffickers, are also a serious
source of instability. The stakes are high. We heard
the statistics this morning from the Secretary-General.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa,
Mr. Djinnit, told us clearly yesterday that transnational
crime posed the gravest threat to that region. Former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said at the launch of the
West Africa Commission on Drugs that

"left unchecked, illegal drug trafficking could
compromise the encouraging progress West African
nations have made in strengthening democracy and
promoting human and economic development."

Illegal drug trafficking is a transnational problem
that impacts source, transit and destination countries.
It is therefore our shared responsibility, and only truly
regional solutions can work to address it. Solving the
problem in one country might simply push it next door.
I would like to focus very briefly on each of the four
areas identified in the concept note (S/2013/728, annex).

First, on border management, Australia's
experience in the Asia-Pacific region has demonstrated
the importance ofregional cooperation and ofmanaging
threats before they actually reach the border. That has
been achieved through reciprocal officer placements
and regional capacity-building programmes. Australia
also established a South-East Asia border security
programme, which improved drug detection capability
through shared technology, closer communication and
specialized training programmes.

The second Regional Ministerial Meeting on Border
Security in the Sahel and the Maghreb, held in Rabat,
identified the need in many States for customs training,
technology to track goods and people, and stronger
networks to enable better coordination nationally and
across borders. The international community should
support that framework. We welcome the recent

decision to establish a joint border security training
centre.
Secondly, with regard to strengthening law
enforcement and judicial systems, the problem will
not be contained until the costs and risks outweigh the
potential gains. Actual prosecutions and convictions
are one of the most important tools in that fight. The
West Africa Coast Initiative is playing an important
role in building regional and national capacities. The
establishment of transnational crime units, for example
in Sierra Leone and Liberia, has strengthened the ability
of law enforcement agencies to share critical criminal
intelligence, enabling coordinated and effective law
enforcement operations. We know at first hand that such
a model actually works: over the past decade, 18 such
units have operated successfully in the framework of the
Pacific Transnational Crime Network. To be effective
in West Africa and the Sahel, we must learn from such
lessons. Transnational crime units can succeed only
with the necessary investigative skills, supported by
appropriate technology and complemented by effective
legislation and robust judicial systems. They must have
the necessary political support.

Thirdly, on anti-money laundering and financial
issues, we have learned that drug trafficking can help
fund armed groups and destabilize Governments, and
that it has increasingly been linked to financing terrorists
in the Sahel and West Africa. We know terrorist groups
and drug traffickers operate in the same areas and
routes. But we do not know enough about the linkages.
That needs closer analysis. The fact is, however, that a
State that has developed a strong anti-money laundering
framework is better placed to tackle the financing of
both terrorism and drug trafficking. The Financial
Action Task Force's guidance on combating money
laundering must be leveraged by the region, including
through a revitalized West African intergovernmental
action group.

Finally, with regard to improved United Nations
synergies, a recent International Peace Institute report
claimed that transnational organized crime was the
elephant in the room for United Nations missions,
impossible to overlook but too big to deal with. It
has become a serious threat for almost every United
Nations peace operation, in many cases hindering
the development, security and justice that the United
Nations is trying to build. It is vital to consider
opportunities for improved United Nations synergies.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is
an important step, providing an overarching framework
for the United Nations, the region and international
partners. The Council must consider whether United
Nations missions have the necessary mandates, means
and expertise to combat transnational crime.

In response to an increasingly complex criminal
environment, the United Nations Police Division has
developed serious-crime support units, where United
Nations police collect and analyse criminal intelligence
and mentor and advise host nations on developing
investigative capabilities. That model is being used by
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti with
some success. We should consider whether such units
could be effective elsewhere.

Many of the necessary tools used to tackle drug
trafficking, border control, criminaljustice cooperation,
anti-money laundering and information exchange
have the same capacities as are needed to manage
arms trafficking and to enforce sanctions. The United
Nations, Member States and regional organizations
could be better coordinated in all of those fields. Given
the stakes, it is in all of our interests to do so.

Finally, since this is the last official meeting of
the year, I would like to say, on record, that Australia
considers it a privilege to have had the opportunity, over
the past year, to work so closely with the five outgoing
members of the Security Council - Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo - and we
would like to formally acknowledge their contribution
to international peace and security.

