Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix; the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller; and the Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
Mr. Festus Mogae, for their valuable briefings on the
most recent developments in South Sudan.

We are concerned about the deterioration of the
political and humanitarian situation in South Sudan. I
would like to start by addressing the political situation.
The State of Kuwait strongly supports the efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
revitalizing the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities,
Protection of Civilians, and Humanitarian Access. We
look forward to the second phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum, to be held next month, with
the highest possible level of participation of South
Sudan and its neighbours and friends, with the aim of
achieving reconciliation among the South Sudanese
people and thereby paving the way for a safe and
stable future for everyone. We welcome the cessation
of hostilities agreement signed by the parties at the
High-level Revitalization Forum in December in Addis
Ababa as a decisive step forward.

We would like to recall the presidential statement
of 14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/25), urging the
parties to the conflict to agree on mechanisms to
monitor abuses so as to ensure that there would be
costs and consequences for those who breach the
peace agreement. What is particularly worrisome is
the fact that violations occurred just a few days after
the agreement was signed. We therefore fully support
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism in its efforts to verify abuses,
in particular in Unity, Western and Central Equatoria
and Northern Jonglei states.

The disastrous humanitarian situation in South
Sudan demonstrates the magnitude of a tragedy that is
worsening by the day. Sixty per cent of the people are in
need of assistance, including 1.1 million children who
suffer from severe food insecurity. One-third of the
people have become refugees or internally displaced,
as we heard in the statement given by Ms. Mueller. At
this juncture, I would like to thank the neighbouring
countries of South Sudan, in particular Ethiopia,
Uganda and the Sudan, for hosting the vast majority
of South Sudanese refugees. We cannot condone
the obstruction of humanitarian assistance or the
harassment of humanitarian workers. We welcome the
President's Republican Order for the Free, Unimpeded
and Unhindered Movement of Humanitarian Assistance
Convoys, and stress the importance of closely
monitoring the implementation of the decree on the
ground as soon as possible.

In spite of the challenges, the work of UNMISS
peacekeepers, the Regional Protection Force (RPF) and
all humanitarian actors is exceedingly noble and most
deserving of the support and gratitude of the Security
Council and of the international community. That is why
we call upon all of the parties to facilitate their work
by removing all obstacles and fully complying with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and statements.

The Government of South Sudan declared its
commitment to cooperating with UNMISS. Compliance
with resolution 2304 (2016), on the deployment of the
RPF, is very important and a commitment that must be
met without further delay. We commend the tireless
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to finalize the strategic review of UNMISS and look
forward to deliberations on it in the Council before the
time comes to review the mandate.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the strong
ties that exist between the peoples of Kuwait and South
Sudan, going back not merely seven years, to the
independence of the Republic of South Sudan, but 40
years, during which we forged a strong friendship that
translated into development aid affecting the daily lives
of the people of South Sudan. The State of Kuwait looks
forward to contributing to South Sudan's development
on a basis of constructive bilateral cooperation in a
peaceful environment, because conflict zones do not

constitute an environment conducive to international
cooperation and development.

