Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. Fabius, we are pleased to welcome you
as President of the Security Council today. We are
grateful to you for convening today's meeting on such
an important and topical subject, which the Russian
Federation considers particularly significant, as was
also indicated in the speech on Christians in the Middle
East given in Geneva on 2 March by Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
at a side event during the current session of the Human
Rights Council initiated by Russia, the Vatican and
Lebanon on "Supporting the rights of Christians,
particularly in the Middle East", with the resounding
backing of 65 States.

For thousands of years the Middle East has been
a crossroads of cultures and civilizations. It was the
birthplace of three major monotheistic religions. Its
historical traditions of peaceful coexistence between
different beliefs and mutual learning and cultural
enrichment go back for centuries. Unfortunately,
the Middle East has also seen many bloody wars and
devastating invasions and has been plunged into an abyss
of obscurantism and senseless brutality more than once.
Today, once again, a terrible drama is playing out before
our eyes in the region. Gangs of radical extremists, led
by a blind, inhumane, medieval ideology, are inflicting
mass carnage on anyone who does not share their
dogmas, blowing up schools, mosques and churches,
evicting people from their homes, destroying thousand-
year-old shrines and historical and cultural monuments
and imprisoning religious leaders in dungeons. Their
bloody cruelty and reason-defying obscurantism know
no limits.

The preconditions enabling a slew of countries in
the region to become hotbeds of terrorism - terrorism
that hides behind the slogans of Islam but has nothing
in common with that world religion - did not appear
overnight. The spread of this evil phenomenon has
been due in large part to the thoughtless actions of
players from outside the region, both before and during
the so-called Arab Spring, examples of which are not
hard to find, since everyone is talking about them.
The 2003 invasion of Iraq, among other ills, wiped
out its State institutions and essentially abandoned the
country's religious and ethnic communities to their
own resources, exposing deep contradictions between
them that have taken horrifying and exaggerated forms.
The situation became even worse in 2011, when the
NATO bombing undertaken in violation of resolution

1973 (2011) not only destroyed the Al-Qadhafi regime
but all the elements that had previously made Libya a
unified State.

In Syria, some members of the international
community, instead of helping the Syrians settle their
internal crisis, began to rock the boat, showering money
and arms on opponents of the country's legitimate
President, Bashar Al-Assad, while simultaneously
putting unprecedented military, political and economic
pressure on his Government. As a result, the successors
to Al-Qaida, having established a solid position in the
Syrian war, proclaimed a caliphate and plied their trade
of Violence and genocide throughout the territories of
Syria, Iraq and Libya, with cells in Lebanon, Egypt,
Tunisia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and a number of other
countries. What was once a population of halfa million
Christians, Yazidis, Assyrians and Sabian Mandaeans
in Iraq is now threatened with a total exodus.
Representatives of Syria's minorities - Christians,
Jews, Armenians, Assyrians and Turkomans - are also
leaving in droves. The reverberations of the tragedy that
has gripped the region, intensified by inter-confessional
and inter-civilization contradictions, are being heard
far beyond the region's borders in very different parts
of the world.

From the very beginning of the so-called Arab
Spring, Russia has supported settling the crisis
situations in the region through evolutionary reforms
and national dialogue without outside interference,
based on building peace and harmony among all
religious groups, including the various sects of Islam
and Christianity. At the time, our calls for ensuring that
the situation not be given up to the mercy of religious
extremists went unheeded - or, rather, were heard
selectively. In some places the extremists were held
off, while in others they were supported, led by cynical
political calculation, used as a battering ram to crush
inconvenient regimes. The most evil forces felt that
their time had come. The results have been the Egyptian
Copts beheaded in Libya and Egypt, the Lebanese
Shiites incinerated in a bus outside Damascus, the Zaidi
Shiites bombed in mosques in Sana'a, the Iraqi Yazidis
tortured in barbaric jails. The Alawites of Latakia and
the Assyrians of Hasaka, as well as those Sunnis who
oppose the caliphate's wars, are also targeted.

Russia firmly and consistently condemns all acts
of violence against civilian populations, including
those based on ethnic and religious grounds. We will
continue our principled approach in the interests of
achieving inter-confessional and inter-ethnic peace and
reconciliation in Syria, Iraq and the other countries of
the Middle East. And we will continue to advocate for
both Christians and followers of other religions who are
persecuted by terrorists.

We believe firmly that we can successfully combat
the rise of religious extremism and the terrorist
structures representing it in the region only through
a global and comprehensive approach. The overall
objective should be to unite international, regional
and national efforts, which can be achieved only by
rejecting policies of double standards and an obsession
with extracting every possible short-term geopolitical
benefit.

The Security Council has taken important
steps with its adoption of a number of resolutions,
including resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2199 (2015).
But that is clearly not enough. We urge all responsible
representatives of the international community to do
everything possible to reverse the dangerous trend to
ethnic and sectarian strife in the Middle East and to
support the coexistence of different ethnic and religious
communities, so deeply rooted in history, in this vital
region of the world.

In order to solve the problem of violence against
Christians and other minorities, the international
community should unify its efforts aimed at combating
terrorism on the basis of norms of international law,
avoid double standards, including in counter-terrorism
efforts, and cease to rely on radical forces or to train
opposition forces, because they can easily be turned
into extremists. It is also important to work together to
restore the political process for a settlement in Syria by
encouraging all Syrian parties to return to dialogue and
unity to fight terrorism.

Our shared task is to help the countries in the region
to peacefully overcome crises, to bring an end to old and
new conflicts and to renew healthy pluralistic societies
and strong political systems by ensuring human rights
and basic freedoms for everyone. It is clear that only
through a comprehensive and responsible approach
in the areas of policy and security can we solve the
problems that States of the Middle East are facing, and
thereby protect the rights of all minorities in the region.

