Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault for
his briefing, which chimes very closely with our own
assessment and analysis of the developments over
the past three months. Let me also warmly welcome
Foreign Minister Trujillo to the Security Council for
the first time.

The United Kingdom welcomes Colombia's
continued commitment, clearly set out by President
Duque, to implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. As we have all said many times in this Chamber,
the agreement represents an opportunity for lasting
peace in Colombia, as well as being a positive example
to the rest of the world.

Like Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Arnault, we also welcome the steps taken by the
new Government so far, including the commitment to
pushing ahead with the effective reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as well as the
appointment of key officials in important institutions
for the peace process, in particular the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of
the Implementation of the Final Agreement and
the National Reintegration Council. We share the
Secretary-General's hope that Colombian institutions
will continue to pursue the peace process, including
security, development and the rule of law in conflict
zones, an effective justice system and reparations for
victims and the essential commitment to those who
have laid down their arms.

Recent progress in the investigation of initial cases
by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has been a key
step in achieving those goals, and we encourage all
parties to support the extremely important work of that
institution, but as the Secretary-General has said, the
challenges ahead remain formidable. We are particularly
concerned by two important and concerning trends.

First, the departure of several former FARC-EP
commanders from some of the territorial areas for
training and reintegration has highlighted weaknesses in
the reintegration process. We agree with the Secretary-
General that economic reintegration activities need to
resume on a larger scale and faster than has been the
case to date and that the security of members of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun must
be assured.

Secondly, we share the Secretary-General's
concern about the expansion of illegal economies, the
competition of criminal groups for territorial control
and the persistence of violence, which is continuing to
claim the lives of human rights defenders and social
leaders. We welcome President Duque's commitment to
tackling those issues, and look forward to those who
signed the national pact for life and the protection of
social leaders and human rights defenders on 23 August,
implementing their commitments.

With that in mind, we welcome the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. We hope and believe that the Verification
Mission will continue to play an important role in
maintaining confidence and cooperation among the
parties and encouraging them to work together on peace
implementation. For our part, the United Kingdom is
fully committed to working with the new Colombian
Government, just as we did with the last, as Colombia
works towards securing a lasting and sustained peace.

