The Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Security Council at this
important juncture in our work for peace in the Middle
East.

As members of the Council know, I have just
returned from Visiting Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, following the meeting of the
Quartet in Moscow this past Friday.

Before the Quartet meeting, I had a series of
bilateral meetings with the Russian leadership,
including President Medvedev and Foreign Minister
Lavrov. I thanked the Russian Federation for its
enhanced contribution to the United Nations agenda
and activities, and we discussed the United Nations-
Russian Federation partnership on regional and global
issues. While in Moscow, I also signed a joint
declaration with the Collective Security Treaty
Organization aimed at strengthening cooperation on
counter-terrorism, drug trafficking, conflict prevention
and other areas.

Tomorrow, I depart for Sirte, in the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, to attend the summit of the League of Arab
States.

These missions take place amid continuing efforts
to start Israeli-Palestinian proximity talks and a crisis
of confidence spurred by the announcement by Israel
2
of its intention to advance planning for the construction
of 1,600 new settlement units in East Jerusalem.

The statement issued by the Quartet in Moscow
reflected strong agreement on all main points.

First, Quartet members stressed the need for
proximity talks to move ahead and to become direct
negotiations as soon as possible, with the goal of
resolving all final status issues within 24 months.

Secondly, the Quartet emphasized that the parties
should respect the conditions that made proximity talks
possible and act in accordance with international law
and the Road Map. This includes a freeze of all
settlement activity by Israel and fulfilment of security
obligations by the Palestinians. The Quartet
condemned the recent Israeli settlement announcement,
reaffirmed the international position on Jerusalem, and
agreed to closely monitor developments and keep
under consideration any additional measures that may
be necessary. Both sides were urged to refrain from
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric.

Thirdly, the Quartet expressed strong support for
the Palestinian Authority's State-building agenda,
which was launched in August last year with the goal
of completing preparations for statehood in 24 months.

Fourthly, the Quartet agreed on the need for an
immediate easing of the closure affecting Gaza and
restated its commitment to a durable solution to the
issues of security, unity and crossings, as envisaged in
resolution 1860 (2009).

I carried these important messages to the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders and their publics. In Ramallah,
I met Prime Minister F ayyad and other senior figures.
President Abbas was in Jordan recuperating from his
recent fall, so I will meet him in Sirte. I was strongly
assured of President Abbas's commitment to proximity
talks and a negotiated settlement on all core issues.
Concern was expressed at changing facts on the
ground, which prejudice the outcome of negotiations
and undermine trust. The importance of Israel meeting
its Road Map obligations - including those to freeze
settlements, remove outposts and reopen Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem - was stressed.

The Palestinian authorities emphasized their wish
to see a greater Quartet role in defining the endgame,
given the desire to avoid past failures. Indirect talks
were viewed as a vehicle to achieving progress on
10-2874]
substantive core issues in advance of a direct phase of
final negotiations.

Prime Minister Fayyad took me to the Al-Masyoun
lookout point, on the border between Area A, which is
under Palestinian administration, and Area C, which is
under Israeli control. The lookout and the subsequent
briefing I received made the Palestinian dilemma quite
clear.

Palestinians need to be able to use more of their
land for housing, agriculture, industry, water,
construction materials and more. Yet, they have limited
access to Area C and no role in zoning. Those
restrictions prevent Palestinian economic and social
development. I could also see the barrier snaking
through the West Bank. I have strongly advised the
Israeli authorities, while addressing their security
concerns, to find a way to further ease the constraints
that restrict Palestinian life and risk undermining the
eventual viability of a Palestinian State.

Despite these difficulties, the Palestinian
Authority is making important gains, becoming more
transparent, accountable and effective. I was impressed
by the efficiency of the security services and the signs
of economic activity. I was also impressed by the
Palestinian determination to build positive facts from
the ground up as a complement to the political process.
Palestinian statehood must become an emerging reality
based on legitimate Palestinian rights, positive
Palestinian actions and a negotiated political
settlement. I confirmed to the Prime Minister the
determination of the United Nations country team to
continue and expand its support for these State-
building efforts. International support remains crucial.

It was also brought to my attention that almost all
recent disturbances between Israelis and Palestinians
have taken place in areas where Israeli forces are
present in Palestinian-populated areas. I received
appeals for an end to incursions, the further removal of
checkpoints, and more responsibility to be given to
Palestinian Authority security forces in Palestinian-
populated areas.

We discussed the essential Palestinian
commitment to non-violence and legitimate protest in
that context. I expressed my concern about Palestinian
prisoners and publicly urged Israel to release prisoners,
as called for by the Palestinian Authority.
10-28741

I was deeply dismayed that four Palestinians
under the age of 20 were shot and killed by Israeli
security forces in the West Bank during my visit.
Israeli Defence Minister Barak assured me that Israel
would investigate those incidents. I publicly
condemned all such Violence and stressed the
importance of protecting civilians.

I also met with representatives of two families
that had been evicted from their homes. I made it clear
that all settlement activity is illegal and that inserting
settlers into Palestinian communities in Jerusalem is
particularly troubling. It leads to tensions and
undermines prospects for addressing the final status of
Jerusalem. Yesterday's announcement that final
approval had been given to build 20 settlement units in
Sheikh Jarrah is unacceptable.

In Gaza, I drove nearly a full circuit of the Strip. I
saw destroyed houses and poverty, formerly
functioning industrial zones and vast greenhouses lying
in ruin, and a visible security presence of the de facto
authorities. In Khan Younis, I met with a number of
civil society and business leaders. They stressed that
the closure of Gaza was morally unacceptable and
counterproductive. I agree with them. "We are
surviving, not living", one said.

I was briefed by United Nations staff and by
Gazans on the perilous state of the water and sanitation
situation; on difficulties in every sector, from fishing
and agriculture to health care and manufacturing; and
on the limitations on travel and basic freedoms caused
by the closure.

What struck me most were the children, and what
worries me most is their future. More than half of
Gaza's population is under 18 years of age, and
population growth rates are high. The schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East are a symbol of the
commitment of the international community to
ensuring that Palestinian youth receive an education, as
is their right. We need to build more schools, but lack
the materials. The only cement available in substantial
quantities in Gaza today is smuggled in through
tunnels. Those who work with smugglers can build, but
the United Nations and others who use legitimate
products cannot.

I was pleased to be able to announce in Khan
Younis that, after three years of closure, the Israeli
Government has now approved the entry of material
3
required to complete 151 housing units in Khan
Younis, carry out a water and sanitation project in Tel
El-Sultan and repair the El-Bader flour mill. Israel has
also agreed to expand the list of imports to include
aluminum and wood. I welcomed that decision, but
would like to emphasize that this is only a first and
very modest step. One hundred and fifty-one units
amount to far less than 1 per cent of the needs in the
shelter sector alone, to say nothing of other needs. I
have informed Israel that we will come back with more
far-reaching proposals.

A rocket fired from Gaza into Israel by radical
elements a few days before my Visit killed a civilian.
During my visit to the region, there were further rocket
firings. While in Gaza, I condemned rocket fire and
made a public appeal for non-Violence and Palestinian
unity.

In Israel, I met with President Peres, Prime
Minister Netanyahu, Defence Minister Barak and other
senior officials. My interlocutors stressed that there
was no alternative to direct talks if core issues are to be
resolved. The Israelis stressed the positive steps taken
by Israel, including the call for direct negotiations, the
removal of obstacles to movement, the Government's
commitment to a two-State solution, and the policy of
partial settlement restraint. However, the Prime
Minister reiterated that Israel would not freeze
construction in settlements in East Jerusalem. I stressed
the need for all parties to do everything possible to
facilitate proximity talks.

My Israeli interlocutors acknowledged significant
progress in the West Bank by the Palestinian Authority
and their readiness to do more to enable progress,
while also expressing the concern that peaceful protest
not turn violent and the importance of restraint on both
sides.

I discussed Gaza with all my interlocutors. I
called once again for the closure policy to be changed.

I met the parents of Corporal Shalit, who pointed
out that their son had been denied the basic right of any
prisoner - that of third-party visits.

My interlocutors expressed Israel's frustration
with the situation in South Lebanon, where Israel
believes that Hizbullah is rearming at an alarming rate.
I understand Israel's legitimate security concerns and
the importance of addressing them, along with the
concerns of all parties, as efforts continue to achieve
the implementation of United Nations resolutions on
Lebanon. At the same time, I conveyed my belief that a
genuine and viable peace process, leading to the end of
the Arab-Israel conflict as envisaged in other
resolutions of this Council, is the key to long-term
stability in the region.

The Israeli Government also raised another
regional matter the Iranian nuclear issue. I share and
appreciate Israel's concerns. I noted that there is an
international consensus to address this question and
that a crucial diplomatic process is under way. I
emphasized the need to approach the matter in this
context.

 

At the Arab League summit in Sirte, I will brief
Arab leaders about the Quartet meeting and my visit to
the region. I will urge them to support the proximity
talks. It is crucial for the Arab countries to help create
a favourable atmosphere in which the talks can
succeed.

Let me close by stressing four key messages that
emerged from my Visit. First, there is no alternative to
negotiations for a comprehensive and just resolution of
the conflict, and no alternative to addressing all the
core issues for a two-State solution. Negotiations must
start without delay.

Secondly, we must not let negotiations be
disrupted by provocations. No doubt, there will be
tests. The parties themselves must take steps to meet
obligations and build trust. Extremists and spoilers
must see that the parties are determined to press ahead.

Thirdly, the situation on the ground is crucial.
There have been too many negative facts being created
on the ground, and these need to stop. We need more
positive facts, such as calm and restraint,
reconstruction in Gaza and transformative change in
the West Bank.

Fourthly, while peace is in the hands of the
parties themselves, the international community must
continue to play a crucial role - supportive, insistent
and, at times, catalytic.

I felt a strong consensus on the way forward in
Moscow, and a determination to review progress
collectively and to work more closely with both parties
and the region, including the Arab League. Regional
support for the peace effort and a regional approach to
peace as a whole are both crucial. I will carry these
messages to Libya.

10-2874]

Let me assure the Council of my firm

commitment, and that of the United Nations as a
whole, to this agenda.

