Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Spain for its initiative in holding today's open
debate. We have listened carefully to the statements of
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, the President of
the General Assembly Mr. Lykketoft and Ambassador
Jiirgenson, Vice-President of the Economic and Social
Council.

Thanks to the joint efforts of its members in recent
years, the Security Council has made good progress in
improving its working methods. With more emphasis on
greater transparency, the Security Council has markedly
increased the number of open meetings convened and
paid more attention to briefing non-Council members
on its work. The work of the Council has become more
more efficient and targeted, thanks to an improvement
in its working procedures. The Council has also used
various modalities to strengthen communication and
exchanges with relevant Member States, regional
organizations, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, among others.

The holding of today's open debate on working
methods fully reflects the positive attitude and
willingness of the Council to draw on the opinions of
wider membership to further improve its work. While
China supports the Council's continuing efforts to
improve its working methods, it would also like to
emphasize the following several points.

First, in accordance with its mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
should focus its energy and resources on addressing the
most urgent issues that threaten international peace and
security. With regard to thematic issues, it should act
strictly within its mandate and enhance communication
with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and others.
With such coordination and division of labour, it
should be possible to avoid the duplication or overlap of
functions by the different organs.

Secondly, the Security Council should attach more
importance to preventive diplomacy and mediation. It
should promote the culture of peace and increase the
use of such peaceful means as mediation and good
offices for dispute resolution. It should push for the
diplomatic settlement of disputes and handling of crises
and, wherever possible, should avoid simply resorting
to the threat or use of such methods as sanctions.
The Council should act in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations to enhance
cooperation with regional organizations.

Thirdly, the Security Council should engage in
more adequate consultations to reach a broad consensus.
Before any action is taken, every effort should be made
to reach consensus through patient consultations and
negotiations among Council members. Efforts should
be made to avoid forcing a text through if it is still
the object of major differences, so as to preserve the
credibility and authoritativeness of the resolution.

Fourthly, the Council should give more weight to
the opinions of the countries concerned and enhance
dialogue and interaction with non-Council members.
Listening to the opinions ofthe countries concerned will
help the Council to make more rational decisions. Such
mechanisms as the meeting with the troop-contribution
countries and police-contributing countries, and the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should be
fully utilized. Communications with troop contributors
and the Secretariat should be enhanced before deploying
in peacekeeping missions or adjusting their mandates.

