Allow me to make a couple of remarks, first, on the progress made in the electoral process. It is positive that the political dialogue has been restored between the Federal Government and all federal member states. All sides need to continue that dialogue in order to achieve tangible progress. We regret that the electoral model adopted has fallen short of our expectations and the Government's promises. That is a point that we discussed at length in the Security Council's previous meeting on Somalia (see S/PV.8755). Still, credible, transparent and fair elections remain possible, and they remain key to the State-building process in Somalia. In that context, we hope and expect that the electoral process will be conducted in a peaceful manner and that the agreed women's quota of 30 per cent will be implemented. My second remark is on the security situation. As the overall security situation remains volatile, the security of the elections and the coming weeks needs to be a top priority. We encourage all stakeholders to increase their efforts and finalize their work on updating and implementing the security transition plan. Cooperation between the Federal Government and federal member states continues to be key in that regard. We note that preparations such as the unveiled draft of the national elections security plan are under way. The progress made on institutional capacity- building activities through training and strategic advice is also very much welcome. We would also like to underscore the importance of increased Somali ownership and the effective coordination of the security sector with international and regional partners. The African Union Mission in Somalia continues to play a pivotal role for Somalia's security. We see that in many instances. Nevertheless, reflecting on how to reshape its mission remains crucial. The nature of existing threats may change, but we must not neglect our common goal, which is for Somalia to take full responsibility for its own security. In that context, we consider the ongoing independent assessment an important opportunity for all partners, including the Somali authorities, troop- contributing countries and the African Union. We believe that all partners should contribute actively and constructively. We are also looking forward to an open and frank discussion at a security event organized jointly by the European Union, the African Union and Somalia on 30 November. On human rights, we are deeply concerned about the bills recently adopted in Somaliland that weaken the protection of survivors of sexual violence and do not comply with international human rights. That has been mentioned by other delegations, and we are deeply worried. It is the responsibility of the State authorities to protect the rights of survivors of sexual violence. That is why we also call for the reinstatement of Somaliland's original rape and sexual offences law. We further call for the 2018 sexual offences federal bill to be enacted. Both of those comply with international human rights standards. We are also concerned about the reported cases of conflict-related sexual violence, with members of Government institutions being reported as perpetrators. Such behaviour is unacceptable. However, we are pleased to see that training programmes focused on responding to such heinous crimes have been provided to the Somali police force and five State police services, and that a follow-up action plan has already been developed. We are also concerned about the increasing number of attacks against journalists, many of whom continue to be arbitrarily arrested or detained. The freedom of expression and the freedom of the press are always essential and must be protected, but they are of particular importance in the run-up to the elections. We welcome the Federal Government's appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the killings of journalists and urge that the perpetrators be held accountable. Lastly, I would like to make a remark on climate and security in Somalia. The impact of environmental shocks resulting from climate change is becoming more and more evident. Floods and droughts are just two examples. Special Representative Swan briefed the Informal Group of Experts on Climate and Security regarding those dynamics. We would like to thank Mr. Swan once again for shedding some light on that important issue. We also appreciate that the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1113) takes note of those factors. We commend Special Representative Swan for the excellent work that he and his team are already conducting on the ground in that regard. We encourage his mission and the United Nations system to systematically include climate-related risk factors in their analysis and efforts. Germany stands ready to support the United Nations in those efforts.
