The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
recognizing Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, Secretary-
General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), and thanking him for his many years of
leadership and service. I congratulate his successor, the
incoming OIC Secretary-General, Mr. Iyad Madani,
who also joins us today. Last year, I was honoured to
be the first United Nations Secretary-General to visit
the OIC headquarters. I look forward to building on our
partnership in the years to come.

Mr. President, I really appreciate your taking the
time to preside this very important Council meeting,
and I count on your leadership and commitment to
peace and security in the Council presidency.
The challenges of peace and security are too complex
and interlinked for any country or organization to
address alone. To be successful, we mustjoin forces and
craft joint strategies that draw on respective strengths.
The United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation are working closely on issues ranging from
conflict prevention and conflict resolution to counter-
terrorism, from human rights and humanitarian affairs
to intercultural dialogue and sustainable development.
I shall touch on a number of specific issues where our
work continues to be critical.

With regard to Syria, our ongoing cooperation
includes humanitarian and political efforts. The United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons are making progress in dismantling
and destroying Syria's chemical weapons programme.
But we must spare no effort to reach a comprehensive
political agreement, one that reflects the will of the
Syrian people. The war has also heightened tensions
between Sunni and Shia communities. We have seen
tragic and violent manifestations of those divisions in
many parts of the Muslim world. That is profoundly
worrying. I believe the OIC could be uniquely placed
to launch a major initiative, working with the United
Nations and others to help bring an end to this upheaval
that has caused the loss of so many civilian lives and
represents such a threat to wider security. I urge the OIC
and all leaders to do everything possible to repair rifts
and rebuild confidence between Muslim communities,
as well as to stem the influence ofradical armed groups
and violent extremists.

On the Middle East peace process, direct talks have
resumed, but Israelis and Palestinians must quickly see
visible peace dividends. The status quo in the occupied
Palestinian territory is not sustainable, and in the long
run, the occupation is deeply damaging to Israelis
and Palestinians alike. The OIC can help forge a way
forward within the agreed time frame.

As Myanmar continues on the path of reform,
a key challenge will be to address the underlying
factors of communal tensions, including the question
of citizenship for the Rohingya population. Myanmar
must act firmly against the dissemination of hate
literature, and instigators must be punished. I urge the
Government and other key opinion leaders to address
those fundamental issues. I am pleased that an OIC
delegation will soon Visit Myanmar, and I welcome its
constructive engagement to reduce tensions.

In Afghanistan, efforts to enhance regional
cooperation and build trust are crucial at this time of
transition. I appreciate the efforts of the OIC, including
through its presence in Kabul and its support for an
Afghan-led reconciliation process.

In Mali, following the milestone presidential
election, the United Nations, the OIC and other partners
should work together to help Mali promote dialogue and
reconciliation, improve governance, undertake security
sector reform, re-establish State authority in the north
and protect human rights.

In the Sudan, I commend the OIC's continued
efforts, especially those facilitated by the State of
Qatar, to bring peace to Darfur. I count on the ongoing
cooperation with the OIC to encourage the Government
of the Sudan to reach out to all stakeholders.

We must also continue to work for progress on
issues that extend beyond regional boundaries.

Terrorism is not associated with any particular
religion, culture or peoples. However, in recent years,
terrorist violence has disproportionately affected
countries that are members of OIC, from the Sahel
and North Africa to the Middle East and South Asia.
The OIC and its member States have been making
significant efforts to mitigate the terrorist threat,
particularly in countering incitement to commit
terrorist acts motivated by extremism and intolerance.
I stress the importance of addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of extremism and terrorism,
including by strengthening efforts to resolve conflict
peacefully, promote the rule of law, protect human
rights and ensure good governance.

Intercultural dialogue between and within faiths is
more important than ever. Let us keep working together
to foster a culture of peace and co-existence, through
efforts such as the Alliance of Civilizations.

Looking ahead, the United Nations and the OIC
must continue to deepen their strategic dialogue. We
have made significant progress, including through
formal partnership agreements and joint workplans,
staff exchanges and joint mediation deployments. We
were also proud to assist the OIC in establishing its new
Peace, Security and Mediation Unit. Let us together
pledge to work from this foundation ofprogress to build
a better world for all.

