Mr. Kumar (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing today. We have also taken note of his third
report to the Security Council pursuant to paragraph 7
of resolution 1970 (2011).

India is not a signatory to the Rome Statute, and
we have stated our views on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on several occasions. I will not repeat
those well-known views.

The situation in Libya has changed significantly
since the Prosecutor's previous report and briefing (see S/PV.6647) to the Security Council. The Libyan people
are engaged in addressing the consequences of the
conflict and building new institutions to meet their
democratic aspirations. Meanwhile, the proliferation of
weapons has emerged as a major problem posing a
threat to stability in Libya and the larger region. The
international community, including the Security
Council and the ICC, should fully assist the Libyan
people and authorities in this process. An inclusive,
broad-based political process anchored in State
sovereignty is the only way to achieve national
reconciliation and overcome the multitude of problems
that Libya is facing in the post-conflict phase.

Under these circumstances, we expect that the
ICC Prosecutor will carry out a thorough and impartial
investigation into all alleged crimes by all parties to the
conflict in Libya. The Prosecutor must not be
influenced by non-judicial considerations and must
focus his attention solely on prosecution, without
diversions due to extraneous considerations. All those
responsible for committing crimes covered under the
Rome Statute should be held accountable, irrespective
of which side of the conflict they may belong to.
Political or other non-judicial considerations should
not exonerate anybody from prosecution for the crimes
committed.
Last but not least, it is also important to ensure
that all actions by the ICC Prosecutor fall strictly
within the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), particularly
paragraph 6, which concerns States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute.

