Mr. Kama] (Malaysia): I too would like to join
those who spoke before me in conveying our deepest
sympathy and condolences to the delegation of Tunisia on
the demise of President Bourguiba.

We wish also to congratulate you, Sir, and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month, and we would like to thank
Ambassador Chowdhury and the delegation of Bangladesh
for guiding the Council's work last month to a successful
conclusion.

My delegation would like once again to welcome
Minister Axworthy to preside over this very important
and timely meeting. We express our appreciation to
Canada for convening this formal meeting of the Council
on the issue of Afghanistan. The immediate aim of the
international community is to undertake the difficult task
of providing humanitarian relief to the long-suffering
Afghan people, who are caught in an armed-conflict
situation. Its longer-term aim is, of course, to work
towards a political resolution of the Afghan problem and

 

the rehabilitation and reconstruction of that war-torn
country.

We would like also to thank Ambassador Listre for his
briefing just now and for the work he has accomplished in
his capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Afghanistan. We thank also Mr. John Renninger, Officer-in-
Charge, Asia and the Pacific Division, Department of
Political Affairs, for his insightful briefing.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the work done by the former Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi. The
peace settlement that has eluded us is not for want of effort
or initiative on his part. It is a reflection of the complex
nature of the problem, which revolves around the seemingly
irreconcilable differences of the various warring factions
and is intertwined with the gee-strategic interests of
Afghanistan's neighbours. We would like to extend our full
support to Mr. Francesc Vendrell, the newly appointed
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan
(UNSMA), as he takes up his challenging appointment and
attempts to hammer out a negotiated settlement under the
auspices of the United Nations.
The heavy toll exacted on Afghanistan and its people
following the long and debilitating war weighs heavily on
the mind of the international community. This impoverished
country can ill afford to squander its scarce resources on
the war effort. As a result, Afghanistan has been consigned
to the backwaters of economic development, with dire
consequences for the long-suffering Afghans, regardless of
their ethnicity and political orientation.

Among the debilitating effects of the armed conflict in
Afghanistan is the fact that vast tracts of the country have
been sown with landmines that have claimed many lives
and limbs. It is estimated that about 10 million landmines
have been laid in Afghanistan, making it the most heavily
mined country in the world. Such is the legacy bequeathed
by the belligerents of the most recent Afghan war. This is
further compounded by other social ills, not the least of
which are the pernicious effects of drugs, guns and violence
and the fact that an entire population is dependent on
handouts from the international community. In addition to
these ills are the catastrophic effects related to the so-called
internally displaced persons, who are, in fact, refugees in
their own country as a result of the long war, exacerbating
an already grave humanitarian situation.

We are also mindful of the effects of the protracted
war on the children of the land - the lost generation that
is growing up with no memory of life in a peaceful
state - many of whom are illiterate. Thousands of
children die each year from malnutrition, respiratory
infections and other diseases. Children are by no means
the only vulnerable sector of society. The maternal
mortality rate is one of the highest in the world.

Malaysia is totally against practices of gender
discrimination. It is deplorable that Afghan women have
been denied their right to education, as indicated in the
Secretary-Generals report. This right, as well as the right
to earn a living and to enjoy participation in other facets
of life, are very much compatible with Islam, which
promotes such rights. We believe that women have the
legitimate right and obligation to play a constructive role
in society, including in the realm of nation-building.

We commend the Canadian presidency for making
human security the thrust of this month's deliberations. In
this regard, the Taliban's recent intrusions into United
Nations premises in Kandahar, in violation of the
inviolable United Nations principle of diplomatic
immunity, is to be deplored. The incident dramatized the
risks faced by well-meaning humanitarian workers in the
performance of their duties in areas of armed conflict.
The subsequent withdrawal of international staff,
including the non-governmental organizations, has set
back relief efforts in an already difficult environment. We
recall the murder in 1998 of Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine
Calo of Italy, an UNSMA official, as well as other,
Afghan employees of the United Nations. We pay tribute
to them for their sacrifices in the service of mankind.

My delegation deeply regrets the lack of progress
made by the Taliban in bringing to justice those
responsible for the murder of the Iranian diplomats and
journalist in Mazar-e Sharif in August 1998. We are
dismayed at the apparent lack of cooperation extended by
the Taliban to the United Nations.

We reaffirm our belief that a durable peace can be
achieved only through political negotiations and not by
military means. We therefore strongly support efforts,
under the auspices of the United Nations, for a negotiated
settlement through dialogue and the formation of a broad-
based, multi-ethnic and fully representative government.
In this regard, we strongly encourage early follow-up to
the Organization of the Islamic Conference meeting in
Jeddah and the Rome process.

 

It is incumbent upon the Afghan parties to recognize
that the search for peace must start with a sustained
political will to reach a negotiated settlement, free from
external influence. It is regrettable that, despite the lofty
principles of the Tashkent Declaration, external military
support continues to be received by the contending Afghan
parties, thereby fuelling the war indefinitely.

It is clear that the people of Afghanistan are weary of
the war and wish to end the cycle of violence as soon as
possible so that they can pick up the pieces of their
shattered lives. It is imperative that the country's major
ethnic and religious groups cooperate among themselves to
decide on their own leadership rather than have one
imposed on them. In this regard, we are of the view that
the Rome process - that is, the convening of the grand
assembly, or loya jirgah, which is the embodiment of this
mechanism - should be encouraged, as it can contribute to
the overall peace process.

Barely six months after sanctions were imposed on the
Taliban, we are beginning to hear talk about further
measures to be imposed on Taliban-controlled Afghanistan.
Sanctions, when imposed as a matter of necessity, must
have certain safeguards so as to mitigate the unintended
consequences on the civilian population. Therefore, before
additional measures can be considered, it is imperative for
the Council to evaluate the impact of the ongoing sanctions.
We wish to remind the Council that, contrary to
requirements, there was no analysis made of the possible
impact of sanctions before they were imposed on the
Taliban. In the absence of that pre-assessment of the impact
of the sanctions, it is important that periodic impact
assessments be carried out, as provided for in paragraph 6
(c) of resolution 1267 (1999), which the Council
unanimously adopted. This provides the Council with the
ability to modify the sanctions regime if and when it is
deemed necessary to do so.

The ongoing war has contributed to continuing human
rights violations, sustained interference by foreign Powers
and far-reaching environmental damage, not to mention the
staggering social cost of the long civil war. Afghanistan has
become the world's largest producer of illicit drugs. These
developments raise serious questions about the commitment
of Afghan groups themselves and that of their external
supporters to a peaceful resolution of the debilitating
conflict. The extent of the humanitarian catastrophe is
perhaps more pervasive than we really know. It is
imperative, therefore, that every effort be made to
ameliorate the plight of the people and to find an early
political solution to the conflict.

