Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): For
years, West Africa has been riven with violent internal
conflicts. Recently, however, the political instability
that has afflicted the region for so long has, for the
most part subsided, and peace processes have been
making steady progress.

In Liberia, under the leadership of President Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf, laudable progress is being made in
rebuilding the country. Sierra Leone and Guinea Bissau
have likewise transitioned from war to constitutional
Government. And in Cote d'Ivoire, the peace roadmap
established by the International Working Group is in
place, and all Ivorian parties reached an agreement in
Yamoussoukro last month on significant commitments
for peace.

Despite those positive political developments, the
region still faces daunting challenges, including
massive cross-border refugee flows, slow economic
growth, low inflows of foreign direct investment,
heavy debt burdens and the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. Achieving lasting peace and
security in the region will take considerable effort.

I would like to stress three steps that are, in our
view, vital to the consolidation of peace in the region:
first, taking a regional approach; secondly, focusing on
the peacebuilding process and thirdly, addressing the
root causes of conflicts.

First, my delegation believes that peace
consolidation in West Africa needs to be pursued on a
regional basis. The peoples and countries in the region
are closely interlinked, which means that ensuring
peace and security in one country necessitates close
cooperation with its neighbours. This regional
approach can best be carried out through regional
organizations. In that regard, we appreciate and support
the continuing role of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in maintaining peace
and security in the region, both through its own
initiatives and in collaboration with the United
Nations.

Secondly, peace and security in West Africa
requires a focus, not just on peacemaking and
peacekeeping, but also on peacebuilding efforts. As the
Secretary-General aptly put it, security in the region is
stable but fragile. The first post-conflict years are the
most dangerous, as wounded societies walk the
tightrope from chaos and violence to sustainable peace
and stability. If West Africa is to avoid falling into the
abyss of renewed conflict, it will need support for new
institutions, disarmament, demobilization, and
reintegration efforts and economic recovery, among
others. In that regard, we believe that the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission has an important
role to play in providing guidance and in coordinating
the efforts of the Security Council, ECOWAS and other
regional and United Nations bodies that will be
engaged in the region.

Thirdly, to prevent new crises and the recurrence
of conflict, it is important to address the root causes of
instability in West Africa. Regional, ethnic and
socioeconomic tensions in the region have been
immensely destructive to infrastructure, caused mass
migrations of refugees and have led to the exploitation
of natural resources for the benefit of combatants
rather than societies. To prevent renewed conflict,
long-term economic and social development strategies
need to be formulated and implemented with the
assistance of the international community. Sustained
attention and commitment by the international
community will be crucial.

The Republic of Korea has actively participated
in international efforts to help the development of
African countries. The plan to double our official
development assistance by 2009 is part of our
commitment to assist African development. We hope
that the era of West African conflict will be followed
by an era of peace, prosperity and renewal.

