Mr. Inzko: These are special days for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it is celebrating 18 years of
membership of the United Nations. But they are also
special days for my home country of Austria, as it was
presiding over the Security Council in the month of
May exactly 18 years ago. On 20 May 1992, the then
Permanent Representative of Austria, Mr. Peter
Hohenfellner, as President of the Security Council,
proposed to this body the adoption of a decision
recommending to the General Assembly that Bosnia
Herzegovina be admitted to the United Nations.

At the same meeting, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 755 (1992), which endorsed that
recommendation. Also at that meeting, the Council
President prophetically stated that "All the members of
the Council are confident that Bosnia and Herzegovina
will make a significant contribution to the work of the
Organization" (S/PV3079, p. 4).

Upon that historic recommendation, 18 years ago,
Bosnia Herzegovina was admitted as a Member of the
United Nations by virtue of General Assembly
resolution 46/237, adopted without a vote on 22 May
1992. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Bosnia Herzegovina wholeheartedly. I am very glad
that, as predicted 18 years ago, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is indeed making a significant
10-37267
contribution to the work of the Organization as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council.

I am also very pleased to see President Silajdzie
sitting in the Security Council Chamber today, as it
was he who, 18 years ago as Minister for Foreign
Affairs, worked tirelessly for Bosnia and
Herzegovina's recognition and membership in the
United Nations. He did so then without having an
office, a mission or even a fax connection. He has
witnessed the tremendous progress of his country from
war and admission to the Organization to its election to
the Security Council.

We should keep that achievement of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's foreign policy at the forefront of our
thinking as we deal in detail with the challenges that
the country still faces. The country is facing problems
that urgently need to be solved, but the fact is that it
has come a long way. We should use that progress as an
incentive to complete the work that still remains ahead.

Membership of the Security Council is the
greatest and most Visible reflection of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's new standing in the international
community. In addition, this year, the country has
substantially completed the road map that may make it
possible for Bosnian citizens to travel to countries in
the European Schengen area without first having to
apply for a visa. The European Union (EU)
recommendation in that regard is still pending, but it
could come as early as next week.

Furthermore, last month, at its summit in Estonia,
NATO agreed to a membership action plan for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, on the condition that the issue of
State ownership of military real estate is resolved. That
success came as Bosnia and Herzegovina had already
decided to accelerate the destruction of unsafe weapons
and explosives left over from the war and to deploy
troops to the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan.

Those three examples show how Bosnia and
Herzegovina can concretely move forward, to the
benefit of its citizens and the counties of the region.

I believe that an additional factor which
strengthened Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
during the reporting period - and one that has
received far too little attention - is the recent and
much hoped-for improvement in regional cooperation,
and consequently in the prospects for regional
reconciliation, that is now evident. Put simply, the
10-37267
Western Balkans is a much better neighbourhood now
than it was two or three years ago.

In the spirit of regional reconciliation, leaders
and parliamentarians in Croatia and Serbia have
addressed the tragedy of the 19905 in an honest and
decent way. Let me here refer to President Tadie's
efforts and to the Serbia Parliament's declaration on
the Srebrenica genocide, and to the admission by
Croatia of its role in the atrocities of the 1990s. This is
creating space for a new and constructive dialogue that
will benefit people throughout the Western Balkans.

It should be mentioned in this context that
Turkey's role in this process has also been
constructive, as was illustrated by the signature of the
Istanbul Declaration on improving relations between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. In the same spirit,
leaders of the region and the wider international
community will gather on 11 July for the fifteenth
commemoration of the atrocities in Srebrenica.
President Siladeie will be travelling today or
tomorrow for an historic, unprecedented Visit to
Belgrade to strengthen this new sense of
neighbourhood. Similarly, in a gesture of
reconciliation, over the coming weekend President
Josipovie of Croatia will visit places where atrocities
were committed in central and northern Bosnia in a
gesture of reconciliation. These represent major steps
forward, and we must seize the possibilities that they
open up.

The informal EU/Western Balkans summit, which
should gather some 40 delegations in Sarajevo on
2 June, can additionally boost this trend towards
regional reconciliation and forward-looking
cooperation. The coming and recent visits to Bosnia
and Herzegovina by senior politicians and officials of
the EU, the United States and elsewhere reflect not
only international interest in the country, but also some
concern over its inability to take advantage of the
possibilities that are now open to it. As I pointed out
when I spoke to the Council in November (see S/PV.6222), Bosnia and Herzegovina remains afflicted
by a lack of a basic and fundamental consensus about
what sort of country it should be or could be -
whether a more centralized or a very decentralized
State - and how to achieve either option.

The leadership of Republika Srpska has, for
example, led the way in undermining State-level
institutions and by threatening to hold an entity
3
referendum that would seek to repudiate the authority
of the High Representative and decisions under
Dayton. Any entity referendum challenging the
authority of the Dayton Accords or the High
Representative under annex X, or impinging upon the
constitutional responsibilities of the State, would be
unlawful and endanger the entity itself, as the entities
derive their legitimacy from the same Accords.

References in an international gazette to the
possible emergence of a new State, and proposals that
nationalist politicians should start discussing the
peaceful dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina or that
the country should not exist at all have been met by
counter-statements to the effect that the disaffected
elements are welcome to leave, but will not be allowed
to take any part of the country with them.

Thus, while regional prospects for reconciliation
have improved, the language and logic of politics
inside Bosnia and Herzegovina appears to have rather
deteriorated. After Serbia's Parliament expressed its
formal regret in March over the Srebrenica massacres,
the Republika Srpska Government threatened to retract
its endorsement of the 2004 report which established
the facts about the events of July 1995 in Srebrenica.

The truth about Srebrenica and other shameful
episodes of the war has been well established by the
International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia through
criminal investigation, forensic research and testimony
scrutinized and tested at war-crimes trials. The way
forward is to face the truth and use it to ensure that
such crimes are never allowed to happen again, and not
to deny the truth.

While I have used my executive powers with
appropriate restraint, these have been faced with
continued resistance from the Republika Srpska. On
14 December, I extended the mandates of foreign
judges and prosecutors working in the War Crimes
Division of the State Court. This decision, based on the
country's obligations to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, enjoyed the
unanimous support of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. The decision has, however,
been strongly criticized by Republika Srpska.

Meanwhile, there have been problems in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where a
divided Government limped from crisis to crisis during
the reporting period. The Federation has failed to

complete the appointments to Government and
judiciary functions and the need to make budget cuts
required by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in
the face of determined opposition from members of
war veterans' organizations. The Federation has
considerable difficulty dealing efficiently with the
necessary IMF conditions, which may affect Bosnia
and Herzegovina's fiscal sustainability in the medium
and long terms. In this regard, as far as IMF
negotiations are concerned, the situation is much better
in Republika Srpska.

Let me give another example of the difficulties
we face with the 22 December ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights against discrimination against
minorities in the election to the State-level Presidency
and House of Peoples. While Republika Srpska
representatives would agree to narrow constitutional
amendments that would implement the 22 December
ruling, Federation politicians, on their side, insist on
far more wide-ranging changes, seeking to use the
Court's verdict to promote their own very different
Visions of how the country should be restructured. The
net result is that the European Court of Human Rights
ruling will not be put into practice before the 3 October
general elections, meaning that this autumn once again
not all citizens will be able to candidate to all
positions. This issue must therefore be a top priority of
the new Government.

This chronic political disagreement has occurred
at a time when unemployment has continued to rise,
living standards have continued to fall, and the
capacity of the authorities to meet the basic needs of
citizens has been systematically eroded by declining
revenue. With great difficulty the relevant authorities
are striving to meet the IMF terms for a €1.2-billion
Stand-by Arrangement; at the same time, generous
development assistance continues to come from the
World Bank, the EU and other international financial
institutions and bilateral donors. However, none or
very few of the key reforms that would allow the
country to take full advantage of this assistance, and
which would revive the economy and reverse the
decline in employment and living standards, have been
enacted during the reporting period; nor have the
domestic authorities made any progress on the
remaining objectives and conditions - the so-called
5+2 agenda - set by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board in February 2008 for the
transition of Office of the High Representative (OHR)
to a reinforced EU-led presence.

The objectives relating to State and defence
property remain unmet. In December 2009 I provided
the State, entity and Brcko District Governments with
an inventory of the properties in question, but this has
yet to jump-start constructive negotiation. Serb and
Bosniak leaders rejected the OHR inventory - for
opposite reasons. At the same time, the entities have
declined to conduct their own assessment of what it is
that institutions require in order to function properly.
Now, unilateral steps to register properties under the
ownership of the entities or the State threaten the
whole exercise.

NATO's decision in April to make a Membership
Action Plan conditional upon the State's taking
ownership of properties required by the armed forces
has so far shown no sign of producing a breakthrough.
All this means that the condition according to which
the Peace Implementation Council must be in a
position to make "a positive assessment of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina based on full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement" looks somewhat
remote, and it is not clear when a decision to close the
Office of the High Representative could be taken.

In this respect, let me here welcome the European
Council conclusions of 25 January, expressing
readiness to extend the executive operation of the EU
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina should the situation
require it. I myself remain convinced that we will need
this presence beyond 2010 for reassurance purposes.
Yet the authorities have demonstrated that progress can
be made, as they pushed through the reforms that have
made the country's bid for visa liberalization with the
European Union a credible one. They did this in
response to popular pressure on an issue concerning
which the connection between reform and immediate
benefits for citizens was clear.

In this respect, I have repeatedly highlighted the
need to stress the causal links between reforms
required for Euro-Atlantic integration and the practical
benefits citizens will derive from the process. In the
case of visa reform, the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have shown that they are able to respond
to the logic of popular demand. I believe this can be
applied to other reforms that have been blocked until
now. In other words, the election campaign can
actually be used to create momentum for change,

instead of being used as an excuse to keep things as
they are. Elections in October could in fact help,
particularly if voters both seek to hold their
representatives to a real accounting during the
campaign and then turn out in force on election day.

This year's election will see a surge of young
people who are eligible to vote for the first time. This
may alter the electoral arithmetic, and even a modest
change could produce more constructive coalitions in
the next Parliament. That is most likely to happen if the
international community remains focused on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, requires absolute respect for the
Dayton Peace Agreement and continues to foster a
constructive atmosphere for constitutional and other
reforms. This is the way to get to the objective that we
all want to reach - where Bosnia and Herzegovina can
move towards full Euro-Atlantic integration under its
own steam - and that means with full ownership of
the responsibilities that go along with it.

I am truly convinced that this possibility can
become a reality for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
people have shown on many occasions that they indeed
have the talent needed. And I will, as High
Representative but also as the EU Special
Representative, continue to dedicate all my efforts to
assisting and supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina's
efforts in this direction. The European Union, too, is
firmly committed to accompanying Bosnia and
Herzegovina on this path, as was confirmed by High
Representative Ashton's recent visit to the country.

Let me conclude by congratulating Bosnia and
Herzegovina once again and by wishing it success in
its contribution to the work of the Security Council.

