Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): First of all, I wish to
thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over this
important meeting. The delegation of Mauritius is very
pleased to welcome Mr. Paul Kagame, President of
Rwanda, to the Security Council Chamber this
morning. We thank the President for his important
briefing.

In the wake ofthe recent tragic event in Kinshasa,
the Security Council received guarantees from Rwanda
that it did not intend to take advantage of the situation.
Similar guarantees were also received from Uganda.
We are glad that these guarantees have been respected,
and on that account, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to remain largely
peaceful.

There is no doubt that the Lusaka Agreement
constitutes the only basis for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, indeed, in the whole Great
Lakes region. Last Friday the new President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in his statement to
the Security Council, reconfirmed his country's
commitment to move the Lusaka process forward and
to actively pursue the inter- Congolese dialogue. We
would like to see all the parties to the conflict reaffirm
their commitments similarly. We believe there is today
an excellent opportunity for peace in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo and in the Great Lakes region.

Indeed, for the last few weeks we have been
hearing statements of commitment from the parties to
the conflict to move the Lusaka process forward. Now
is the time for these statements to be translated into
concrete action by all those concerned. In this regard,
the highest priority undoubtedly is the implementation
of the disengagement plan signed in Harare in
December. In this regard, we have noted with
satisfaction that Rwanda has offered to go beyond the
provisions of the disengagement plan and withdraw its
forces to a distance of up to 200 miles. We welcome
this positive commitment by Rwanda. Our goal, of
course, is to bring about the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the Democratic Republic of the Congo at
the earliest.

We are confident that the meeting of heads of
State of the region in the coming days will add new
impetus to the momentum already created to advance
the Lusaka process. We call for the earliest deployment
of phase II of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1332
(2000).

The dire conditions prevailing in the Great Lakes
region are largely a result of the illegal circulation of
and trafficking in small arms and light weapons and the
use of mineral and other resources for financing
paramilitary and organized rebel groups. We are
therefore looking forward to the report and the findings
of the United Nations panel on illegal exploitation of
natural resources and other sources of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is due next
month.

We are extremely concerned by the humanitarian
situation arising from the instability in the Great Lakes
region. All the countries of this region face the
problems of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Although the humanitarian relief agencies are doing a
commendable job in alleviating their suffering, we
would like to see the international community make
more efforts to provide further assistance to these
people, who find themselves in dire economic
conditions. But there is no doubt that only when peace
and stability are firmly established in all the countries
of the region will the end of human suffering be
ensured.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to add
that no progress can be achieved unless the leaders of
the Great Lakes region show their determination, will
and commitment to engage fully in bringing stability
and peace to the region. We believe that the time to do
so is now.

