The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Do Nascimento
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern
at recent destabilizing actions in Angola, in particular
the failure of the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) to comply with resolution
1118 (1997) of 30 June 1997 and its continued efforts
to restore its military capabilities. The Council
considers the information submitted by UNITA to the
Joint Commission on 21 July 1997 with regard to the
strength of its armed forces, the extension of state
administration and the activities of Vorgan radio
station to be neither complete nor credible.

"The Security Council condemns the
mistreatment of the personnel of the United Nations
and international humanitarian organizations in areas
under UNITA control, as well as the harassment of
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) personnel in the exercise of their functions.
Those actions by UNITA are unacceptable and
contrary to its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol

and to Security Council resolutions. In this regard,
the Council fully supports the joint statement by
MONUA and the representatives of the three
Observer States issued on 14 July 1997.

"The Security Council notes with concern that
the increasing tension in the northern part of the
country is rapidly spreading to the central and
southern provinces, with very dangerous implications
for the implementation of the remaining tasks of the
peace process, including those referred to in Security
Council resolution 1118 (1997). The Council calls
upon both parties to refrain from any use of force,
in accordance with their commitments under the
Lusaka Protocol.

"The Security Council also calls upon both
parties to continue to work closely with the Joint
Commission, and in particular UNITA, to cooperate
fully with MONUA and to ensure the freedom of
movement and the safety of its personnel, as well as
of international humanitarian organizations.

"The Security Council reiterates its belief that
the long-awaited meeting within the territory of
Angola between the President of Angola and the
leader of UNITA could greatly contribute to the
reduction of tension and to the process of national
reconciliation.

"The Security Council notes with concern
reports from MONUA that unauthorized aircraft
have landed in territory under UNITA control. In
this context, the Council calls upon all States to
comply fully with paragraph 19 of resolution 864
(1993) of 15 September 1993.

"The Security Council reaffirms its readiness to
consider the imposition of measures, inter alia, those
specifically mentioned in paragraph 26 of resolution
864 (1993), unless UNIT A takes irreversible and
concrete steps immediately to fulfil its obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol. These steps should
include demilitarization of all its forces,
transformation of its radio station Vorgan into a
non-partisan broadcasting facility and full
cooperation in the process of the normalization of
state administration throughout Angola. The Council
requests the Secretary-General to keep it fully
informed on the implementation of those tasks and
to assess their fulfilment by UNITA in his report
which is to be submitted by 15 August 1997 in
accordance with resolution 1118 (1997).

"The Security Council will continue to monitor
closely the situation in Angola and will remain seized
of the matter."

This statement will he issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l997/39.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.

