Ms. Boucher (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Sweden for organizing this
open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
As we begin the year with a new Secretary-General,
today's debate is extremely timely and goes directly to
the heart of the Organization's fundamental purpose.

We are confronting a challenging global situation,
and we continue to face threats to international
peace and security that generate major pressures on
the Organization and on Member States. In numbers
unprecedented since the Second World War, people
around the globe remain displaced by conflict. The
duration of protracted refugee situations is also
lengthening, which puts sustained pressure on those
displaced, on host communities and on the global
capacity for humanitarian response. The indiscriminate
bombing and targeting ofcivilians and medical facilities
have become the hallmark of too many conflicts.
The senseless attacks recently suffered by civilians
in Aleppo represent perhaps the lowest point in our
collective response in protecting populations at risk.

Clearly, we must do more and do it sooner to prevent
conflicts from escalating. We must do more to secure
sustainable peace in fragile situations. Over the past
year, Canada has sought to reinforce the capacity of
the United Nations to support conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. As Prime Minister Trudeau signalled to
the General Assembly (see A/71/PV.8), pluralism and
inclusion represent crucial values in building peaceful
societies and sustainable development.

(spoke in English)

Various high-level reviews conducted over the past
two years - by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and by the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, and
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) - highlighted the importance of
prevention. Many of those recommendations were
endorsed by Member States in the landmark Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262)
on sustaining peace. Not only must that work continue,
but we encourage the Secretary-General to articulate
an ambitious plan of action to advance those objectives.
Let me highlight a few areas where Canada would like
to see greater emphasis.

We know that political solutions lie at the heart
of conflict prevention and peacebuilding. However,
preventing conflict and sustaining peace must become
overarching goals of all United Nations activities before,
during and after conflict, including for the human rights
and development pillars. We also think it is important to
strengthen the Secretariat's capacity for joint analysis
and j oint planning, as well as for conveying timely early-
warning information and analysis to Member States.
Overall, we believe a better balance must be struck
between the considerable resources spent on peace
operations and those supporting conflict prevention
and sustaining peace, particularly in the field.

As for the Security Council, we encourage it to
make greater and fuller use of its prevention toolbox,
including Chapter VI measures, as well as the use of
special political missions. We also think the Secretary-
General has a central role to play in galvanizing
international action for peace.

Finally, we really do need a stronger link between
sustaining peace and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. As highlighted in the Stockholm
declaration of 2016, peacebuilding and State-building
are integral to sustainable development, not separate
from it. While that link is recognized in the 2030
Agenda, we believe that it needs to be strengthened
with greater urgency. The sustaining peace and
sustainable development agendas intersect in multiple
ways, but perhaps the most important priorities are
gender equality, women's empowerment and the
participation of women and youth in peacebuilding
and governance. We urge the Secretary-General and
the Council to continue to strengthen the work of the
United Nations on gender and youth, particularly in
countries experiencing fragility.

We look forward to working closely with our new
Secretary-General. We offer our full support to him
and to his team, as well as to Council members, as we
advance this important agenda.

