Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to congratulate
the United States on its presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also want to commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for bringing much needed attention to this
important subject.

Israel assigns great importance to protecting
children in armed conflict, and we look forward to the
commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
in November.

One of the world's most-beloved children's authors,
Dr. Seuss, once wrote: "A person's a person, no matter
how small". All children around the world deserve to
grow up in an environment where their dignity and
human rights are respected and their aspirations are
valued. Yet in too many parts of the world, children are
the targets of violence or casualties of conflict. Abuses
against children in armed conflicts not only tear at our
hearts, they unravel entire communities and destroy
the fabric of a society. An estimated 2 million children
have died as a direct result of armed conflict over the
last decade, and many more have been permanently
disabled or seriously injured.

In the Middle East, terrorists regularly single
out children in their attacks. In June, millions of
Israelis were numb with horror when they learned
that Hamas terrorists had kidnapped and murdered
three Israeli teenagers - Eyal, Gilad and Naftali - as
they made their way home from school. That is just
one of many attacks targeting Israeli children. Over
the summer, over 3,800 rockets and mortars were
fired into Israel, which represents an average of one
rocket every 10 minutes. The rockets landed on Israeli
kindergartens, playgrounds and homes. Four year-old
Daniel Tragerman of Kibbutz Nahal Oz was one of
the tragic casualties of those attacks. Daniel's mother,
Gila, sent a letter to the Secretary-General this week,
in which she wrote:

"Daniel, 4.5 years old, was killed in our house,
while playing with his sister in a tent built indoors
and not outside, because it's dangerous. He was
killed by a mortar shell that was shot by terrorists
from Gaza, he died in our hands. Daniel died in
front of his little sister, who is 3.5 years old; he died
in front of his baby brother Uri, only four months

old and right before our eyes, his mother and father.
Daniel was killed by a mortar shell that was fired
by Hamas members from an elementary school
for boys in Gaza City. It was not a stray shell. It
was not an accidental death. From that school,
terrorists fired deliberately at the kibbutz to murder
civilians - children, women and old people."

Today, over 1 million Israeli children live with the
threat of Hamas missiles. One in every three children
living in communities near Gaza has been diagnosed
with post-traumatic stress disorder. Thousands of
those children cannot sleep at night and refuse to go
outdoors - for good reason. In recent weeks, the
Israel Defence Forces have discovered dozens of terror
tunnels leading from Gaza to the doorsteps of Israeli
communities. Hamas planned to use those tunnels to
send terrorists into the hearts of those communities to
kill and kidnap as many people as possible.

As a father who has raised three children in Israel,
I can say that Israeli children grow up in an abnormal
reality. They go to school with security guards, walk
through metal detectors in malls and live with bunkers
in their buildings. They grow up thinking that all of
that is normal. Each and every day, Israeli parents
worry that their children will be the next victims of a
rocket attack, kidnapping attempt, suicide bombing or
stone throwing.

Israel is committed to upholding international law
and takes extensive measures to ensure the protection
of civilians. In contrast, radical extremist groups
like Hamas see no problem with using civilians and
children to achieve their ends. They deploy minors as
suicide bombers and recruit them to carry out attacks
against Israeli civilians and soldiers; they send children
deep underground to dig their terror tunnels; and
they place children in harm's way by using schools,
hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods as bases for their
terror activity. During Hamas's most recent escalation,
terrorists booby-trapped hundreds of Palestinian homes
and went so far as to use children's bedrooms and even
baby cribs to hide explosives and conceal terror tunnels.
Hamas also launched M-75 rockets from a children's
playground located in the Shuja'iya neighbourhood.
Dozens of other rockets were launched only steps from
Gaza schools, including the Al-Wakaf Al-Shariah
School, the Sinah School, the Haled Al-Alami Girls
School and the Shahada Al-Manar Boys School. And,
of course, we are well aware that, on at least three
separate occasions, rockets were found hidden in the
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). I can
assure you that Hamas did not place them there because
it had added rocket science to the school curriculum.

Hamas has made its educational priorities clear.
Earlier this year, UNRWA tried to distribute new
textbooks to teach Gaza's children about human
rights. Hamas rejected the books on the grounds that
the materials would brainwash Palestinian children.
A representative from Hamas's Education Ministry
explained that the books would foster "negative feelings
toward armed resistance" and that the inclusion of
topics such as the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights would contaminate children's minds.

Learning about human rights would contaminate
children's minds? The truth is that every single day
Hamas is polluting young Palestinian minds with
hatred and violence. Over 100,000 children have
graduated from Hamas's paramilitary camps, which
encourage teenagers to "follow in the footsteps of the
suicide martyrs". The toxic lessons taught by Hamas
are poisoning any opportunity for Palestinian children
to grow up in peace. Generations of Palestinians have
suffered under a leadership that would sooner tear Israel
down than raise its own people up. It is time for the
Palestinian leadership to teach its children tolerance,
coexistence and mutual understanding.

The United Nations has a duty to shield the world's
young people from hate and protect them wherever
and whenever they are threatened. For the sake of
those children and for the future of our region, the
international community must act and must act now.
As Dr. Seuss wrote: "Unless someone like you cares a
whole awful lot, nothing is going to get better."

