Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to express Lebanon's gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing and to Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his statement. I also commend the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its efforts in Afghanistan, in particular
in view of the difficult circumstances on the ground.

Ten years after the international military
intervention in Afghanistan, we are now bearing
witness to the dawn of a new era with the transfer of
authority to the Afghan people. Yet, the security
situation remains alarming. Violence against
international and Afghan forces and against the Afghan
people continues at an accelerated pace. This situation
has led to a greater need for vigilance at the security
level during the transitional phase in order to return
power to the hands of the Afghans and to ensure the
safety of civilians and their property. All parties are
called upon to respect international humanitarian law
and to make every effort to spare the lives of innocents.

In the context of the search for a political solution
to the crisis, Lebanon commends efforts to achieve
reconciliation and reintegration. Specifically, we
underscore the role played by the High Peace Council
and the Security Council's support for the
reconciliation process through its unanimous adoption
of resolution 1988 (2011), which splits the sanctions
regimes for the Taliban and Al-Qaida and provides
members of the Taliban with the opportunity to
disassociate themselves from terrorist ideology and
respect the Constitution in order to participate in the
peace process.

No less important than the security and safety
situation is the issue of strengthening respect for
human rights in Afghanistan. Specifically, efforts
should continue to be made to enforce laws regarding
acts of violence against women in every province.
Women should be protected against discrimination,
injustice and coercion, and should be integrated into
public life. These are things that the Organization has
repeatedly called for.

Moreover, we would like to underscore the
significance of the allegations in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/381) concerning the ill
treatment and abuse of detainees, who are often
deprived of legitimate defence counsel as well as being
arbitrarily detained without charge or trial. It is
essential to good governance that such gaps in the
areas of the rule of law and institutions be dealt with.

We should also emphasize the importance of
continued commitment to the Kabul Process,
particularly in the context of social and economic
development. The reform of public institutions is also
crucial to transparency and accountability. We would
also like to add our voice to the call made by
Secretary-General in his report concerning the need for
the creation of an International Monetary Fund country
programme. The lack of such a programme is having a
generally negative effect on projects and programmes
around the country.

In addition, efforts within Afghanistan should be
accompanied by dialogue and regional cooperation.
Neighbouring countries can - indeed, it is in their
interest to do so - strengthen their ties with
Afghanistan and contribute to improving the safety and
security situation by monitoring borders and combating
drug-trafficking and transnational organized crime.

We would like to emphasize our appreciation for
the international community's efforts in general and in
particular those of the United Nations, through all its
agencies. United Nations staff are working
courageously and determinedly under very difficult
circumstances to build an Afghan State that is capable
of protecting its own people and institutions, with a
view to safeguarding the lives and prosperity of all
Afghan men, women and children.
