Mr. Kolby: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report on the recent Security Council Mission to
Kosovo and Belgrade, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
At the invitation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo, Michael Steiner, the
Security Council decided to send a Mission there. I was
asked, and I accepted, to head the Mission.

On 19 November, the Council decided that the
visit should take place from 13 to 17 December, and a
specific mandate was decided upon. Earlier Council
Missions to Kosovo had taken place in April 2000 and
in June 2001.

According to the mandate, the Mission had the
following objectives: first, to find ways to enhance
support for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

To this end, the second objective was to observe
UNMIK's operation and the situation on the ground
and, specifically, to obtain an update on Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Steiner's
benchmarks, including the rule of law, the rate of
sustainable return and the privatization agenda. In
addition, it was to face the challenges faced by
UNMIK, particularly the follow-up to the local
elections, decentralization in Mitrovica and to report its
conclusions to the Security Council.

Thirdly, the Mission's objective was to convey a
strong message to the provisional institutions for self-
government, local leaders, the newly elected municipal
officials and all others concerned about the need to,
first, use the opportunity created by the local elections
to move forward with the decentralization process and
to further develop democratic institutions; secondly,
promote inter-ethnic reconciliation and inclusion;
thirdly, reject all violence and condemn extremist and
terrorist activities; fourthly, ensure public safety and
order and promote stability and security; and, finally,
support the full and effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and fully
cooperate with UNMIK and the international security
presence to these ends.

The Mission's fourth objective was to explore
ways to enhance cooperation between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, on
the basis of the UNMIK-Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Common Document of 5 November 2001,
and the opportunities for increased cooperation
between Pristina and Belgrade.

The fifth objective of the Mission was to look at
the impact of the regional situation on the work of
UNMIK.

All Council members decided to be represented in
the Mission.

As planned, the Mission was able to travel on 13
December, and during our four days in Kosovo and
Belgrade, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, we had an
intensive programme, meeting with the representatives
of the international community, Kosovo politicians,
Yugoslav authorities and civil society groups in
Pristina, Mitrovica and Belgrade.

As head of the Mission, I gave two press
conferences, one in Pristina and one in Belgrade, and
had to give a number of statements to the press after
specific meetings.

In Pristina, on 14 and 15 December, the Mission
met with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michael Steiner, and his staff for briefings
on the work of UNMIK and assessments of the
situation.

We met with representatives of the provisional
institutions of self-government, including President
Ibrahim Rugova, Prime Minister Bajram Rexhepi,
President of the Assembly Nexhat Daci and the Inter-
Ministerial Coordinator for Returns, Milorad
Todorovic.

We met with representatives of the Kosovo
Assembly from all major Kosovo Albanian parties and
the Kosovo Serb coalition, as well as representatives of
other ethnic communities. Members of the Mission met
with families of missing persons. On Sunday, 15
December, the Mission received a briefing from KFOR
on the security situation and the main tasks and
challenges of the international security presence.

The briefing was led by the KFOR Commander,
Lieutenant General Fabi Mini. It then went to
Mitrovica. In northern Mitrovica, the Mission was
briefed on the Kosovo Trust Agency and the process
towards privatization. We had a meeting with
representatives of Serb and Bosnian civil society in
northern Mitrovica. The Mission then walked across
the bridge to southern Mitrovica to receive a briefing
from the Special Representative, the Mitrovica regional
administrator and the Mitrovica municipal
administrator on the evolution of UNMIK's presence in
northern Mitrovica and the status of implementation of
UNMIK's Mitrovica strategy. This was followed by a
meeting with the Presidents of the municipal
assemblies in the Mitrovica region, three of whom are
Kosovo Albanians and three Kosovo Serbs.

We visited the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) in
Vucitrn, where we were briefed by the Director,
Mr. Steven Bennet, and the Police Commissioner,
Mr. Stefan Feller, as well as a high-ranking KPS
officer, Colonel Ahmeti and where we met with a
multi-ethnic group of KPS officers.
Back in Pristina, we had a meeting on return with
leaders of returnees from Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb communities, with the municipal assembly
presidents of anilane municipality, as well as with
representatives of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and of various non-
governmental organizations. In Pristina, we also had a
meeting with deputies from various political parties
from the Pristina municipal assembly. The day ended
with a meeting with women representing different
ethnic communities, members of the political
establishment and civil society.

On Monday, 16 December, at the end of the visit,
I held a joint conference with Special Representative
Steiner before leaving for Belgrade. In Belgrade, we
had separate meetings that day with the President of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Vojislav
Kostunica, the Serbian Prime Minister, Goran Djinjic,
the Serbian Deputy Prime Minister and the President of
the Coordination Centre of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija. Members of the Mission had a meeting with
the representatives of the Serbian Association of
Families of Missing Persons. On Tuesday, 17
September, the Mission met with the Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Goran Svilanovic. At the end of
our visit, the Mission held a press conference.

Allow me, in this context, to express our
appreciation to UNMIK and to Special Representative
Steiner, as well as to the Security Council secretariat,
for an excellent programme and for the impressive
organization of the visit.

These are our findings on Kosovo. Since the last
Mission of the Security Council to Kosovo, the
Mission finds notable progress in several areas with
regard to implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). Elections held for the Kosovo
Assembly in 2001 and in municipalities in 2002 have
led to the formation of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government and the new municipal assemblies.
The process of handing over power and responsibilities
to the local institutions continues.

There is also progress in the area of the rule of
law. Crime rates are down, and security is improving.
The Kosovo Police Service continues to increase in
numbers, and the judiciary is in the process of being
established, both of them as multi-ethnic bodies. For
the first time, the number of minority returns is larger
than that of those leaving. Nevertheless, the overall
figures of internally displaced persons and refugees
from minority communities returning remains low. The
Mission noted a sharp contrast between the number of
returnees and the number of those who still remained
internally displaced, as well as the daunting task that
lies ahead and the financial implications of that task.
There is also progress in the preparations for the
privatization process.

Cooperation between UNMIK and Belgrade has
improved. The establishment of UNMIK administration
in the northern part of Mitrovica has been necessary for
the implementation of a uniform standard of
administration throughout Kosovo and marks an
important move against parallel institutions. The
Mission believes that UNMIK's presence in the
northern part of Mitrovica is an important step forward
for the normalization of living conditions in the city. In
that respect, the Mission is impressed by the work of
UNMIK and KFOR. It also notes the interest in, and
dedication to, this work by some members of the
community in Kosovo.

The formulation of benchmarks for a realization
of standards is a constructive approach for the further
development of Kosovo towards a democratic, multi-
ethnic society. The Mission looks forward to the next
report on UNMIK, with a further detailing of the
benchmarks, so as to measure progress. The Mission
hopes that these can be worked out with local
authorities in Kosovo in order to build local ownership
of them. The Mission holds the view that "standards
before status" is the only viable way forward.

The Mission was consistent in its message to all
interlocutors regarding "standards before status",
multi-ethnicity and integration of all communities, and
their responsibility for the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). It urges the newly elected
bodies to use their competencies, transferred in
accordance with the Constitutional Framework, for the
benefit of all inhabitants. The Mission stresses the
importance of participation by all communities in the
work of the elected bodies.

The Mission notes that, in spite of these positive
developments, the situation in Kosovo remains fragile.
Much work remains to be done, by both UNMIK and
the Kosovo institutions and communities. This covers,
inter alia, the rule of law, sustainable returns, local
ownership of Kosovo's progress, democratic
development, inter-ethnic reconciliation and dialogue,
cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade and the
combat against organized crime.

The firm establishment of the rule of law is
central to achieving security, functioning democracy
and sustainable economic development. Even though
there has been notable progress in this area, the
Mission finds that a continued strong effort is
necessary to achieve the goals in this area.

The sustainable return of minorities is a
precondition for a multi-ethnic society. A considerable
amount of attention and resources should be dedicated
to this issue. Even more than financial assistance, there
is a need for region-wide and local commitment to
supporting conditions for sustainable returns. Security,
confidence-building and economic viability are all vital
factors that must be addressed in order to achieve a
significant, sustainable and successful return process.
This is a responsibility for all levels of Kosovo society.
UNMIK should, together with local institutions and
civil society, continue to work, with a comprehensive
approach, in order to move the return process forward.

Reconciliation and dialogue measures are
paramount in this regard. One important contribution to
reconciliation between the communities is the
resolution of the fate of the missing persons from all
communities. UNMIK is encouraged to press forward
on these issues in consultation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), KFOR, the
Provisional Institutions and concerned local non-
governmental organizations, and with Belgrade.
UNMIK is requested to keep the Council regularly
informed. The Council is urged to continue to follow
the issue.

The Mission points out that the progress achieved
so far has been driven to a large extent by the
international community. The Mission has the firm
impression that local ownership and commitment to
these processes has been less than could have been
expected. It is important that UNMIK make further
efforts to involve the local institutions and political
leaders in the practical formulation and implementation
of political goals and strategies. A case in point is the
further specification and implementation of the
benchmarks for the eight standards articulated in the
"standards before status" policy. A greater degree of
local ownership of, and commitment to, the realization
of those standards is a prerequisite for their ultimate
successful implementation. Naturally, the communities
themselves also have a critical responsibility in that
regard.

The recently held municipal elections were
conducted in a well-organized and non-violent fashion.
Participation levels were on average disappointingly
low, and especially so with regard to Kosovo Serbs.
Greater effort must be made to promote participation in
the political process in Kosovo. Effective participation
by all communities in those institutions is a
prerequisite for a functioning democracy in Kosovo.
Special emphasis is given to the inclusion of, and
respect for, the views and interests of all communities
by the local institutions. The Mission stresses a results-
oriented approach through consensus.

The Mission underscores the necessity that
elected representatives act in a responsible and
solution-oriented manner in order to provide basic
services for the inhabitants of their municipalities. The
Mission emphasizes that the handing over of
responsibilities from UNMIK administrators to the
locally elected bodies needs to be done in a way that
ensures local ownership and accountability. There are
huge tasks for the municipal assemblies to address.
Municipalities have a particular responsibility to foster
dialogue, reconciliation and conditions for sustainable
return, and to act against corruption. UNMIK should
support efforts in that regard.

The Mission urges UNMIK, in consultation with
local institutions and elected representatives, to further
elaborate the proposal for the decentralization of
competences to municipalities without delay.

It is the opinion of the Mission that the time has
come for cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade on
practical issues. UNMIK should consider ways and
means of facilitating such contacts and practical
cooperation. The Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government should similarly take steps within their
competences to make that possible.

The Mission underscores the importance of
viewing developments in Kosovo in a regional
perspective. Events in Kosovo have an impact on the
surrounding region and vice versa. That is linked not
only to political issues, but also to security, law and
order and economic development. The Mission points
to the need for regional cooperation in order, for
example, to effectively combat organized crime,
including trafficking.

In the light of the many difficult issues yet to be
resolved, the Mission is of the view that continued
substantial international engagement in Kosovo will be
necessary for the foreseeable future.

The Mission would like to express its
appreciation to Special Representative Michael Steiner
and the staff of UNMIK for their efforts to realize the
decision of the Security Council. The Mission likewise
expresses its gratitude to General Fabio Mini and
KFOR. The implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
remains high on the Security Council's agenda, and the
Mission is impressed by the hard-working dedication
of the men and women, local and international, of
UNMIK, working together with local and international
partners, to implement that resolution.

Those are the findings of the Mission.

Finally, let me thank my fellow Council members
for their constructive participation in the Mission.

