Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Kazakhstan for its initiative
in convening this important meeting and, more
generally, for placing Central Asia and Afghanistan
at the heart of the Security Council's attention in the
month of January. As the Council has just returned from
Kabul, this meeting is an opportunity to reaffirm the
importance that we collectively attach to the security
and development of that region of the world. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

France aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union. I shall confine
myself to three main points.

My first point concerns the situation in Afghanistan.
As I said, the Security Council has just visited Kabul,
a first since 2010. On behalf of France, I would like to
thank the Afghan authorities for their hospitality and
to commend their determination as they pursue the
democratic consolidation of the country.

The very high level of insecurity and violence in
Afghanistan remains a major source of concern for
France. Armed clashes and repeated terrorist attacks
continue to seriously destabilize the entire country.
In that regard, France shares the determination of the
Afghan authorities and of our allies to combat terrorism,
including its financing. In addition to the need to pursue
ongoing reforms aimed at achieving governance that is
more effective and better able to serve the population
and strengthen the rule of law, France encourages
Afghanistan to focus on two priorities in 2018.

The first priority is the conduct of free and
transparent local and parliamentary elections. Progress
has been made in that area, and preparations for the
parliamentary elections have been initiated by the
competent authorities, in particular the Government
and the Independent Electoral Commission. France
encourages the Afghan authorities to continue their
efforts, with the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), to
ensure an inclusive and credible electoral process. In
that regard, the full participation of women in electoral
processes, both as voters and as candidates, will
be essential.

The second priority is to reinvigorate momentum
towards an Afghan-led peace process. That requires
relaunching the inter-Afghan dialogue, but also a
sincere commitment and unambiguous support for
peace from all of Afghanistan's neighbours. We call
on everyone to make a renewed effort in that direction
and make concrete commitments. France has noted the
announcement of a new meeting of the Kabul Process
at the end of February and hopes that the meeting will
bring together existing initiatives under the authority of
the Afghan Government.

Those are the two immediate priorities. But
we must certainly not lose sight of the fragility of
the humanitarian situation, particularly the case of
refugees, as well as the very precarious situation of
women and children, who remain, it should be recalled,
the first victims of the conflict.

My second point pertains to cooperation between
Afghanistan and Central Asia, which is not only
necessary but also replete with great opportunities.
France thanks Kazakhstan for taking the initiative
of drafting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2)
that for the first time highlights the special ties
linking Afghanistan and Central Asia, as well as the
opportunities that they represent for the economic
development and security of the region. Afghanistan
and Central Asia in fact share many common challenges,
all of which involve areas where stronger regional
cooperation is needed.

In the area of security, I would mention preventing
radicalization, in particular of young people and. more
generally. combating terrorism and its financing.
With regard to combating drug trafficking, which
continues to fuel the Taliban insurgency, trafficking
encourages corruption and poses a major public health
risk to Afghanistan and the neighbouring countries.
In that regard, the Paris Pact initiative, a partnership
that includes Afghanistan and the Central Asian
countries, remains a unique framework for exchange
among all countries affected by narcotics produced
in Afghanistan.

In the area of economic development, it is essential
that Afghanistan be able to benefit from its geographical
location in the heart of Asia. Its increasing involvement
in multiple projects to increase connectivity between
Afghanistan and Central Asia, as well as in various other
forms of regional cooperation, must be encouraged.

Energy and transportation are two key sectors
in that regard. As Afghanistan is one of the primary
sufferers from global warming, which causes severe
drought, it is fortunate that the region is endowed
with great potential for developing renewable energy,
including hydraulic, solar and wind resources. France
encourages regional partners to invest in those energy
sources and to green their economies. In Central
Asia as elsewhere, it is important to continue to
foster a comprehensive approach linking security and
development goals as part of the framework of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

My third, and last, point concerns the support of
the international community, especially the United
Nations, for Afghanistan and Central Asia. That support
comes not only from UNAMA and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, but also from all United Nations agencies that are
working to strengthen the stability and development
of the region. I should like to reaffirm France's full
support for the work of United Nations in the region
and to encourage increased cooperation between
UNAMA and the United Nations Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy. Security Council consultations scheduled
for next Monday, 22 January, concerning the activities
of the Centre, and the upcoming renewal of UNAMA's
mandate in March will provide opportunities to further
elaborate on how the United Nations can continue to
support Afghanistan and Central Asia.

For its part, France will continue to cooperate
closely with Afghanistan and Central Asian countries
on major international issues, beginning with combating
terrorism, in a bilateral framework, as well as through
the European Union, which today is a major partner
for the region. France will also continue to support the
modernization of those countries in all areas and to
work resolutely to strengthen our links.

