Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this briefing in order
to review the seventh report (S/20l7/904, annex) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
I take this opportunity to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu
and Mr. Edmond Mulet for their informative briefings
and, through them, to thank all the men and women
who strive to establish the facts in order to attribute
the responsibilities for, as everyone has said, the
unacceptable use of chemical substances as weapons
against civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic.

As previously stated in the Chamber, my delegation
reiterates its strong condemnation of the chemical
attacks in Syria, in particular the two incidents under
consideration today, in Khan Shaykhun and in Umm
Hawsh, whoever the perpetrators were. As a State party
to the Chemical Weapons Convention and as an ardent
defender of the chemical weapon non-proliferation
regime, Senegal, through me, reiterates its conviction
that nothing can justify an atrocity such as the use of
chemical substances as a weapon against civilians by
anyone and under any circumstances.

Not only such attacks but also the many and ongoing
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
highlighted by the report and by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic demonstrate - if
any further proof were necessary - how important it
is that the JIM. continue its work, which acts also as
an instrument of deterrence, since the risk of weapons
of mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State
actors, such as terrorist groups, is real. That is of
particular concern to Senegal.

On behalf of my country, I therefore takes this
opportunity to welcome the positive cooperation, in
accordance with resolution 2319 (2016), between the
Mechanism and other subsidiary bodies of the Council,
including the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. Senegal
also welcomes the cooperation of certain Member States
with the Mechanism as part of its investigative work.

Whatever our views on the report under review, my
delegation believes that there is still sufficient common
ground among members of the Security Council to
allow us to renew the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which expires in only 10 days, as my
neighbour has just reminded the Council. I would
like to express the hope that the Council will regain
the spirit of compromise and consensus on this highly
technical issue, as in the case with the adoption of
resolutions 2118 (2013), 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), all
of which enabled the Council to make tangible progress
in tackling the issue of chemical weapons in Syria.

In any case, since my delgation is convinced
not only of the crucial contribution of the JIM. in
establishing the truth with regard to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, but also of the relevance of the
lessons to be drawn, in particular regarding the global
non-proliferation architecture, my delegation reiterates
its great appreciation of and support for the Mechanism.
We would encourage the Mechanism to continue its
crucial mission, which seeks to discharge - it should
be underscored - independently, impartially and
objectively its mandate established under resolution
2235 (2015) and renewed by the Council through
resolution 2319 (2016). It is important to recall that the
mandate comprises identifying, to the extent possible,
the individuals, entities or Governments that have
perpetrated, organized or ordered the use as weapons
of chemical substances, including chlorine, sarin and
any other toxic chemical substance, in the Syrian Arab
Republic or those who have participated in any way,
Since everyone agrees that chemical weapons have
been used in Syria and given that there are further
allegations that have not yet been verified, Senegal
believes that the Security Council can reach agreement
on renewing the mandate of the JIM.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate the importance
of finding a negotiated political solution to the Syrian
conflict on the basis of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015) as the
only viable solution in order to overcome the significant

humanitarian challenges spawned by the conflict and
to shed all possible light on the many allegations of the
use of prohibited weapons in Syria.

