Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): We too would like to
express our gratitude to President Chiluba and to the other
prominent speakers who addressed the Council today,
reiterating the urgency of the problems facing Africa. As
the representative of a country that maintains close
traditional ties with African States and that has pledged to
address their specific interests as a member of the Security
Council, I would like to reiterate Ukraine's resolve to act in
support of peace and development in Africa.

We are greatly satisfied that, thanks to the remarkable
initiative of the United States presidency, the first month of
Ukraine's membership in the Council has been a month of
focused concentration on African issues. Certainly the
Security Council does not possess a magic wand for
resolving all outstanding problems overnight. However, it
would be really hard to deny that January 2000 has been an
extraordinary month for both the African continent and the
Security Council itself. This year's first open meeting, on
10 January, was innovative in all respects. It set an
important precedent by turning our attention to those
aspects of the maintenance of international peace and
security that had often been overlooked in the Council's
day-to-day work.

I wish to reiterate my delegation's strong hope and
confidence that our consideration of the issue of AIDS
will provide a powerful impetus for reaching a new stage
in the international community's struggle against AIDS.
For this purpose, the delegations of Namibia, Canada and
Ukraine submitted to you, Mr. President, specific
proposals regarding possible follow-up action. We thank
you for taking up these proposals.

Humanitarian aspects of international crises,
including the refugee problem, have been on the
Council's agenda for some time. Here, too, it is important
that our discussions make a real difference on the ground.
Special missions of the Council and preventive
deployment may be steps that can show the Council's
willingness to put the issue of refugee protection, which
is so acute in Africa, on a practical track.

Special prominence during this "month of Africa" in
the Security Council was given to the situation in Angola.
After the outstanding briefing by Ambassador Fowler on
the results of his visit to that country, we have even more
evidence that the Security Council is in a position to
make a tangible contribution to achieving the ultimate
goal of restoring peace and security in Angola.

This month the Security Council was also privileged
to seat at its table one of the most prominent statesmen of
our epoch, Mr. Nelson Mandela, who has been designated
as the new Facilitator for the Arusha peace process. We
very much hope that the strong support provided by the
Council for the new Facilitator will boost his efforts to
achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict in Burundi.

Finally, last week the Security Council addressed the
major challenge facing the international community at the
turn of the century. The historic meeting on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has resulted in
a twofold recommitment. The first part was the assurance
of the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement that they
will respect this instrument as the only viable basis for
the resolution of the conflict. The second part was the
undertaking by the United Nations to support the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. Furthermore,
this was also perhaps the first time in several decades that
the Security Council really held a meeting in the terms of
Article 32 of the United Nations Charter, according to
which the Council has an obligation to invite the parties
to a dispute to participate in its discussions. We look
forward to the deployment, without further delay, of a
strong, full-fledged United Nations peacekeeping mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

 

Let us also not ignore the other conflicts in Africa,
which were rightly mentioned by Ambassador Greenstock
as well as by Ambassador Hamer. We fully support the
idea of establishing an expert group of the Security Council
on Africa.

Let me conclude by highlighting one more innovation
that promises to enrich both the Council's procedures and
the diplomatic process. We are all familiar with the good
old custom of greeting the incoming President at the first
meeting of the month. I am certainly not suggesting that
you, Mr. President, convened this meeting on the last day
of the month intentionally, with a View to collecting some
extra salutations. Nonetheless, we gladly seize this
opportunity to extend our most sincere congratulations on
the successful completion of your first, yet truly excellent
presidency of the Security Council. We express again our
gratitude for your efforts to further raise the prestige of this
organ in international politics.

