Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mr. Eliasson; the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Patriora; and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), Ms. Clark, for their briefings.

Two years after the publication of the Secretary-
General's report on the issue of peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746), I think it is very
useful for the Council to once again express its views
on a subject that is at the heart of the work of the
Organization. I would like to thank the Luxembourg
presidency of the Council for convening this discussion.

I would like to recall some principles that France
considers essential with regard to peacebuilding.

First, peacebuilding implies the establishment
of inclusive processes, in particular of a national
dialogue - of course, one that is inclusive in the
sense mentioned by the Ambassador of Jordan in his
statement today. In other words, it is not just a sharing
of power and infrastructure; it is effectively finding
a narrative that can lead to reconciliation. It was
precisely to relaunch the national dialogue that had
been obstructed and a conflict narrative that was going
in contradictory directions that the Council visited
Mali in early February to try to put the stabilization
process back on a better basis.

Working to build peace after a conflict must
also include all segments of society. We support the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
designed to ensure the active participation of women in
peacebuilding processes. We often say that and do little,
and therefore we need to make progress in that area.
In that respect, the appointment of the interim Head
of the Transitional Government in the Central African
Republic, Ms. Samba-Panza, and the important place
given to women in her Government has, we feel, been a
good example of that. Over and above the participation
of women, we must ensure the participation of all
sectors of society in the transition process.

Another principle for establishing the bases for
a lasting peace is the need to work on justice. Justice
remains the key to all post-conflict stabilization.
Through its practical experience in a number of
countries, the Council has identified several key areas
for intervention when it comes to justice - support
for the criminal justice system, independent justice,
the establishment of a prison system, security sector
reform and support for the international criminal
justice system.

National Governments bear the primary
responsibility for bringing to justice and punishing those
responsible for atrocities, including those committed in
post-conflict situations. But when States fail in their
responsibilities, the International Criminal Court must
play its part. Cases from a number of countries in
which we are involved in peacebuilding - the Central
African Republic, Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - have already been referred to the Court.

Finally, it is essential to begin long-term work to
rebuild institutions that inspire public confidence.
Again in reference to the Central African Republic, up
until today, thanks to the action of the African force
supported by the French Operation Sangaris, large-scale
massacres have been avoided. However, we face a
situation of insecurity borne of the collapse of the State.
It is therefore essential, parallel to security measures,
to act immediately to restore the State's authority and
constructive relations with the society as a whole. For
that, certain basic actions need to be carried out, such
as ensuring that civil servants are paid, which would
get the police and gendarmerie forces back to work, as
well as the courts and detention centres.

We cannot simply separate the opposing armies.
We also must arrest and bring to justice those who
order or incite violence. We must also bear in mind the
goal of holding elections no later than February 2015.

To re-establish the Central African Republic State,
those projects need resources. With regard to those
priority areas, the United Nations - today through the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic and as soon as possible, we
hope, through a peacekeeping operation - will have
an essential role to play. The international community,
however, must strengthen its mobilization in order
to provide the means necessary. As emphasized by
Ms. Clark, UNDP has a critical role to play in that regard.
It has the ability to develop policies and to mobilize,
as we saw in the Central African Republic, where the
UNDP has shown its effectiveness and its ability to
react in recent crises by setting up a multi-donor fund.

In the face of the challenge of peacebuilding,
the United Nations offers an opportunity to act in
a coordinated fashion. For our part, we would like
to stress the need to proceed in stages and to think
carefully about the various phases of transition.
Peacekeeping operations themselves have now become
multidimensional, and from their deployment try to
respond to varying challenges in countries where State
structures have practically disappeared.

It is important that peacekeeping operations pave
the way for peacebuilding. We must explain, however,
that those operations cannot in one year or in a few
months accomplish a whole multitude of tasks. Previous
speakers today have referred to the difficulties that we
have encountered in South Sudan.

Moreover, there must be close cooperation between
UNDP and the special political missions or the civilian
component of peacekeeping operations, so as to avoid
duplication. Exit strategies must be prepared, which
should guide the action of missions on a daily basis. In
those complex peacebuilding processes, I would like to
stress the particular importance of reinforcing the link
between the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, who depend upon the resources provided by
the peacekeeping operations or special missions, and
the United Nations country teams, directed by the
Resident Coordinators.

The country teams are expected to take over, at
the appropriate moment, the leading of peacekeeping
operations to ensure an effective transition towards
development programmes. That is an important
challenge, which we can see in countries such as Burundi
and Sierra Leone. The international community must
remain mobilized in those types of situations because,
if we do not, we cannot exclude a relapse into conflict
after the when different actors are demobilized.

Lastly, coordination among all actors contributing
to peacebuilding is essential. Others before me
have mentioned the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States, endorsed in Busan at the end of 2011,
which reminds us the necessity of coordination. The
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund are entities that can play a very useful role in
support of activities on the ground and to ensure the
necessary synergies with the missions in place. In that
regard, I welcome the establishment of justice/police
oversight mechanisms in Liberia that are financed by
the Peacebuilding Fund and supported by the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. In our opinion, those
are very interesting examples of cooperation among
different United Nations actors.

We are certain tha the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission architecture in 2015 will give us an
opportunity to go even further in terms of coordination
and the further strengthening of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, an institution in which we
truly believe and which has made a lasting contribution
since its establishment to strengthening States in post-
conflict situations.

