Ms. Davtyan (Armenia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate Pakistan on its
assumption of its duties as President of the Security
Council. We would also like to congratulate Mexico on
its successful completion of its presidency. Lastly, we
would like to thank the delegation of Pakistan for
organizing this very important meeting. We believe that
this is an interesting and thought-provoking discussion
that provides a good opportunity to once again pause
and reflect upon the ever-important matters of
international security and the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

In order to reach the noble objective of the
peaceful coexistence of nations, vigorous action at the
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels should be
pursued. Certainly, the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as conferred upon it
by the Charter of the United Nations. While modern
threats to international peace and security are taking
new shapes and forms, in its responses to various
conflicts the Security Council should also make an
effort, to the extent possible, to reflect the legal and
historic aspects of conflicts. That could further enhance
the effectiveness of the implementation of Security
Council resolutions.

We would also like to emphasise the role of the
Security Council under Chapter VIII to encourage the
pacific settlement of disputes through regional
arrangements and agencies. We believe that such
organizations are better placed and equipped to respond
to particular disputes, and that they can contribute to
the activities of the Security Council to that end.
The Charter of the United Nations reaffirms our
collective faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and
small. Indeed, this is what must be put at the core of
our policies in order for us to succeed in our common
struggle for peace and security in the world. This can
be achieved by addressing the root causes of conflict,
by promoting economic, social and cultural
development and by ensuring universal respect for, and
effective enjoyment of, human rights by all, including
the right of peoples to self-determination. In this
regard, one cannot fail to recall the very crucial role
that the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, played in realizing one of its success stories,
the case of Timor-Leste.

Unfortunately, we in our region must also
struggle to resolve conflicts and ensure peace and
security. The conflict in Nagorny Karabakh was not the
result of armed aggression, as Azerbaijan tries to
present it, but the forced resort to self-defence of the
Karabakh population. That was the only choice left to
them in order to avoid mass deportation and massacre
following their peaceful, legal and just quest for self-
determination.

Moreover, Azerbaijan's claim on Nagorny
Karabakh and its blind adherence to the principle of
territorial integrity is legally deficient and invalid, as
Nagorny Karabakh has never been a part of
independent Azerbaijan. It was arbitrarily incorporated
into the administrative borders of Soviet Azerbaijan.
Consequently, after the break-up of the Soviet Union,
the people of Nagorny Karabakh peacefully exercised
their right to self-determination through popular vote,
in accordance with the laws and the constitution of the
former Soviet Union and international law.
Unfortunately, their quest for self-determination was
answered by a military onslaught against them.

With regard to the Security Council resolutions
mentioned by the representative of Azerbaijan, if one
chooses to refer to a document it is imperative that the
reference be made correctly. Armenia has done exactly
what Security Council resolutions have called for: to
use its good offices with the leadership of Nagorny
Karabakh to help find a peaceful solution to the
conflict through negotiations within the framework of
the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

It is particularly alarming that, despite the
ceasefire in place and the peace negotiations under
way, there are forces in Azerbaijan, including within
high-level official circles, who are calling for a military
solution of the conflict. Indeed, it is up to Azerbaijan to
engage in the peace process constructively and to
negotiate in good faith in order to achieve a speedy
resolution to the conflict. My Government has always
been an advocate of a peaceful resolution of conflict
through mutual compromises based on the realities on
ground.

