Mr. Gaspard (Haiti) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to hail the Belgian presidency and thank it for having invited the Haitian delegation to take part in this Security Council meeting in order for it to express the views of the Government of the Republic of Haiti on the first report submitted by the Secretary-General (S/2020/123) in accordance with resolution 2476 (2019), which establishes the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). I wish also to congratulate the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her excellent briefing and to convey to her words of encouragement from the Haitian authorities, in particular from the President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, for the dedication with which she has carried out her tireless work in the Haitian context. I commend also Marie Yolene Gilles for her commitment to human rights in Haiti. My delegation wishes also to take this opportunity to warmly thank the members of the Security Council for their constructive comments, which reflect the unwavering solidarity of this important organ of the Organization with the Haitian cause. The presentation of this first report comes at an important time. Indeed, it closes the book on 15 years of the consecutive presence of a peacekeeping operation in Haiti and opens a new chapter in the cooperation between the United Nations and Haiti. The report also comes at a time when the country is facing a severe economic and social crisis, with unpredictable consequences that threaten social cohesion. The report of the Secretary-General stresses in particular the alarming and accelerating deterioration of the economic and social situation in the country. The gross domestic product, for instance, is estimated to have contracted by 0.9 per cent for 2018/2019. The national currency, as the representative of Indonesia underlined, has depreciated by 22 per cent compared to the United States dollar in 2019. In addition, fiscal revenue is weak and dropped by 4.3 per cent compared to the previous fiscal year, and there has been massive job loss and a corresponding increase in unemployment, in particular among young people. World Bank predictions are very worrisome, as they foresee economic contraction of 1.4 per cent in 2020 and 0.5 per cent in 2021. And yet the investments made in 2017/2018 in various sectors - agriculture, tourism and infrastructure - had made it possible to forecast growth of 3.4 per cent, according to reports of the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of the Republic of Haiti.However, that goal could not be reached because of the violence and political upheaval. The year 2018 ended with growth 1.4 per cent lower than forecast. On this point, the Government of the Republic of Haiti has taken due note of all the concerns expressed in the report by the Secretary-General and endorses the main conclusions contained therein. With regard to political governance, the Haitian Government noted with great satisfaction the focus on the dialogue initiatives launched by the Head of State in order to achieve an agreement among the main actors of the country, in particular those of the opposition, the business sector and civil society. Discussions are continuing this week. A comprehensive agreement has not yet been reached among all actors. However, it is important to note that significant progress has been achieved in inducing political actors to sit at the negotiating table and engage in dialogue on the need to overcome the current political impasse. On this issue, we welcome the fact that the report has mentioned the main round of negotiations that have already been held by the actors concerned. It is also important to mention that other progress has been achieved, in terms of, for example, the establishment of a new national unity Government; the revision of the Haitian Constitution; and the need to reach an agreement on the issue of elections, in other words, to reach a comprehensive agreement on political governance. In that context, the Haitian delegation also welcomes the role played by BINUH in this process of dialogue. Tangible progress is still possible. The fight against community violence is a major challenge, because the political crisis has led to a climate of insecurity in the country that threatens to undermine social cohesion. The figures contained in the report clearly demonstrate the scale of the phenomenon and the insufficiency of the measures taken so far and of the resources mobilized to reduce insecurity in Haiti. The Haitian National Police, with 15,000 professional police officers and limited operational capabilities, has done its best to address the situation, but it still requires more training and sufficient resources and equipment in order to be able to effectively protect and serve all segments of the Haitian population. Restoring State authority over the whole territory is more urgent than ever. It is undeniable that the political crisis has overall had a negative impact on the functioning of the judiciary, hindering the smooth operation of the courts and consequently aggravating the issue of prolonged pretrial detention. We are aware of the fact that a great deal remains to be done to irreversibly ensure the independence of the judiciary. As an example, I wish to mention the Superior Council of the Judiciary, which represents a vital step towards achieving the independence of the judiciary in Haiti. Thesamecanbesaidaboutthehumanrights situation. While numerous violations have been reported, it is also true that the country has made significant progress in this area and is abiding by its international commitments by, in particular, cooperating with various regional and international bodies. The recent on-site visit to Haiti by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) is part of that approach. The same goes for the holding of its 175th session, which will take place in Haiti from | to 10 March. On the sidelines of that session, consultations will be held between the Government, civil society and IACHR, the objective of which is to establish an ongoing dialogue among those bodies in order to strengthen the Haitian State's prevention and control capacity with regard to human rights violations. Regarding the killings, particularly those at La Saline, it is important to remember that since 4 January 2019 the investigating office has been requisitioned to report. Investigations are mandatory in criminal matters. Three reports were therefore issued by the General Directorate of Judicial Police in January, February and April 2019 based on the evidence examined. On the basis of those reports, 16 people have already been arrested in the context of the investigation. Rulings should be issued shortly. The matter of youth unemployment mentioned in the report is a major and recurrent problem in the country. It is of the utmost concern to the Haitian authorities. I would like to particularly inform Council members of a programme implemented by the President of the Republic with a view to finding lasting solutions to the issue. It notably involves granting loans to enable many young entrepreneurs to start small businesses. The Government of the Republic is encouraged by the emphasis in section IX of the report, entitled "Conduct and discipline", on zero tolerance towards sexual exploitation and abuse committed in the context of the United Nations. Those heinous acts, which have added to the suffering of the country's most vulnerable people, can only tarnish the image of our Organization.The perpetrators, wherever they come from, must be prosecuted and punished so that the ideals of the United Nations can be fully realized. In addition, the Republic of Haiti continues to be concerned about the many cases of abandonment by United Nations peacekeepers of fatherless children who live in abject poverty and the thousands of cholera victims who await compensation. In that regard, there is a need for greater rigour and transparency in the Organization's activities, particularly in its efforts to provide assistance to all victims. The Haitian authorities are fully aware of the complexity and fragility of the country's political situation and its negative impact on all aspects of national life. There must be genuine interaction among and an extreme effort by the country's key political actors to find a positive solution to this crisis. All Haitian actors are aware of that. That is the best way to bring together all the country's leading forces, which, despite the tireless efforts of the Head of State, has still not been achieved, since the main responsibility for jointly seeking, in the context of a genuine dialogue, positive and lasting solutions to the issues that undermine the security and the economic, social and environmental stability of our country lies primarily with us and us alone - in short, the genuine civic involvement of all those affected by the crisis. It is therefore up to us to set and maintain the course. Hence, the urgent need for the country's key political forces to reach an agreement on political, economic, social and institutional governance. The Head of State, His Excellency Jovenel Moise, is focusing on that. However, to achieve that, the Government is counting on consistent, appropriate and enhanced international support, for the mobilization of adequate resources is critical to realizing the objectives that should restore mutual trust and the security, stability and long- term development of the country. Indeed, the current humanitarian crisis facing the country means that the strong, coordinated, harmonized and unconditional support of its key partners remains important.
