The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
statement in my capacity as the representative of Peru.

We would like to express our gratitude for the
briefing by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
to thank him for his willingness to help to achieve a
solution to the impasse in which the Security Council
currently finds itself. We encourage him to continue
to spare no effort in this respect, in line with the
prerogatives conferred upon him by the Charter of the
United Nations.

Peru expresses its deep-rooted concern at the
divisions that have emerged in the Council, in particular
between its permanent members, and at the regrettable
use of the veto, which limits our capacity to maintain
international peace and security and to resolve the
humanitarian conflicts and crises that form our agenda.

We note with alarm the fact that the conflict in
Syria continues to involve atrocity crimes committed
with impunity and that it has deteriorated into a serious
threat to regional and global stability, to the point where
it is giving rise to serious tensions.

With respect to reports of the further use of
chemical weapons in Douma, we believe it necessary
to resume, as a matter of urgency and in a renewed
spirit of compromise, negotiations that will lead to
ensuring full access, as required, for the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, which is being deployed in Syria
to determine what happened; and to create a dedicated,
independent, objective and impartial mechanism to
attribute responsibility.

On that understanding, we believe it important to
recall once again that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian conflict and that any response to the
barbaric events taking place in that country must be
in keeping with the norms of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

We recall also that in its resolution 2401 (2018), the
Council ordered a humanitarian ceasefire throughout
the entire Syrian territory, and that it is urgent to make
headway in the political process in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

As the Secretary-General himself said, of particular
concern is the potential threat posed by the current
deadlock. We must at all costs prevent the situation
from spiralling out of control. This must not occur
given that our duty is to put an end to the suffering of
millions of people and to impunity for atrocity crimes.

Peru reiterates its commitment to living up to the
lofty responsibility that the maintenance of international
peace and security entails. My delegation will continue
to work towards a solution to the conflict and protect
the Syrian people, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to recall the statement by the President
of the Security Council contained in document
S/2017/507, on the length of interventions.

