Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I align myself, Sir, with all the delegations that
congratulated your country on its work in the Security
Council over the past two years. I am convinced that
Spain has left its mark in carrying out its duties as
President and through its leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), as well as on the women and peace and
security agenda.

As the President highlights in his concept note
(S/2016/1013, annex) for this debate, the risk of the use
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) by non-State
actors, particularly terrorists, poses the greatest threat
to international security. We are convinced that, in
order to prevent a catastrophe, States must lend their
assistnace to the 1540 Committee and other relevant
bodies in order facilitate national-level implementation
of the resolution, by helping countries to develop their
action plans, encouraging the timely presentation
of national reports and fostering the exchange
of experiences.

In our region, for example, we are engaged in an
exercise of peer review that will take place next year
in conjunction with Chile, with the support of the
Office for Disarmament Affairs United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism. It is necessary to
offer that same type of support to also strengthen
the legal systems, focusing on the implementation of
the resolution, not just in preventing the acquisition
of WMDs, but also in ensuring the accounting and
physical security of related materials.

With regard to nuclear weapons, in order to comply
with resolution 1540 (20040, all of our actions must lead to the absolute eradication of nuclear-weapon
arsenals in a transparent, verifiable and irreversible
fashion and within a multilaterally agreed upon and
defined time frame. As far as chemical weapons are
concerned, it is necessary to promote education and
outreach among industry, academia, universities and
research centres on the responsible uses of chemicals,
as noted here, as well as the obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In terms of biological
weapons, we firmly believe that we need to strengthen
and implement policies on import and export controls
and transshipments of dangerous goods, thereby
carrying out rigorous assessments end-users in order to
avoid potential diversion of said materials.

I would very briefly like to share three proposals
that could bolster the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

We could complement the existing international
legal framework on disarmament and non-proliferation
by fostering synergies between the provisons of
those instruments and resolution 1540 (2004) and
the development of complementary processes at the
global and regional level that would avoid a duplication
of efforts.

It would be of benefit to broaden the geographical
composition of the 1540 Committee with a view to
enriching the debates, proposals and considerations that
are part of the internally workings of the Committee.

Furthermore, we must promote activities for
education, as mentioned this morning, and outreach
among industry, academia, universities and research
centres on the responsible use of chemical and
biological material and nuclear energy, as well as on
the obligations from the main international instruments
in those areas.

Finally, it is my pleasure to inform the members
of the Security Council that my country's commitment
to this issue is of high priority, and for that reason
Colombia co-sponsored resolution 2325 (20106), which
we adopted this morning.

