Ms. Lee (Singapore): We, too, congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for this
month and join colleagues in expressing our
appreciation to Ambassador Belinga-Eboutou and his
team for his presiding over the Council last month. We
would also like to extend a warm welcome to the
Foreign Minister of Uganda for his participation here
today.

We join our colleagues in thanking Ambassador
Kassem and the other members of the Panel for their
very comprehensive and insightful report, contained in
document S/2002/ll46. Given the complexity of the
problems stipulated in the Panel's new mandate and the
very difficult conditions under which they had to work,
we appreciate the determined manner in which they
went about their work, as well as the candour of their
report.

We are also impressed by the standards of proof
adopted by the Panel and the fact that they "made
every effort to fairly and objectively evaluate the
information it has gathered", as stated in paragraph 8 of
the report. The Panel's credibility has been given the
acknowledgement it deserves by the Porter
Commission, as cited in paragraph 136 of the report.
My delegation is particularly impressed by the detailed
findings by the Panel with regard to the elite networks
that continue to exploit the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, even as foreign forces finally
withdraw from the country. The information provided
by the Panel is vital for a clearer understanding of the
actual situation and will certainly play a key role in our
decision on the next steps that need to be taken to stem
"the plundering of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo" (para. 1).

However, as the Security Council deliberates on
this substantial report, we will also need to take into
account the responses of the Governments, individuals
and companies implicated in the report. It is no
understatement to say that the report has stirred up a
hornet's nest. As we have heard today, many of the
parties implicated in the report have accused the Panel
of failing to observe due process and of relying on
flimsy evidence in arriving at its findings. The
chairman of one such company, Oryx Natural
Resources, visited Security Council members in New
York last week, including our delegation, to make the
case that his company was innocent. He also told us
that the Panel had made no attempt to contact him or
his company to check its facts prior to implicating his
company in the report.

In our View, such responses to the report must be
fully addressed so that no innocent party is
inadvertently included among the guilty but the guilty
parties are conclusively shown to be what they are. To
achieve this, we must ensure that due process is
observed. The Panel has quite wisely proposed a grace
period of four to five months before a final decision is
taken on the imposition of the financial and travel
restrictions that it has recommended against the
individuals and companies listed in Annexes I and II of
the report. That grace period is needed to clear up any
disputes that those named may have and, at the same
time, provide the opportunity for the guilty parties to
cease their illegal activities.

However, the Security Council does not have any
mechanism to assist it, so as to ensure that the
observance of due process and the necessary high
evidentiary standards will be the final arbiters before
we make our decision on the Panel's recommendations.
We will take up this question again when the Council
meets next week in informal consultations to discuss
the outcome of today's debate. Here, I would like to
add that we agree with the representative of France that
our purpose should not be to point fingers at anyone
but to stop the plundering and to find a way for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to move forward.

On the substance of the report, in general, we see
the Panel's report as an important contribution to our
efforts to stem the illegal outflow of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Even as we wrestle with the problem of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we must recognize that such
exploitation is possible only when the parties involved
know that they can get away with it. The Panel's
description of this state of affairs was that of "a self-
financing war economy centred on mineral
exploitation", as aptly stated in paragraph 12 of the
report.

A sustainable solution would require the
development of a reasonably transparent economy and
good governance in the areas exploited. A precondition
for both would be peace and a Government that is
clearly representative of, and committed to, the people
of the country. Emphasis must, therefore, continue to
be placed on the political dialogue process among the
Congolese parties, so that such a Government can be
established. To underpin stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, indeed, throughout the
Great Lakes region, countries in the region should
develop a transparent regional trading system that
would not only discourage the illicit movement of
goods but also enable the countries to complement each
other's economic strengths. It is to their credit that
during the Security Council meeting two weeks ago on
the subject of cooperation between the United Nations
system and Central Africa, many African delegations
emphasized the importance of regional economic
cooperation as a cornerstone of the African continent's
efforts.

In my delegations view, the international
community should support the efforts of both the
region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
stop the pillaging of the natural resources of the
country. Monitoring of the illegal exploitation should
be maintained until the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is able to exercise effective
control over the areas concerned. We are, therefore,
supportive of the Panel's recommendation in paragraph
186 of its report that the Security Council should look
into the establishment of a monitoring body for that
purpose.

And like our colleagues, we have also taken note
that many of the criminal activities of the elite
networks described by the Panel are related to the usual
suspects that we have encountered in other Panel
reports. For example, at paragraph 72, 107 and 140 of
the report, there is reference to the Victor Bout
connection. We are also concerned that the Panel has
uncovered smuggling of Angolan and Sierra Leone
diamonds despite Security Council embargoes on those
diamonds. Those references came from paragraph 52 of
the report. We have previously pointed out that a
mechanism must be established for the consistent
monitoring of Security Council embargoes. Perhaps the
time has come for the Security Council to also look
into the establishment of a body for that purpose.

Finally, when one reads the Panel's findings
regarding the fortunes that have been made and are still
being made by the elite networks, and juxtaposes this
with the statistics of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on malnutrition and
mortality rates of children below the age of five years,
it is clear that non-action by the Security Council is not
an option. We cannot fail the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

