Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
welcome the appointment of the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, who is a
friend of ours. I thank His Excellency Mr. Prodi for the
introduction of a very important report (S/2008/813). I
would also like to welcome the presence of African
Union Commissioner Lamamra and Ms. Dlamini
Zuma, Foreign Minister of South Africa, at today's
meeting. The presence of these high-level
representatives demonstrates the importance that
African Union members attach to this challenging
issue.

The Security Council has been devoting
considerable time and energy to addressing many
issues of peace and stability in Africa. Therefore, it is
gratifying that the African Union (AU) has been
playing an increasingly important role in the
maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent. We commend the efforts undertaken by
African countries.

It is important for the United Nations to make full
use of the strength and advantage of regional
organizations whenever appropriate, consistent with
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We concur
on the need to reinforce practical cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU. More specific steps
should be taken to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission.
We should also further promote the existing good
cooperation between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council.

The cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations should be developed in a
way that reflects the principle that the Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, according to the
Charter. In particular, when peacekeeping operations
that are initiated and led by regional organizations are

considered for transfer to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the United Nations and the relevant
regional organizations must start early-stage
consultation, coordination and information sharing.

Japan has promoted the enhanced peacekeeping
capabilities of African countries, the AU and regional
organizations. The Security Council should encourage
the international community and mobilize traditional
and new, unconventional donors to continue to extend
support for the capacity-building of AU headquarters,
AU peacekeeping operations and individual Member
States that are troop-contributing countries.

The importance of capacity-building through
better training and better equipment cannot be
overemphasized and should be given particular
attention. At the fourth Tokyo International Conference
on African Development, held in Japan this past year,
support for capacity-building of African peacekeeping
efforts was stressed as an essential element of the
consolidation of peace and stability in Africa. We
therefore welcome the ongoing efforts made by the AU
support team within the United Nations Secretariat.
Japan will continue to provide its assistance to support
training centres for peacekeeping operations in many
African countries.

The most crucial factor for effective action is
African ownership, and we welcome the growing
commitment to that on the part of the AU. In this
respect, it is interesting to note the recommendation
contained in the panel's report to establish a system for
financial support for peacekeeping operations through
AU-assessed contributions.

We recognize the panel's emphasis on the fact
that one of major constraints is resources - how to
secure predictable, sustainable and flexible resources.
We naturally welcome initiatives by regional
organizations such as the AU to maintain regional
peace and security. However, an authorization given by
the Security Council for such an operation itself is
meant for activities of regional organizations and does
not automatically qualify for financial support by the
United Nations.

In our view, we need to clarify practical, legal,
administrative and financial aspects. We should also
study the matter further to determine what would be
credible and realistic conditions in order for such
support to be made available. When it comes to the use
of the assessed budget of the United Nations, we must
stress the importance of respecting the established
rules and mechanisms of the United Nations. As clearly
stated in the Charter of the United Nations, including
in Article 17, only the expenses of the United Nations
itself shall be borne by Member States through
assessed contributions. We should also consider how to
ensure accountability and transparency in a credible
manner, on the part of the United Nations Secretariat
and also on the part of the African Union.

With regard to the possibility of establishing a
trust fund based on voluntary contributions, we should
examine the relationship with existing mechanisms and
the modalities for effectively managing, planning for,
implementing and evaluating the fund.

We take note of the many interesting ideas
presented in the panel's report. We are committed to
supporting the African Union and other regional
organizations in Africa and we are ready to consider
carefully every feasible option.

The panel's report addresses a wide variety of
issues that will require detailed technical consideration.
We believe it would be useful to set the priorities and
timeframe for the Council's review. In that regard, we
appreciate the Secretary-General's assessment and
analysis of the panel's recommendations, on the basis
of which the Security Council should examine the most
appropriate way to follow up the recommendations.

Finally, let me reiterate that peace and security in
Africa are fundamental to the continent's economic and
social stability. Japan, mindful of that overriding
imperative, continues to promote peace and security in
Africa and support for the efforts of the African Union
and subregional organizations. In that regard, we attach
particular priority to enhancing Africa's peacekeeping
capabilities, strengthening the African Peace and
Security Architecture, funding issues and an effective
peacebuilding strategy.
