Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French): I would add my thanks to those expressed
by other members of the Security Council to the
Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, as well as to the President of Serbia,
Mr. Tomislav Nikolic', and to the Ambassador of
Kosovo, Ms. Vlora Citaku.

I should like to begin my statement by recalling
once again France's wish to revise the frequency with
which the Security Council reviews the situation in
Kosovo. Given that the Council is facing an increasingly
burdensome workload, there no longer appears to be
any justification for maintaining quarterly briefings on
the question of Kosovo, whose situation is in no way
comparable to crises for which the Council's intensive
commitment is crucial.

We believe also that the positive developments
we have seen in recent years in Kosovo in terms of
strengthening institutions justify our desire to continue
to refocus the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and to ensure their
coordination with the other international actors present
in Kosovo. We call once again on the Secretary-
General to make recommendations on this issue in the
framework of his next report.

France is convinced that the future of Kosovo can
no longer be seen as a priority in the Council, but, rather,
within the framework of a political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, led by the European Union.

It is therefore important in this regard for the parties
to demonstrate a proactive commitment at the highest
level. We expect that all of the agreements reached will
be implemented as swiftly as possible, including as
concerns the establishment ofa community association
of Serb-majority municipalities, which is a key element
of the dialogue. We therefore urge the Kosovo and
Serbian authorities to step up their efforts, particularly
on this latter issue, in order to achieve more concrete
outcomes in the months to come. This is an issue that
we will follow very closely.

We are deeply concerned about the tensions that we
have seen in recent months on the ground as well as by
the regrettable provocations that have fuelled them. We
expect all actors to show responsibility and restraint.
The agreement reached on the demolition of the wall
in Mitrovica is in this respect a positive development.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina remains, generally speaking, a prerequisite for
their progress on the path to European rapprochement,
which was once again encouraged at the Paris-Balkans
2016 summit, held on 4 July last.

The efforts under way to strengthen the rule of
law in Kosovo must remain a priority and include
fighting radicalization in all its forms. We therefore
welcome the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in
this regard, both locally and within the international
coalition against Da'esh.

France will also continue to provide its support to
the efforts undertaken by the authorities of Kosovo in
favour of international recognition of their State.

Lastly, I would like to conclude my statement
by pointing out that the action under way in France
against Mr. Ramush Haradinaj is a part of a judicial
proceeding initiated on the basis of an arrest warrant
issued by INTERPOL. This order was carried out as
a matter of routine, in keeping with our international
commitments. It does not have a political dimension
and does not alter in any way the relation of trust that
we traditionally have with Kosovo or our support for
reconciliation in the region and the implementation of a
dialogue between Belgium and Pristina.

