The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia. (S/ 1998/ 1012 and Add.l)

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 29 October 1998 (S/l998/1012 and Add.l).

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned
at the continuing tense and unstable situation in the
Gali and Zugdidi regions and at the threat of
resumption of serious hostilities. The Council demands
that both sides observe strictly all their obligations to
refrain from the use of force and to resolve disputed
issues by peaceful means only.

"The Security Council welcomes the
reinvigoration of the negotiations within the United
Nations-led peace process. It particularly welcomes the
meeting of both sides on confidence-building measures
held in Athens on 16-18 October 1998, the largest and
most representative meeting of the parties since the
military confrontation of 1993, and the increased
bilateral contacts between the two sides. The Council
strongly urges the two sides to build on this
momentum to widen their commitment to the United
Nations-led peace process, to continue to intensify
their discussion, in particular within the Coordinating
Council, and to expand their relations at all levels.
The Council also strongly encourages the parties to
work together in order to convene a meeting between
the President of Georgia and Mr. Ardzinba and to
reach agreements, in particular on the return of
refugees and measures for the economic
rehabilitation of Abkhazia, Georgia, as a concrete
step towards easing tensions and leading to
improvement in the security environment. The
Council reiterates its call to both sides to display
without delay the necessary will to achieve
substantial results on the key issues of the
negotiations, and calls upon them to implement
promptly and in good faith their undertakings, so
that living conditions for the population on both
sides can be improved by practical confidence-
building measures.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
deliberate acts of violence against the personnel of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) and of the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
including the continued laying of mines which also
endangers the civilian population and impedes the
work of the humanitarian organizations. The Council
demands that both sides take determined and prompt
measures to put a stop to such acts, which subvert
the peace process, and to ensure that the security
environment of all international personnel improves
significantly.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts of
the Secretary-General aimed at improving the
security of UNOMIG, approves his proposal to
increase the number of internationally recruited
lightly armed security personnel and additional local
security personnel to provide internal security to the
Mission's installations, and requests the Secretary-
General to keep the security of UNOMIG under
constant review taking into account the observations
contained in his report.

"The Security Council reminds both sides that
the continued commitment of the international
community to assist them depends on their progress
in achieving peacefully a comprehensive political
settlement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
