Mr. Pressman (United States of America): My
Government very much welcomes this meeting and the
greater attention being paid to the danger posed by the
illicit trafficking in and stockpiling and use of small
arms and light weapons. I would like to thank Lithuania
for its leadership on this issue and also to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/289). We also
appreciate the briefings today by Mr. Diakite and by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Today, I would like to touch on three essential
issues. The scope of the small-arms and light-weapons
problem and the violence that results, the importance
of stockpile security and management, and what we
need to do to disrupt supply routes. A conservative
estimate of the official global trade in small arms and
light weapons is approximately $1 billion annually.
Black markets alone are estimated to account for
another $200 million. Estimates suggest there are over
600 million small arms and light weapons in circulation
worldwide. Readily available and easy to use, small
arms and light weapons have been the primary or
sole tools of violence in almost every recent conflict
dealt with by the United Nations and, too often, they
are being used by children who are too young, too
vulnerable, exploited and in danger. Stockpiles of arms
and ammunitions are widely available. Such weapons
are so small, so cheap, so convenient and easy to use
and transfer around the world. It is all too common to
see a teenage boy walking around with a gun almost as
heavy as he is.

We do not need to look far to see the impact of and
immense misery caused by this deadly phenomenon.
Large caches of weapons available in Darfur, Libya
and South Sudan have exacerbated conflicts in those
countries and in others throughout Africa and the
Middle East. Illicit weapons have a way of travelling
and where they go, they wreak havoc. Weapons from
Libya alone have been used in Egypt, Gaza, the Niger,
Somalia and Syria.

When South Sudan became independent in 2011, it
was estimated that there were 3.2 million small arms in
circulation, which is one gun for every fourth person.
We have seen their deadly toll, including widespread
and systematic killings of civilians and targeting of
individuals based on ethnicity, often in their homes,
churches and hospitals. In Darfur, terror is wrought
by a Government that continues to complement
indiscriminate bombings with ground attacks
conducted by its well-armed rapid-support force. Just
three months ago, the Security Council deplored the
routine conveyance of weapons and ammunition into
Darfur, but little has changed. Despite the presence of
a large peacekeeping operation, guns continue to flow
and terror reigns supreme.

The Secretary-General is right to highlight in
his report the need to address stockpile security and
management on an urgent basis. The United States has
been among the leading donors in helping Member
States to secure their stockpiles of conventional arms
and ammunition and to destroy those weapons no
longer required for national defence. We have supported
programmes that have destroyed approximately
1.6 million excess or poorly secured weapons and over
90,000 tons of munitions worldwide. We also continue
to cooperate with law enforcement authorities around
the world in tracing illicitly trafficked small arms and
light weapons. The United States has also worked with
the Organization of American States and the Nairobi-
based Regional Centre on Small Arms to assist Member
States in marking their State-held stockpiles.

That leads me to a point about the imperative of
controlling and regulating illicit weapons supply
routes. More robust enforcement of Security Council
embargoes and sanctions regimes by all Member States
is essential if the prohibitions already in place are to
be successful. Related to that, improvements in export
and import controls would mitigate the risk of illegal
transfers. Currently, bogus end-use certifications and
intentional diversions of legal arms transfers are used
to channel arms to Governments and others in violation
of national and international laws. Establishing high
standards for end-use certification, more robust post-
export verification by arms-exporting countries and
appropriate regulation of commercial arms brokers
would all contribute greatly to addressing the illicit
movement of small arms and light weapons.

We must also redouble our commitment to strong
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
measures in post-conflict situations. Effective DDR,
including the expeditious destruction of war surpluses,
can ensure that the tools of today's wars do not fuel
conflict somewhere else tomorrow. Nations have the
right to defend themselves and their citizens. Small
arms and light weapons are often manufactured legally
and appropriately, traded and retained for legitimate
and lawful purposes. That must be respected and
protected. But when legal controls break down and,
through weaknesses of governance, corruption or
other illicit lawless activity, deadly weapons fall into
the wrong hands, the victims are too often too many
vulnerable innocents.

This debate has helpfully laid out the grave
problems that small arms and light weapons pose to
international peace and security. But it has also offered
practical and effective solutions, and in that vein, we
support Lithuania's draft resolution on the issue and
urge our colleagues to do so as well.
The threat posed by cynical profiteers who
trade in an illicit economy of corruption merit our
attention. The misery wreaked by the illicit movement
of small arms demands our focus. Children, whom
the High Commissioner powerfully observed with
their small muscles can vanquish a life, are too often
instrumentalized and victimized by our failure to
effectively address the illicit movement and unlawful
proliferation of small arms. The United States is deeply
committed to continuing our work together to address
that challenge and advance our collective goal of
forging a more peaceful and secure world.

