Mr. Motomura (Japan): My delegation is
grateful to the Security Council for providing us with
an opportunity to address the important issue of
children and armed conflict.

Children are our common treasures; they embody
our dreams and our hopes. This is why, at the
Millennium Summit last year, heads of State and
Government made a firm commitment to

"spare no effort to ensure that children that
suffer disproportionately the consequences of
natural disasters, genocide, armed conflicts and
other humanitarian emergencies are given every
assistance and protection so that they can resume
normal life as soon as possible." (Resolution 
55/2, para. 26)

Japan is deeply concerned that in recent armed
conflicts, increasing numbers of civilians, including
children, have been directly affected. In countless
cases, children have been hurt, killed, or uprooted from
their families and communities to become involved in
conflicts as soldiers. According to the Secretary-
General's report "We the Children", approximately
300,000 children are actively involved in armed
conflicts as soldiers at present. Children are also being
exploited, and we are particularly concerned about girls
who are sexually abused. These children consequently
suffer extreme trauma and psychosocial damage. In the
light of this reality, Japan wishes to stress the
importance of the international community's
energetically tackling the issue in cooperation with
local non-governmental organizations.

I would like to share with the members of the
Security Council and the other participants in today's
discussion some of the thoughts and initiatives of the
Government of Japan regarding this subject.

First, children must be protected from all
violence. The use of children as soldiers must be
ended, and in post-conflict situations such children
should be kept away from danger and cared for. The
following are examples of post-conflict activities in
which the Government of Japan has participated: a
project to reduce small arms in post-conflict areas,
such as Cambodia, as these weapons often create
tremendous obstacles to social and economic
development and are harmful to children; projects in
many parts of the world to eliminate anti-personnel
mines, which pose a great threat to children; and the
Reactivation of Quality Primary Education in Kosovo
project, which Japan has supported through the Trust
Fund for Human Security. At school, children receive
social rehabilitation attention, and trauma can be
alleviated. Support for a project to reintegrate former
child soldiers in Africa into society through the same
fund is now under consideration.

Secondly, former child soldiers must be socially
integrated. In this regard, in March this year, in
collaboration with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Government of Japan conducted a survey on
reintegration of former child soldiers into society,
whose results made clear the significant role that the
community plays. Based on this survey, we believe that
more efforts should be made by the international
community to provide former child soldiers with access
to basic and vocational education, and to establish a
social safety net for physically handicapped,
psychosocially traumatized or orphaned children. In
addition, special measures need to be taken for
sexually abused girl children in their communities.

Thirdly, the issue of the sexual abuse and
exploitation of children in armed conflict, particularly
girls, indeed calls for a stronger response. In order to
strengthen the partnership in addressing the issue, it is
necessary to raise awareness and share information
among all the actors concerned. My delegation believes
that the Second World Congress against the
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, to be
held next month in Yokohama, Japan, will provide an
opportunity to realize this goal, as armed conflict is
one of the causes of the sexual abuse and exploitation
of children. The Government of Japan strongly calls for
high-level participation in the Congress by Member
States so that we can address the plight of children.

Before concluding, I cannot fail to touch upon the
situation of Afghan children. The Government of Japan
would like to reiterate its support for Security Council
resolution 1378 (2001), which calls upon all Afghan
forces to refrain from acts of reprisal and to adhere
strictly to their obligations under human rights
instruments and international humanitarian law. In this
connection, Japan welcomes the meeting to be held in
Berlin next week to discuss the transitional
administration to be established in Afghanistan in the
near future. It is the hope of my delegation that that
meeting, called for by Ambassador Brahimi, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Afghanistan, will lead to the formation of a transitional
administration that will serve as the basis for a truly
broad-based Government conducive to the realization
of well-being for the Afghan people, including
children. We strongly call upon the Afghan parties to
act to achieve this end as soon as possible.

Furthermore, Japan would like to call for special
attention to be given to the situation of refugee and
internally displaced children in and around
Afghanistan, where the region's severe winter is about
to begin. We must take action to ensure that
humanitarian aid reaches those children, and that
efforts for rehabilitation and reconstruction take fully
into account the plight of children. Japan, for its part,
will spare no effort to ensure that United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations are able
to carry out their work effectively.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
continuing commitment to working with the
international community to respond to the issue of
children and armed conflict, so that all children can
grow up in a family environment, in an atmosphere of
happiness, love and understanding.

