Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Council for this month and,
through you, I would like to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui, for her briefing
to the Council on the subject under discussion. The
delegation of the Sudan would like to express its
appreciation to the French presidency for organizing
this open debate on children in armed conflict, with a
focus on the victims of rebel movements. The Council
has done well by tackling this important issue.

When we participated in the launch of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign last year we stated
that it should include rebel movements, and not confine
itself to Government forces and the situations covered
by the annexes to the annual report of the Secretary-
General. It is well-known that the extent of aggression
perpetrated against children and violations of the rights
of children by my country's rebel movements in Darfur,
Blue Nile and South Kordofan states are taken up in
the report. The extent of the violations in my country
are incalculable; in fact, that has been mentioned. One
such incident involved the abduction of 1,900 children
by the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North in
South Kordofan last year. Such violations by the rebel
movements are continuing.

The Council is well aware of what is going on,
including the attempts to occupy the capital of the
Sudan, Khartoum, in 2008. We greatly appreciated the
Council's actions on several occasions in dealing with
this matter, particularly on the first anniversary of the
campaign to end the recruitment of children. We hope
that they will be followed by steps and measures that
will force the rebel movements to halt the violations,
lay down their arms and have recourse to negotiations
instead of armed conflict. We would like to commend
the contents of section 4 of the presidency's concept
note (S/2015/168, annex). The issues of protecting
children and their rights are among our Government's
priorities. A case in point is the long list of efforts and
accomplishments undertaken by the Government.

First of all, at the level of international commitments,
our Government has ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child along with its two protocols
concerning the protection of children in armed
conflict and from commercial sexual exploitation. The
Government of the Sudan also ratified two relevant
conventions of the International Labour Organization:
the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), and
the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999
(No. 182). The Government of the Sudan declared its
support for the campaign organized by the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict in partnership with UNICEF in early 2014. We
also participated in the launch of that campaign here in
New York.

Secondly, at the level of national legislation, the laws
regulating the Sudanese armed forces and the police
categorically prohibit the recruitment of children below
the age of 18. Our Government established correctional
justice for minors in 2010 when it enacted the law to
protect children and set up prosecutorial offices to
deliverjustice to minors. At the level of child protection
machinery, our Government has established units in
the armed forces to protect children, as well as at the
Ministry of the Interior. The Government established
the National Council for Childhood, appointing a
special prosecutor to investigate the crimes of Darfur
and other allegations since the emergence of the conflict
since 2003. It also established a fact-finding committee
to investigate the abduction and recruitment of children
in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. In July, the
Government launched the tenth comprehensive national
plan on promoting the rights of children in the Sudan.

At the level of outreach to international bodies
dealing with children, we are in constant contact,
through our Permanent Mission to the United Nations,
with the Office of the Under-Secretary-General and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as with UNICEF.
In that connection, I would like to refer to the meeting
of our Minister for Social Affairs with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, addressing all
concerns relating to children. In that regard, I recall
the statement made by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui, on the efforts
currently under way in the Sudan in cooperation with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) aimed at preventing the rebel
movements from recruiting children.

The Government of the Sudan is continuing its
efforts to promote the status of children. To that end,
the National Council on Child Care established a task
force to investigate the situation of children. As part
of its primary mandate, the task force is charged with
addressing the situation of children in emergencies,
in cooperation with UNICEF and UNAMID. At the
same time, the National Council on Child Care held a
workshop on internal cultures and their impact on the
situation of children. Work is under way, in cooperation
with the various agencies dealing with children, to
finalize an action plan on children in areas of conflict.

In light ofthe policies to which we havejust referred,
as well as the steps and measures taken with regard to
children, we request that our name be removed from
the list included in the annex to the Secretary-General's
annual report.

If the issues of children are to be addressed in a
comprehensive and integrated manner, we would like
the following points to be taken into account. First, the
Governments of States experiencing conflicts should
be assisted to end such conflicts by convincing or
forcing armed rebel factions to lay down their arms and
pursue negotiated solutions. Secondly, the root causes
that lead to the recruitment of children or their truancy
from school, including poverty, climate change, and
the unfair, unilateral economic sanctions imposed
on some States, along with other factors that lead to
conflict, must be addressed. Further steps include
relieving the debt burdens of developing countries,
extending technological assistance and capacity-
building to affected countries, support for education
and reconstruction efforts, as well as utilizing the
massive experience of the United Nations.

It is not enough for rebel movements to sign
plans to end child recruitment; that will not end the
violence that they perpetrate. Such measures must be
accompanied by condemnation of the conduct of the
rebel movements, and they must be forced to lay down
their arms and participate in negotiations. Governments
must be involved in any movement relating to the issue
of children in conflict, and they must be able to work
with such organizations in transparency and with full
respect for national sovereignty.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
continuing to cooperate with international bodies
dealing with children and call for correct and verifiable
information in the Secretary-General's reports, which
must be devoid of controversial phrases such as
those referring to military uniforms as well as other
ambiguous references. In many cases, a military
uniform is no longer the preserve of Government forces.
We also demand that information and allegations be
shared with Governments before they are incorporated
into the Secretary-General's reports to the Security
Council.

