Mr. Lowcock: Every month, I update the Security
Council on the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Today marks my fifteenth briefing and the thirty-sixth
members will have heard since 2015. My experience is
just like that of the main character in the hit Hollywood
movie Groundhog Day. Many in the Chamber will have
seen it. He finds himselftrapped in a time loop, repeating
the same day over and over. He tries to escape in many
different ways - to no avail. Every morning, he wakes
up back where he started. Just as in Groundhog Day,
the details in my briefings to the Council change from
month to month. The larger picture, however, does not.

Today I want to step back and consider the time
loop we seem to be experiencing in Yemen. How has
this war evolved in the past four or five years? What
has it wrought? What can we expect if it continues?
What are we doing about it? And what is needed to help
Yemen break this cycle for good? Let me begin with the
nature of the war.

From the start, it has been brutal. One independent
monitoring group, the Armed Conflict Location and
Event Data Project (ACLED), estimates that more
than 70,000 people have been killed just since 2016.
Violence has also been remarkably consistent. Fighting
may decrease in one area - as we have seen recently in
Al-Hudaydah with the Stockholm Agreement - only
to mushroom elsewhere, as we are seeing right now in
Al-Dhale'e, Hajjah and Taiz.

Today there are more than 30 active front lines
in Yemen - more than enough to absorb fighters
redeploying from quieter areas. In fact, ACLED data
indicate that conflict incidents across the country have
been mostly increasing since 2016. Yemen is getting
more violent, not less. The conflict is getting worse,
not better. Fighting this year has displaced more than
250,000 people. The number of incidents killing
or injuring children more than trebled between the
last quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of this year.
In recent days, we have also seen a dangerous and
reprehensible increase in attacks on Saudi Arabia, as
well as air strikes in Sana'a and other areas.

All the fighting has, however, led to relatively few
major shifts in control. Today, the large majority of
Yemenis live in areas controlled by Ansar Allah and
its allies. After tens of thousands of air strikes, shells,
mortars and ground clashes, this has changed only
marginally since 2016. So the war is not only brutal; it
is unwinnable. Everyone agrees on that, at least in their
public statements, and yet the fighting continues. So the
next question is: If all the fighting has not materially
changed the military facts on the ground, what has
it achieved?

We give the Security Council the figures every
month. Eighty per cent of the population - more than
24 million people - need assistance and protection,
including 10 million who rely on food aid to survive.
Some 600 incidents per month damage or destroy
civilian infrastructure. More than 100 hospitals,
health facilities and schools were hit just last year. A
quarter of Yemeni children are out of school. More than
3.3 million people remain displaced. The economy has
been devastated, shrinking by 40 per cent or more.

Some may suggest that the war is not solely to
blame for this tragedy. Four years ago, Yemen was
already the region's poorest country and millions of
people were receiving aid. That is true. But there was
also a functioning economy. Public institutions were
providing essential services and basic infrastructure
reached across the country. Yemen was even seeing
improvements in food security and nutrition.
All that has now been undone. Today, the number
of people who need assistance is 50 per cent higher
than it was before the war. For the first time this year,
assessments confirm pockets of famine-like conditions
in dozens of places across Yemen. So when people ask
about what the effect of all the fighting has been, the
answer is clear: untold death, damage and destruction;
the immiseration of a nation; and the fracturing and
fragmentation of its society - all amounting, in sum,
to the world's worst humanitarian tragedy.

Let me turn now to the question ofwhat will happen
if the war continues. There are two immediate answers.

First, many more people will die and conditions will
get much worse for those who survive. An independent
study by the University of Denver, commissioned by
the United Nations Development Programme, recently
used a global model to forecast the impact of continuing
conflict in Yemen. If fighting lasts until 2022, we can
expect close to half a million total deaths, including
more than 300,000 people who will die from hunger,
lack of health care and related causes. That is twice as
many people dying as the model predicts ifthe war were
to stop this year. We would also see a profound decline
in the status of survivors throughout the country. A
quarter of all children would be malnourished, and
nearly 40 per cent would be out of school. Council
members can imagine better than I can what the
implications of this might be for security and stability
in the wider region.

That brings me to the second answer. We will
need an even larger and an even more expensive relief
operation. At $4.2 billion, this year's response plan is
already the world's largest. It is also three times more
than we needed in 2015, but if the fighting does not
stop, today's requirements will be a fraction of what we
will need to keep people alive a few years from now.

Some Yemeni activists have rightly asked why the
international community is spending so much money
in Yemen but things keep getting worse. Unfortunately,
humanitarian organizations cannot do much more
than keep people alive, and we have been reasonably
successful at that. In early 2017, we were providing aid
to about 3 million people every month. Two years later,
we are now reaching more than 10 million a month.
Working with local institutions, we have rolled back
the risk of famine in some areas, stemmed the world's
largest cholera outbreak and greatly increased the
number of malnourished children who are being
treated and cured. But as conflict continues, underlying
conditions keep deteriorating.
How do we get out of this deadly loop? What needs
to change to break the cycle altogether? Last October,
I set out five priority actions to avert catastrophe in
Yemen. At the time, I emphasized that all five steps
needed to be taken together to bring about real change.
It is worth reviewing where we stand with those
priorities today.

First, I said that we needed an immediate ceasefire
across the country and to silence the guns and ground
the war planes. There has been a reduction in violence
in Al-Hudaydah since December, but that has been
essentially offset by escalating conflict elsewhere.
Enough is enough. The parties must also respect
international humanitarian law, sparing civilians and
civilian infrastructure at all times, whether or not there
is a ceasefire.

Secondly, we need all parties to facilitate rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access, as again required
under international humanitarian law. More than
5 million people who need help, including 3.8 million
people in acute need, live in 75 districts that are
hard to reach because of bureaucratic impediments,
insecurity or logistical constraints. In April and May,
access constraints prevented or delayed humanitarian
assistance for more than 1.5 million people. That is half
a million more people than in the previous two months.
Bureaucratic impediments remain a major problem,
costing lives and increasing suffering.

So far this year, Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities
have prevented or delayed 55 United Nations field
missions, which is an average of three per week.
Monitoring restrictions, issues with beneficiary
targeting and other interference all require
constant engagement.

Despite those challenges, we have seen some
progress recently. For example, it is encouraging that
Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities have issued more
entry permits for aid workers recently. And last week,
Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities told us that they
wanted us to proceed with a technical assessment to
assess the decaying FSO SAFER oil tanker, which is
storing an estimated 1.1 million barrels of oil off the
coast of Al-Hudaydah.

I have repeatedly alerted the Council to the risks
in that regard. If the tanker ruptures or explodes, we
could see the coastline polluted all along the Red Sea.
Depending on the time of year and water currents, the
spill could reach from the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait to
the Suez Canal and potentially as far as the Strait of
Hormuz. I leave it to Council members to imagine the
effect of such a disaster on the environment, shipping
lanes and the global economy. If a major spill occurs,
the world will surely demand answers from anyone who
could have prevented the catastrophe but chose not to.
Provided Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities continue
to facilitate this work, the assessment team should be
able to deploy to the FSO SAFER tanker within the next
two weeks.

The other major concern about interference and
access relates to the diversion of food aid. I will leave
it to David Beasley to update Council members on that.

The third priority that I outlined in October
(see S/PV.8379) is full funding for the humanitarian
operation. This year, as I said, we require $4.2 billion.
We have so far received only $1.15 billion, or 27 per
cent. In February, we heard very generous pledges in
Geneva, amounting to $2.6 billion. We thank all our
donors for their generosity, and we understand that this
money comes from voluntary contributions. But when
pledges are made, they must be fulfilled. It has now
been four months since the Geneva conference. The
World Health Organization has already had to suspend
payments to health workers and the procurement of
medicine and other supplies. Vaccination programmes
will also soon start winding down. That means that
people are almost certainly already dying as a result
of those funding gaps. Other critical programmes,
including malnutrition treatment, cholera prevention
and support for displaced people, could start closing in
the next few weeks.

Fourthly, in October, I emphasized the need for
sustainable measures to strengthen the Yemeni economy.
We have seen some important progress on economic
issues over the past six months. The Government
recently published its first budget since 2015, and I
strongly support its efforts to get it fully financed. I
hope donors will do the same. The Government has
paid salaries across the country for health workers and
some other civil servants for several successive months,
and the Ansar Allah authorities have also made salary
payments in some areas. In May, commercial food
imports through Al-Hudaydah and Saleef were the
highest in three years, and fuel imports have largely
recovered from the fuel crisis in the previous month.

With salary payments rising and increasing
imports, many Yemenis should have more money in
their pockets and find more goods to purchase in the
market. But - and this is the point to focus on - like the
war itself, progress on one issue can obscure the bigger
picture. Commercial imports through Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef rose in May but they also fluctuate greatly from
month to month. As I have said before, we frequently
see that in months in which food imports increase, fuel
imports drop, and vice versa. And the trend line, which
is what really matters, points sharply downwards. Since
the conflict began, food imports have declined by more
than 40 per cent, fuel imports by 70 per cent and the
import of medicines by 50 per cent.

Almost no containerized commercial cargo has
entered Al-Hudaydah or Saleef since late 2017. That
means that everything that is not food or fuel, such
as medicine, clothing or shelter materials, must go
elsewhere. Food, fuel and other goods are able enter
Aden and other ports, but moving them north, where
most people live, is increasingly difficult and pushes
prices even further out of reach for many people. And
while it is true that civil servant salaries are being paid
more often, the currency is also losing value again. One
United States dollar now costs about 560 Yemeni rial as
compared to 400 rial at the end of last year and 215 rial
before the crisis. Any extra money in Yemeni pockets is
therefore now worth much less, especially since nearly
all goods must be imported.

A growing number of families are also getting less
help from friends and family overseas. According to the
World Bank, Yemenis working abroad, almost entirely
in Gulf countries, send home more than $3.3 billion a
year. Remittances are a lifeline for their families. Some
experts estimate that those payments make up nearly
a quarter of Yemen's gross domestic product and pay
for more than half of commercial imports. But stricter
labour policies are sending thousands of Yemeni
workers home every month, effectively cutting off
family incomes. There therefore remains an essential,
indeed growing, requirement for a predictable and
regular flow of foreign exchange into Yemen at a scale
that allows the Government to continue to pay salaries
and to keep the exchange rate stable.

The fifth priority is the most important: meaningful
progress towards peace. The Stockholm Agreement is
a crucial step in the right direction. But as Council
members just heard from Martin Griffiths, we are in
danger of losing that momentum. I hope that everyone
will do everything they can to work with Martin and
his team to keep moving towards peace. I have already
again today explained the consequences of failing to
do so.

After almost endless repetition, there is a happy
ending to Groundhog Day. The main character
eventually breaks out of his time loop but only by
completely changing his behaviour. The film ends as
he embarks on a peaceful, satisfying future. There is a
lesson here for our own time loop as well. Nothing will
change in Yemen unless everyone is ready to do things
very differently. The steps I have outlined are the way
to start. Otherwise, Council members can expect more
of what they have been hearing for the past four years:
more fighting; more death; more destruction; more
hunger; more disease; more appeals; more pledging
conferences; and more briefings like this one.

