Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and on convening this important
meeting. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on small arms and for the valuable
recommendations contained therein. My appreciation
also goes to the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs for introducing the report.

Although slow progress has been made, in
particular since the international community started to
address the problem of small arms in a comprehensive
manner, the easy availability of small arms worldwide
continues to create havoc throughout the world,
especially in Africa. They threaten peace and security
and are responsible for countless numbers of deaths
and injuries. Small arms are now estimated to kill half
a million people every year. They have a devastating
impact on every part of society, in particular vulnerable
groups, such as children and women.

Furthermore, small arms have a profound impact
on the social and economic development of countries.
Despite the urgent need to fight poverty and diseases,
such as HIV/AIDS, a lot of money continues to be
spent on the production and accumulation of these
weapons.

The United Nations last year took a strong stand
in addressing the scourge at the Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. The Conference adopted by consensus the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. The success in the
implementation of the Programme of Action can now
be seen in the national reports and implementation
activities of Member States. The Programme of Action
is indeed not an end in itself, but the starting point of
comprehensive national, regional and international
efforts to address the problem.

We were, however, disappointed that the
Conference failed to achieve agreement on two core
issues relating to the problem of small arms and light
weapons, namely, strict control over private ownership
and the supply of small arms to non-State groups.
These issues are so critical to the curtailment of small
arms that the international community will have to
address them at one point or another. My delegation
looks forward to the biennial meeting to be held in
2003 and the Review Conference to be held by 2006 to
take stock of progress and to consider further and more
effective measures to combat the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons.

With regard to the implementation of the
Programme of Action, several initiatives have been
taken in the subregion of the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC), such as the
adoption of the SADC Protocol on Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials. Namibia has
already ratified the SADC Protocol and this week held
a national conference on its implementation. The main
objective of the conference was for civil society
organizations and government officials to discuss the
creation of a long-term sustainable national plan of
action for arms management and disarmament that
would be in compliance with the international and
regional obligations agreed to by Namibia.

My Government also hosted the United Nations
Workshop on Transparency in Armaments in Windhoek
in June this year. The Workshop was sponsored by the
Governments of Canada, Germany, Japan and the
Netherlands and was attended by Government officials
from countries in our subregion. The Workshop
succeeded in creating greater awareness and
participation in arms transparency instruments.

The Security Council has, in the implementation
of its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, helped to prevent the flow of arms to conflict
areas through the imposition of embargoes and other
measures. The effectiveness of the Council measures
has been strengthened by panels of independent experts
and monitoring mechanisms. In the southern African
subregion, these efforts produced positive results
against UNITA by reducing its military capacity.

Apart from stopping arms from reaching conflict
areas, it is equally important to eradicate arms that are
already in circulation in conflict situations. In this
regard, it is crucial for the Council to include in the
mandate of peacekeeping operations clear provisions
regarding the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, as well as specific
measures for the collection and disposal of illicit and
surplus small arms and light weapons. However, in
order for these programmes to be consistent and
successful, their financing needs to be strengthened
through the expansion of measures under the budget for
peacekeeping operations so that they are not entirely
dependent upon voluntary contributions.

My delegation welcomes all the recommendations
and observations in the Secretary-General's report.
While many are already being implemented to a certain
degree, it is clear that they should also be expanded
and strengthened in order to have the maximum effect.

In conclusion, no country, region or organization
can alone resolve the problems caused by small arms.
Indeed, a collective effort is required, and those that
lack the capacity should be provided with the tools to
do so. We therefore hope that the General Assembly
and the Security Council will continue to address the
issue of small arms within their respective mandates.
Namibia remains committed to fully implementing the
measures contained in the Programme of Action
adopted at the United Nations Conference on Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as
those adopted by the Security Council aimed at the
maintenance of international peace and security.

