Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to start by thanking the three Committee
Chairmen for their detailed briefings and for their and
their Committees' work throughout the year. I should
like also to thank the experts and staff members who
support the Committees. I wish also to associate myself
with the comments to be made later by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

Terrorism continues to constitute one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
Substantial progress has been made on the counter-
terrorism agenda over recent years, but the
international community must continue to stand
together and to do more. Only by helping all States to
strengthen their capacity to tackle terrorism can we
hope to succeed in the medium and the longer term.

Let me begin with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), whose work is an
essential element in the international non-proliferation
effort. The analysis provided in the recent report is
particularly useful, and we welcome the recent
extension of the Committee's mandate, as set out in
resolution 1673 (2006). The work of the Committee so
far has been a major achievement, but, as we have
heard, there is still a great deal to do. We particularly
welcome the chance for the Committee to tackle the
issue of outreach. The Committee has an essential role
to play in promoting bilateral and multilateral
assistance programmes both between States and with
international and regional organizations. That will
allow individual States to develop effective action
plans and to learn from good practice. It will increase
access to technical assistance and will ultimately steer
all States towards achieving full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

I should like to move on to the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Following the
Council's recommendations last December, the United
Kingdom welcomes the development and use of new
analytical tools which allow States and the Committee
to move away from the never-ending reporting cycle
and shift to a tailored dialogue. Those tools also allow
for consistency in analysis. We also value the country
visits made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and attach great importance to
timely and accurate follow-up to those visits. The
Committee will be judged by the concrete results that
derive from all those visits.
11

S/l'V.5446

 

The United Kingdom particularly supports a
strong focus on technical assistance. The issue has
been under discussion for some time, and there is now
an opportunity to move more quickly. Thus, we look
forward to seeing substantial results in the form of the
assistance delivered and the resulting improvement in
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Assistance is critical to the success of counter-
terrorism efforts. We need to be more consistent in
agreeing on what is needed, more aware about what is
already being provided, and more coherent and
committed in how we get assistance delivered.

Now let me say a few words about the Al-Qaida
and Taliban sanctions Committee, established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999). The very productive
programme of visits, particularly by the Monitoring
Team, and the efforts with the Government of
Afghanistan are very encouraging. The United
Kingdom fully supports the reconciliation process in
Afghanistan, and we hope that the Committee will do
all it can to aid that process.

We encourage the Committee to maintain and
increase its progress on listing and delisting. This is an
important issue whose resolution is overdue, and which
last year's world summit asked us to address. Now we
must make rapid progress on it. The recent paper by
the Watson Institute for International Studies should
help inform the Committee's discussions. We also look
forward to hearing the Committee's views on the
recommendations contained in the fourth report of the
Monitoring Team. We should like also to urge States to
submit their checklists to the Committee, as called for
in resolution 1617 (2005). The focus should be on the
quality of each list, ensuring that the Committee and
Member States have as much information as possible.

We look forward to the continued coordination of
work and close cooperation among the three
Committees. We remain committed to working on the
issue of reporting to make sure we have the right
balance in the reporting requirements of the
Committees and the consequent burden on States.

At the most recent open briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.5375), we expressed our desire to encourage
other States to submit information requested under
resolution 1624 (2005) concerning incitement, by
taking a proactive approach and voluntarily submitting
information. The United Kingdom, for its part,
submitted its reply to the CTC earlier this month. We
12

should like to call on all other States to do the same
without delay. That will allow the CTC to have the
basis for the best possible information to report to the
Council in September, as called for in that resolution.

The issue of incitement to terrorism remains a
central one for the British Government; we must take
steps to tackle it. The United Kingdom legislative
programme for preventing terrorism and pursuing
terrorists and those who support terrorist organization
has been under review, not least on that issue of
incitement. Most notable among the new legislation is
the Terrorism Act 2006, which contains a
comprehensive package of measures designed to ensure
that the police, intelligence agencies and courts all
have the tools they require to tackle terrorism and
bring perpetrators to justice.

There has been much discussion in recent weeks
of the Secretary-General's proposal for a counter-
terrorism strategy for the United Nations. The United
Kingdom wholly and wholeheartedly supports the
Secretary-General's idea. Its operational focus is
exactly right, and it sends a strong message that
terrorism can never be justified, no matter what the
context. We also welcome its pragmatic approach and
its focus on capacity-building and on maintaining
counter-terrorism work throughout the United Nations
system. We welcome particularly the fact that the
whole United Nations membership is engaged in this
discussion of how to tackle a threat which aims to
undermine the values and principles of the
Organization, and we hope that the membership will all
be able to come together and quickly agree on a strong
strategy building on the areas in which we are all able
to reach agreement.

International terrorism has been and will continue
to be a grave problem for the global community. The
best way to tackle it is together. That requires a real
commitment from us all: in the Security Council and
outside it.

