President Gbagbo (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I should like to thank President
Thabo Mbeki for this initiative, as well as Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, who, immediately upon
assuming his official functions, began to take the steps
necessary to assist cote d'Ivoire to emerge from its
crisis.

I also commend President Blaise Compaore of
Burkina Faso, who helped us in his capacity as head of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). I wish to point out here that on Monday,
before I boarded the plane, Cote d'Ivoire, having
assembled all the actors to participate in the elections,
set the date of 30 November for the first round of
presidential balloting. It represents a victory for us all,
and especially for cote d'Ivoire, which has grown
weary of this erratic crisis. The first round of
presidential elections will be held on 30 November,
and everyone should support us morally and assist us
to convene the elections and to put an era that does us
no honour behind us.

Today's meeting is an important one. I wish to
make just a few points. The United Nations was
established at the end of the Second World War. It is
the same age as me and older than many current heads
of State. It was created to resolve conflicts among
States, but our conflicts in Africa generally take place
within a State and are aimed at destroying it. That has
been the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia

and wherever conflict has erupted. Darfur is a
somewhat unique case because it contains both an
internal Sudanese conflict and a border conflict
between the Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic. It is perhaps the only case in which two or
three States have faced off against one another in
Africa. The others, even that in Kenya, are domestic
conflicts, which were not exactly foreseen or
contemplated as a reason for the establishment of the
United Nations.

I greatly admire the initiatives that Africans
themselves have launched. We have done a great deal
in ending our own conflicts. I commend all those who
have led the African Union and the Organization of
African Unity before it, as well as our colleague and
brother President Konare, who is present among us,
and his successor, who is striving methodically.

We need, however, to institutionalize all our
progress, and the United Nations must support us. In
Cote d'Ivoire, for instance, we have a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Abidjan, but
his work needs to reach out to our institutions and the
United Nations must work to decentralize power. This
is a question not merely of resources, but of
responsibility as well. It is a structural issue. The
African Union and subregional organizations, such as
the Southern African Development Community,
ECOWAS and the Arab organizations, must be
provided with the structural responsibility to resolve
the new types of conflict we are seeing today.

That is what I wanted to suggest. Of course it is
necessary to support the African Union and its
membership. My expectation from the United Nations
is that such reforms will take place. Reform of the
United Nations does not mean only reform in terms of
who is on the Security Council and who is not: it is a
question of who does what in the world. The world has
become too big: I believe that the world population
was not even 2 billion when the United Nations was
founded, and there were far fewer independent States.
With every passing month and year, new countries
have emerged. We must ensure that regional
organizations play a larger role, and that they enjoy the
support of the United Nations.

That is my proposal, and that is why I came here
today. Whenever cote d'Ivoire has made significant
progress, Africans have been on the front line. In 2005
we made significant progress through South Africa's
mediation; and we are making significant progress
today through Burkina Faso's facilitation. We have
established an inter-Ivorian dialogue with Burkina Faso
facilitation. I believe that Africans have a great deal to
offer Africa in terms of peace. They have a great deal
to offer, and I want them to give a great deal - and to
give more. I want the United Nations to support them
so that they can give even more to peace in Africa.

