Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): It is my particular honour
to be speaking in this Chamber today, with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of a fellow South Asian country in
the Chair. On behalf of the Government and the people
of Nepal, Sir, I wish to congratulate you, your country,
Bangladesh, and your able team here in New York, led
by Ambassador Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, on your
sterling service to the cause of least developed
countries and of developing countries in general, and
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I congratulate you also on
having so promptly organized this important open
debate on the prevention of armed conflict. Allow me
also to put on record our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General, whose comprehensive and
optimistic report on the subject of this debate is before
the Council today.

Despite frequently being highly praised for its
virtues, the prevention of armed conflict remains one
of the least practised aspects of the pursuit of
international peace and security. However, we note
with encouragement that this situation seems to be
changing for the better. While the Security Council is
meeting today to consider the subject for the second
time since last July, the Secretary-General has
established by empirical evidence that prevention can
be comparatively economical and cost-effective. That
is in addition to saving lives, property, social
constructs, the sense of common humanity and the
environment for development.

What is alarming, though, is the Secretary-
General's candid confession that, despite these great
virtues, preventive strategies will not be easy to
implement. The fear is that, once the policies and
strategies for prevention are on the table, the political
will and the commitment of resources required for their
implementation may perhaps be lacking. Nevertheless,
we must respond to the call of the day by moving
forward, and forward we will move.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is the primary responsibility and obligation of
the United Nations. This duty demands that all
appropriate measures be taken to prevent potential
armed conflicts around the world, with full
commitment to the principles of the political
independence, sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of all States. Failing this, the Organization
will be unable fully to fulfil its purposes and principles
under the Charter, according to which it seeks to
maintain international peace and security and to
promote socio-economic development, the rule of law,
human rights and justice.

The sheer nature and magnitude of the work
required to prevent potential conflicts speaks loud and
clear: any effort that does not involve all actors at all
levels and in all spheres will be incomplete at best and
counterproductive at worst. The process must be
comprehensive in its analysis and holistic in its
approach. Therefore, although the Security Council is
charged with the immediate responsibility of
preventing armed conflicts, it cannot, and must not try
to, do so alone. Given the multifaceted nature of the
subject, the Council needs the full cooperation of all
other principal organs, funds and programmes of the
Organization, as well as that of many other partners
outside the United Nations system.

An issue so wide in scope and so central to the
core mandate of the United Nations cannot be dealt
with on an ad hoc basis with bits and pieces of isolated
efforts, and in an atmosphere lacking mutual trust and
confidence. With the Security Council and the
Secretary-General on the front lines, all principal
organs of the United Nations must be fully and visibly
taken on board. There should be absolutely no effort to
undermine or subordinate any organ's contribution to,
or involvement in, the process. For the sake of
humanity, whose trust this Organization was created to
keep, the entire United Nations system and its
international partners must act together, in a
synchronized manner, with full faith in the power of
their ability to prevent armed conflicts. Based on this
strong conviction, my delegation welcomes the efforts
of the Secretary-General to examine and analyse the
potential roles of each principal organ of the United
Nations, as well as those of other organizations and
partners, to forge coordinated policies and strategies.

As the lead Organization in these global efforts,
the United Nations must first of all strengthen its
capability to support national Governments in conflict
prevention. Interdepartmental coordination and inter-
agency coherence need to be promoted and sustained.
Interactions with relevant regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations, civil society and the
private sector must take place in order to achieve
greater synergy and complementarity. All aspects,
ranging from the role of the media to assistance for
women and children, and from drug abuse, disease and
crime to human rights and food security and
disarmament programmes, need to be dealt with in
tandem. A strategic analysis of the vast amount of
information existing in the Organization and resulting
from expert fact-finding missions may be of immense
use in the process.

Peacekeeping has a distinct role in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts. When armed conflicts erupt, the
seed of deadly bitterness remains for a long time. The
situation becomes sensitive to the smallest of
provocations and susceptible to the recurrence of
violence. While peacekeeping missions primarily seek to
restore normalcy and keep peace, they also need to
manage peace until a point of sustainability is reached,
from where the relevant national Governments can take it
up. Post-conflict peace management is crucial to ensure
the continued solace of security to peoples in order to heal
the wounds inflicted. Disarrning combatants and
reintegrating them into mainstream society to build a
common future together is quite a daunting task. Indeed,
the close involvement of troop-contributing countries is
always a prerequisite for success.

There is clearly no better forum than the General
Assembly to deal with the entire range of issues
relevant to the prevention of conflicts. We are familiar
with the usefulness of the Assembly's previous
deliberations and its relevant resolutions on this issue.
My delegation is particularly pleased by the fact that
the President of the Millennium Assembly has already
scheduled a general debate on the subject in the light of
the report of the Secretary-General. We believe that
this is the way it should be. My delegation also
believes that the involvement of the Economic and
Social Council in the process is equally urgent.
It is time for us seriously to embrace the
suggestion of the Secretary-General that conflict
prevention be made the cornerstone of collective
security under the United Nations in the present
century. This should involve a full understanding of the
concepts of sustainable peace and security and
sustainable development, and a close focus on the
complex inter-linkages between these concepts and
their building blocks, including social and economic
development, democratization and the rule of law.

Let me hasten to add, however, that the premises
on which we should base our principles and strategies
should in no way fail to capture the essence of the
existing inter-linkages of all elements involved. It is
important that the Secretary-General has taken as a
premise of his report that conflict prevention and
sustainable and equitable development are mutually
reinforcing activities. He elaborates on this idea by
stating that an investment in national and international
efforts for conflict prevention must be seen as a
simultaneous investment in sustainable development,
since the latter can best take place in an environment of
sustainable peace.

My Government strongly believes that the reverse
is equally true. Empirical evidence suggests that most
of today's conflicts have erupted because of extreme
poverty and the multiple problems associated with it.
Sustainable and equitable development may be the only
durable way to prevent such potential conflicts in
future. We remain convinced that an investment in
sustainable development must also be taken as a
simultaneous investment in conflict prevention, and
that the necessary additional resources should be
ensured for the development of conflict-prone and very
poor societies.

While the prevention of armed conflicts is a
collective obligation of Member States, the United
Nations must be prepared to assist national Governments
in building their capacity in the area of conflict
prevention. With the inter-linkages between poverty and
conflict firmly established, there can be no better way to
meet this obligation than to enable national Governments
to eradicate poverty and improve the socio-economic
standards of living of the ordinary people. We all know
what unemployment and an empty stomach can do to
people. My delegation believes that this is where the
crucial role of the Economic and Social Council fits in.
We hope that, in due course, the Economic and Social
Council will also take up the call of the Secretary-General
to examine the question of addressing the root causes of
conflict and the role of development in promoting long-
term conflict prevention strategies. The contribution of
the Bretton Woods institutions would also be invaluable
in the process.

Nepal concurs with the view that the sooner
preventive measures are taken, the more chances they
stand of being effective, and it fully supports the concept
of the culture of prevention that the Secretary-General
envisages and the membership strives to achieve. We
believe that the increased use of preventive deployment
definitely serves this purpose. However, we are aware that
a true culture of prevention demands long-term, arduous
and often carefully planned and implemented policies and
strategies. It is often outside the realm of short-term
operational measures of prevention, instead involving
long-term preventive measures of a structural nature. A
preventive strategy, to be successful, requires
complementary, cooperative and mutually reinforcing
partnership roles among the principal organs of the United
Nations, its system-wide funds and programmes, family-
wide organizations and agencies, as well as all possible
actors. We all have due roles to play in the consistent
implementation of coherent measures.

The success of preventive measures is contingent
upon the sustained political will of, and a long-term
commitment of requisite resources from, all stakeholders.
While my delegation appreciates the Secretary-General's
determination to work towards building a culture of
prevention within existing resources, insofar as possible,
we remain convinced that an institutional strengthening of
the key organs of the Organization, and their reorientation
where necessary, would be crucial in strengthening the
capacity of national Governments to prevent conflicts. We
also encourage the Secretary-General to effectively
pursue his good offices for the purpose of prevention of
conflicts.

To conclude, we believe this fresh process
towards creating a genuine culture of prevention faces
us as a test of our true conviction, our political will and
our sincerity of commitment to put in place the
preventive measures and necessary resources
commensurate with the root causes of all potential
conflicts. For our part, we pledge our full support, and
we would like to remain confident that the membership
will survive this acid test before it is again too late.

