Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency ofthe Council and to express the delegation
of Jamaica's appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador
Wang, for his effective leadership of the Council
during the previous month.

My delegation joins in thanking the Prosecutor,
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, for her very useful briefing on the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

We wish to express our support for the work of
the Tribunals, as we believe that international
cooperation is imperative, not only to send an
unequivocal message to those who have committed
these egregious criminal acts and are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunals, but also to those who
continue to engage in violations of international
humanitarian law anywhere in the world.

The message must be firm: that there will be no
impunity for perpetrators of those criminal acts under
any circumstances. It is important that those charged
with crimes against humanity must include the leaders
of groups which have engaged in actual acts of
criminal conduct, whether they are civilian, military, or
para-military. The establishment of the ICTR found
further justification in the findings of the Carlsson
report on the genocide in Rwanda, which was
considered by this Council a few short months ago. The
perpetrators of the crimes in Rwanda and in the former
Yugoslavia must be brought to justice.

The effective functioning of the Tribunals
depends on the full support of the international
community. Where it is found that States failed to
honour their obligations to cooperate with the
Tribunals, the Council must act appropriately to
enforce its mandate. We regret the reported lack of
cooperation from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
but are pleased to note from the briefing of the
Prosecutor that there has been improved cooperation
from Croatia. We also wish to commend the
cooperation that the Tribunals have received from
African and European countries.

My delegation appreciates the efforts of the
Tribunals to develop procedures to ensure fairness and
impartiality, which will afford the accused a reasonable
opportunity to mount a defence against charges. As the
Tribunals seek to deliver high-quality justice with the
proper dispatch in each of the cases brought before
them, we appreciate that trials must be speedy and fair.
In this regard, we note the recommendations of the
Expert Group, in document A/54/634, and the
comments of the Prosecutor on these recommendations,
contained in A/54/850. Many of these
recommendations are aimed at reducing the length of
trials, and we note that while the pace of prosecution
has picked up considerably, there remains much scope
for the development of procedure and practice. Many
of the recommendations of the Expert Group, however,
fall within the purview ofthe Security Council and will
require some modification of the statutes of the
Tribunals. We note in particular the recommendations
regarding the need for more judges to deal with the
increased workload and the proposed use of temporary
ad hoc judges. In the case of Rwanda, we note the
conclusion ofthe Expert Group in which the Prosecutor
concurred that there is no compelling reason for the
Security Council to provide an independent prosecutor
for the ICTR.

My delegation believes that we must adhere to
the adage that justice must not only be done, but also
appear to be done. My delegation therefore agrees with
the Prosecutor that the credibility of the Tribunals
among the international community and the victims
partly depends on whether their proceedings are seen to
have a powerful impact in bringing home the
responsibility of individuals for their horrendous
crimes. By the same token, justice delayed is justice
denied. A frequent criticism ofthe Tribunals is the long
pre-trial delays after the indictee has been taken into
custody. We realize that some delays may be directly
related to dilatory tactics of defence counsel. It is
therefore incumbent on the Trial Chambers to exercise
control over the proceedings to ensure that the right of
the accused is protected while at the same time
carrying out its responsibility to bring closure to the
proceedings within a reasonable time-frame.
Improvement in pre-trial proceedings could also help
expedite the actual trial process. It is also important
that interlocutory appeals be disposed of expeditiously.

We also wish to emphasize the need for resources
to expedite forensic work, and in this regard I have
been pleased to note the decision announced by Canada
to provide additional forensic support for the Tribunals.

My delegation fully supports the work of the
Tribunals and believes that consideration should be
given to expanding their jurisdiction to include
financial investigations and forfeiture of funds for
compensation to the victims. The work of the
international Tribunals continues to be important to fill
the void, pending the establishment of the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
support for the work of the Tribunals and the judges
and the staff of the Tribunals, whose work is carried
out under very difficult circumstances.

