Mr. Essonghe (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, my delegation would like to welcome your
initiative, Mr. President, in organizing this debate on the
important subject of the situation of children in armed
conflict. In this respect, I have no doubt that this discussion
will result in concrete actions, given the resolve to eradicate
this evil, which has been described today by Mr. Olara
Otunnu, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. I am grateful to him for his comments.

It will be recalled that the international community has
already established a number of legal texts aimed at the
promotion, protection and well-being of children. These
include the 1949 Geneva Convention, the Additional
Protocols of 1977 and the 1989 United Nations Convention,
all of which relate to the rights of the child. This matter is
therefore one of undoubted importance, given the role that
children are called upon to play in societies. I am sure that
the Council would agree with me, Sir, that children
represent the human capital of the future, since they are
destined to take over from adults.

As a result, they must be assured of conditions
conducive to their personal development, the development
of their inherent intellectual capacities and balanced
physical growth. It has been clearly demonstrated that an
imbalance in their environment, especially when that
environment is disrupted by scenes of violence and horror,
results in the alienation of personality. Such alienation leads
in turn to disturbances at all levels of society.

That is why we are convinced of the need to
strengthen international legislation to protect children,
ensure that they are safe and respected and prevent them
from suffering traumas that are often protracted and from
which recovery is often difficult.

Furthermore, we also believe that the situation of
children in armed conflict cannot be separated from the
resolution of the global issues involved in such conflicts.
In other words, if we are to tackle the problem of the use
of children in combat and the brutalities of all kinds that
they suffer, including the scenes of horror that they
witness during conflict, we must do our utmost to prevent
armed conflicts.

For all these reasons, we support the
recommendations of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General aimed at preventing the use of child
soldiers. We also firmly support the measures aimed at
demobilization, as well as other relevant
recommendations. Finally, we support the draft
presidential statement on this subject.

