Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Michel Kafando for his briefing on the current political
situation in Burundi. We are very much encouraged by
the continued stable security situation in that country,
even after the 17 May constitutional referendum. It is
also encouraging that the results of the referendum
were largely accepted by stakeholders and grievances
handled through established legal mechanisms.

We believe that the statement made on 7 June by His
Excellency Pierre Nkurunziza, President of Burundi,
not to stand for the presidential elections in 2020 is a
positive gesture towards the settlement of the political
impasse in the country. As we have repeatedly stated,
the political impasse in the country can be addressed
only through peaceful, inclusive and consensual
dialogue. The lack of progress in this regard in the
mediation led by the East African Community (EAC)
has been a matter of concern. Hence the relaunching
of a genuine and inclusive dialogue under the auspices
of the EAC and with the support of the African Union
and the United Nations, on the basis of the spirit of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement and the
Constitution of Burundi, is all the more urgent so as to
ensure lasting peace and stability in, as well as a better
future for, Burundi.

In the light of the calm security situation and the
subsequent progress registered in the country, we
believe that the engagement between the international
community and the Government of Burundi must be
based on a realistic strategy aimed at supporting strong
institutions and creating a conducive climate in which
gains are consolidated and the remaining political
differences addressed, without backsliding into the
violence seen in the past.

In this regard, the Council should explore new
avenues for re-engagement with Burundi. Alleviating
the socioeconomic difficulties of the population and
addressing the humanitarian situation, inter alia, should
be seen as an integral part of such re-engagement. On
the side of the Government of Burundi, too, we believe
that it is important to have an open-minded engagement
with the international community in explaining the
plan for the election to be held in 2020, as well as the
commitment to the spirit of the Arusha Agreement.

Finally, we call for the Government to fully
cooperate with the three human rights experts
mandated by Human Rights Council resolution 36/2,
which was presented in Geneva on 28 September 2017
by African countries, including Burundi, in gathering
the information so that it could garner the necessary
assistance to address the capacity gap critically needed
in this area.

