Mr. Latona (Mauritius): Let me start by thanking
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the

S/PVA478

 

situation in the Middle East. We have supported the
request of the Group of Arab States for convening this
open debate not only because the situation in the
Middle East is extremely dangerous and alarming, but
more importantly, we fear that if nothing is done to
diffuse the situation, we might very soon witness a
full-scale war in the region.

We fully concur with the views and concerns
expressed by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his
briefing to the Security Council last Thursday. We
remain gravely concerned over the continued
downward spiral of events. As we meet to discuss the
Middle East issue, it is hard to believe how close the
two sides were to reaching an agreement a year ago,
and how far apart they are today.

Over the past months, the cycle of violence has
only gained momentum and vigour. Violence is
breeding more violence. Hate and mistrust are now
widespread. Since the September 2000 uprising, more
than 900 Palestinians and 250 Israelis have been killed.
More than 17,000 Palestinians have been injured. Over
the past week alone, violence has taken a toll of 60
more lives. A tit-for-tat response has become the daily
feature of the Middle East crisis.

We condemn all acts of provocation and violence
from the Israeli side. We also condemn all acts of terror
from Palestinian fringe groups, which continue to harm
the Palestinian cause. We also mourn the victims of all
the bloodshed. It appears as if life has lost all its
meaning, especially when we hear of reports of a
pregnant woman being shot at an Israeli checkpoint.
Against this backdrop, we can see no immediate hope
of any de-escalation. While the spiral of violence takes
wider proportions, more lives are likely to be lost. With
so much suffering, we fear the situation may lead to
such a point where it will be nearly impossible to bring
the parties back to reason.

What is more disturbing is that the Israeli
leadership, it would appear, is sparing no effort to
destroy the peace process, from harsher economic
blockades to the occupation of Palestinian offices and
various extrajudicial killings. With the recent attempt
by the Israeli authorities to sideline Chairman Arafat
by keeping him under virtual house arrest for almost
three months - although there have been some limited
steps over the weekend to ease partially the restrictions
on his movements - we stand to be convinced that
Israel really wants peace and a conclusion of the
political process.

The international community has said time and
again that there can be no military solution to the
Middle East crisis. Yet Israel, under the pretext of
defending its population, is resorting only to military
action to further oppress the Palestinian people. Israel
is demonstrating its power, taking no heed of the call
for restraint by the international community. This
compounds further the feeling of despair among the
Palestinians.

A few days ago, Israeli forces attacked Chairman
Arafat's compound in Gaza City, killing four of his
military aides. However, let there be no doubt that
Chairman Arafat is a symbol of the Palestinian
struggle, and he remains the only viable interlocutor
and partner for peace. Any attempt to physically
eliminate this symbol, by design or otherwise, will
only set the entire Middle East ablaze, with dire
consequences. Therefore, we strongly urge the Israeli
authorities to urgently review their policy towards
Chairman Arafat and Palestine.

We share fully the assessment of the Secretary-
General that the key problems remain occupation,
security, economic deprivation and suffering - all of
which are interrelated. It is also important to note that
the security aspect will not be resolved if it is not
addressed alongside the core political issues. No peace
will be achieved if one side is not only reluctant to give
up anything, but also wants to take all that it can. We
have heard reports of Israeli reservists who have
refused to serve in the occupied territories. We can
only hope that their action will be an eye-opener for
the Israeli authorities.

Since late last year, we have seen growing
international consensus that a permanent solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be achieved only with
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), with the creation of a State of
Palestine, which will live in peace with the State of
Israel, and with both States enjoying secure and
recognized borders. We believe that this growing
consensus constitutes a very important step in the
search for peace in the Middle East, and the Security
Council has a very important role to play in this regard.

Mauritius supports fully the establishment of a
Palestinian State and believes that such a move is the
only way forward towards a lasting peace in the

S/PV.4478

 

Middle East. What the Palestinian people need is a
homeland that they can call their own. They cannot be
denied this right. In this regard, we believe that the
recent proposals of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia contain numerous merits which should be
carefully and seriously considered.

Over the past 18 months, we have seen the deep-
rooted feelings of hate and mistrust that the Israelis and
Palestinians have for each other. We continue to
believe that there is a need for third-party intervention
to protect the civilians on the ground and help the two
parties implement the recommendations of the Mitchell
Committee and the Tenet security plan.

For several months now, many protagonists on
the ground have attempted - unfortunately without
much success - to end the crisis and relaunch the
negotiations. While we call upon them to remain fully
engaged and to renew their efforts to break the
deadlock, we can afford no longer to see inaction and
paralysis on the part of the Security Council over the
worsening situation in the Middle East.

We tend to behave as if the Security Council's
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security simply did not apply to
the Middle East crisis. This is totally unacceptable to
my delegation, which believes that the United Nations
has a permanent responsibility with regard to the
Middle East issue until it is completely resolved. More
important, the Security Council needs to be proactive
to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions
regarding the Middle East. The time for action is now,
before the peace process is completely shattered,
making it impossible to put the pieces back together.

