Mr. Kellenberger: I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation to share with Council members how the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has
been responding to the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

I should like to start by highlighting two factors
which played a defining role in shaping ICRC's
response to the recent conflict in Iraq. The first is that
ICRC has been active in Iraq without interruption since
1980, with bases in Baghdad, Basra and the North,
where it has pursued both protection and assistance
activities. Concretely, protection work has meant visits
to and repatriation of prisoners of war from the Iraq-
Iran conflict, as well as the search for information on
people unaccounted for from the 1990-1991 Gulf War.
In terms of assistance, it is particularly relevant to note
that support for medical structures, hospitals and
health-care centres alike, has been at the forefront of
our priorities for the past four years. The same applies
to water and sanitation projects. ICRC was therefore
pretty familiar with the country's health and water
adduction and processing systems well before 20
March this year.

Secondly, in October last year, our institution
decided to increase its response capabilities in and
around Iraq. The decision of principle was also taken to
keep core teams of expatriate staff inside Iraq in the
event of a war. Moreover, a careful review process has
led us to the conclusion that, regardless of military
developments, deficiencies in the health-care delivery
and water adduction systems were likely to be issues of
critical concern to the civilian population. In addition,
it was evident that the outbreak of a full-fledged
conflict would require ICRC to step up its protection
work, notably by visiting prisoners of war and civilian
internees. In other words, we concluded that the
existing operational priorities were likely to keep, if
not increase, their relevance. The course of events
validated our choices.

During the war, ICRC supported hospitals and
health centres and effected emergency repairs on the
water supply systems. As regards protection, ICRC
delegates have so far visited over 7,000 prisoners of
war and civilian internees. Over 6,000 have been
released in the meantime. Efforts to gain access to all
other interned persons are ongoing.

There were also limits, both security- and staff-
related, to the activities carried out by ICRC during the
most intense phase of fighting. Whereas ICRC could
carry out emergency work in Baghdad, the Basra
region and the North during the most intense phase of
fighting, it had no access to major cities between Basra
and Baghdad, such as Nasiriyah, Karbala and Najaf.

I would now like to say a few words about our
present and future priorities in Iraq. These priorities
will include, as may be expected from ICRC, visits to
all persons deprived of their liberty; the protection of
vulnerable groups, such as separated and
unaccompanied children, the sick and wounded,
internally displaced persons and minority groups; the
re-establishment of family links; the prevention and
resolution of issues of persons unaccounted for in
relation to the present and past conflicts and violence;
emergency repair and rehabilitation of vital structures,
such as water, health and sewage facilities; the
provision of medical emergency consumables and
equipment; assistance to and support for public health
structures; emergency food and non-food assistance to
vulnerable populations; and awareness-raising
activities related to explosive remnants of war and
landmines. ICRC is presently fielding nearly 100
international and 450 Iraqi staff to implement this
programme.

ICRC, as lead agency of the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement in Iraq, is also
coordinating the activities of the national Red Cross
and Red Crescent societies in that country.
Representatives of 33 different societies and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies met on the premises of the ICRC
delegation in Baghdadjust 10 days ago.

When it comes to assessing the current
humanitarian situation, it is essential to understand that
it cannot be dissociated from the security context or
from the current dysfunction of key administrative
structures. ICRC drew the attention of the coalition and
of the international community to this fact at an early
stage - for example, in a public appeal I made on 11
April. Improving security and establishing functioning
administrative structures so that people can go back to
work and get paid remain top priorities. In fact, when I
visited Baghdad in early May, that was my main
message. ICRC remains concerned by the security
situation in Baghdad and other parts of the country.
Various incidents in recent days further show that main
roads remain unsafe.

An early analysis, based on our field experience,
that Iraq was not faced with a general humanitarian
catastrophe seems now to be widely shared. However,
three considerations should be borne in mind. First,
things could still go wrong if security is not improved.
More has to be done. Secondly, there are urgent
humanitarian needs in specific sectors. Thirdly, beyond
humanitarian emergencies, there are immense needs for
repair and upgrades of infrastructures, in particular in
the health and water sectors.

If there is, in our assessment, no major lack of
dry food at present, people are lacking fresh food, not
so much because of a lack of supply, but because of a
lack of money to buy. It is good news to hear that the
payment of salaries or other financial incentives has
now started in various places. We also understand that
the lack of fuel in some parts of the country sometimes
makes difficult the transportation of staff from different
institutions or can reduce supply lines.

A systematic evaluation of needs by ICRC
medical teams in hospitals and other medical structures
across the country is under way. In the course of the
week of 11-18 May alone, ICRC medical teams visited
about 10 hospitals in Baghdad and seven in the central
region of the country. The situation in hospitals does
vary widely from one place to the other. There is a
clear need for medical supplies in order to treat specific
diseases, such as cancer, diabetes or cardiovascular
diseases. In order to fill the gap until the central drug-
supply system is functioning again, ICRC has just
placed a large order for pharmaceuticals to be
distributed through the central pharmacy and monitored
by ICRC.
One of our main humanitarian concerns relates to
the high number of accidents caused by unexploded
ordnance and mines and to the potentially disastrous
effects of the many weapons and large amounts of
ammunition that are easily accessible across the
country. In order to disseminate emergency information
and to evaluate the situation, an ICRC team recently
visited 10 of the country's governorates.

As far as the legal framework is concerned, we
are, in terms of international humanitarian law - as
has been said before - in a situation of occupation.
The applicability of the relevant provisions of the
Geneva Conventions, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and of the Hague Regulation is accepted
by the occupying Power. Monitoring the application of
these provisions will be one of the tasks of the ICRC.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and other
colleagues from the United Nations system for their
kind words with regard to our institution, and it will be
my great pleasure to convey them to our staff.

We are looking forward to cooperating closely
with the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
system and with other humanitarian actors while -
and the Council is well aware of this - maintaining
our full independence with regard to all actors.

The ICRC will strictly respect the principles of
independence, neutrality and impartiality in Iraq, as in
all other operational contexts. If our organization has
been able to conduct its activities for the past 23 years
in Iraq, for the past 24 years in Afghanistan, and in
many other places, it is because the institution is
perceived as neutral, impartial and independent and
therefore accepted by the local population and the
different groups. Present and active in Iraq for 23
years, the ICRC will continue to assist the Iraqi
population, in full respect of its dignity.

