Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Mr. President, for having launched this
debate. We share the conviction that we must confront
emerging problems at an early stage and that the
greatest insecurity arises when risks accumulate.

It is not enough to enumerate the different
phenomena and negative trends. We need to discuss the
tools that we have at our disposal to address the issues
and their root causes. In that regard, I would like to
focus today on the preventive potential of certain recent
international frameworks, agreements and processes
and give a few examples of how Switzerland and other
Member States can contribute to realizing this potential.

First, the United Nations has never had a more
solid framework for conflict prevention than today.
Prevention is in the DNA of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and of the resolutions on
sustaining peace that the Council and the General
Assembly unanimously adopted in 2016 . An additional
impetus for linking the pillars with prevention is
anchored in the Secretary-General's reform agenda.
The new United Nations-World Bank prevention study
says that for every dollar invested in prevention, $16
is saved.

Secondly, the implementation of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change is, in our view, a
significant preventive step. The Paris Agreement
acknowledges the strong links between climate change
and peace and security. Switzerland is currently
addressing the specific challenge of the interaction
between water resources and peace.

We are involved in the Blue Peace Initiative, which
aims at preventing conflicts linked to the domestic
or transboundary management of water. Switzerland
encourages members of the Council to further analyze
the relation between the competition for natural
resources, climate change and peace and security.

Thirdly, respect for human rights is essential for
conflict prevention. In order to enhance systematic
cooperation within the United Nations system on
human rights issues and to strengthen the existing
human rights framework, in 2016 Switzerland launched
the Appeal of 13 June. The Appeal specifically calls for
intensified cooperation between the Security Council
and the human rights organs of the United Nations with
a view to strengthening conflict prevention. To date,
71 Member States havejoined the Appeal, and we invite
all others to do the same.

Fourthly, many conflicts arise around issues of
perceived or real exclusion and injustice. That is an
aspect that deserves our attention, including in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Together with Brazil and Sierra Leone,
we helped to launch the Pathfinders for Peaceful, Just
and Inclusive Societies. As part of that cross-regional
group of Member States, we are determined to accelerate
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
16 and its related targets. The Pathfinders recently
launched a road map that spells out the process and
challenges more clearly.

Switzerland remains committed to strengthening
the capacity of the United Nations to recognize and
address new and complex challenges to peace and
security. Currently they are enormous, but we also have
very solid reference frameworks and agreements on
human rights, climate change, development and peace
and security. We can effectively contribute to conflict
prevention by taking them seriously and implementing
them thoroughly.

