Mr. Mladenov: I am afraid that I must begin this
month's briefing to the Council by focusing on the rising
spectre of violence in the West Bank and Gaza and the
threat for a regional escalation. Both are happening
against the backdrop of the complete political deadlock
of the Middle East peace process and the lack of any
prospective to revive it.

On numerous occasions, the Secretary-General and
I have warned that the lack of a political horizon towards
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of
the two-State solution, unilateral moves on the ground,
including settlement construction and expansion,
terror attacks and a multitude of other factors create an
explosive mix that can be resolved only by a leadership
that is willing to return and capable of returning to the
table for meaningful negotiations towards a sustainable
and just peace and that can stand up to extremists
and radicals and uphold what we in the international
community, the Security Council and the region have
said so many times, namely, that lasting peace can be
based only on the idea that Israelis and Palestinians live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition,
as both peoples have a legitimate and historic right to
their own statehood.

That can be achieved on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and mutual agreements.
If we stray from that framework, we will see the
inevitable radicalization. We cannot give up on the goal
of a peaceful resolution to the conflict. The alternative
is too horrible to fathom. In the past month, we have
seen an increase of violent incidents, including settler-
related violence in the West Bank, and continuing
tensions in and around Gaza.

On 8 August, a 19-year-old Israeli was murdered in
the West Bank, stabbed close to the settlement ofMigdal
Oz. Two Palestinian suspects were later arrested by the
Israeli security forces. On 15 August, two Palestinian
teenagers stabbed and injured an Israeli police officer in
Jerusalem's Old City. One of the assailants was shot and
killed. The following day, two Israeli teenagers were
injured in a car-ramming attack near the settlement
of Elazar, south of Bethlehem. The 26-year-old driver
was shot and killed by an off-duty Israeli policeman.
On 23 August, an improvised explosive device was
detonated near the settlement of Dolev, north-west of
Ramallah, killing a 17-year-old Israeli girl and severely
injuring her father and brother.

I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian
and Israeli civilians. Such dangerous attacks serve only
those who want an escalation. Violence and terrorism
must be condemned by all. Their glorification by
Hamas, the Islamic Jihad and other Palestinian factions
is indeed deplorable.

In East Jerusalem, two months after the killing of
a 21-year-old Palestinian in the Al-Issawiya district,
tensions remain high as the Israeli security forces
continue to carry out raids and arrests. Overall in the
past month, two Palestinians and Israelis have been
killed and at least 102 Palestinians and seven Israelis
have been injured in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.

In response to the terrorist attack on 23 August
near the settlement of Dolev, the Israeli Government
decided to submit to the High Planning Committee a
plan for the establishment of the new neighbourhood in
Dolev with approximately 300 new housing units. That
decision is part of the practice to expand settlements in
the wake of attacks in the West Bank.

In addition, settlement expansion, demolitions
and seizures of Palestinian property continued during
the reporting. period. Citing the lack of Israeli-
issued building permits, which are nearly impossible
for Palestinians to obtain, the Israeli authorities
demolished or seized 22 structures in Area C, including
14 donor-funded aid structures and II structures in East
Jerusalem. Among the demolished structures were four
water cisterns, serving two herding communities in

southern Hebron, which are already facing severe water
shortages. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the demolitions have resulted
in the displacement of 19 people, including six children,
and affected the livelihoods of some 2,000 others.

I reiterate the statement made by the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory that Israel's policy of destroying Palestinian
property is not compatible with its obligations under
international humanitarian law.

On 5 and 6 August, Israel's High Planning
Committee advanced plans for some 2,400 housing
units in Area C settlements, with 800 units reaching
the final stage of approval. Some 200 units in East
Jerusalem were also advanced during the reporting
period. Further, the Security Cabinet of Israel
discussed on 30 July the advancement of another 6,000
housing units and, in a rare step, unanimously approved
granting construction permits for 715 housing units for
Palestinians living in Area C.

The expansion of settlements has no legal effect and
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law. By
advancing the effective annexation of the West Bank, it
undermines the chances for establishing a Palestinian
State based on relevant United Nations resolutions as
part of a negotiated two-State solution.

Despite the relative calm over the past two months,
the situation in Gaza remains very fragile as violent
incidents continue. During the reporting period, some
11 rockets and mortars were launched from Gaza
towards Israel. Most were intercepted. Two landed in
the Israeli town of Sderot on 17 and 25 August, causing
material damage. In response, just yesterday, Israel
decided to temporarily reduce the fuel transfer to Gaza
by a half. That unfortunate decision has already resulted
in a reduction of energy supply to the Gaza Strip.

On several occasions during the reporting period,
some 15 militants from Gaza breached, or attempted
to breach, the perimeter fence, triggering retaliatory
fire or air strikes by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) in
which nine militants were killed. The weekly protests
at the perimeter fence also continued. Some individuals
engaged in violent activity. The IDF responded mostly
with riot dispersals means. However, live ammunition
was also used. One Palestinian was killed and 545 were
injured, including more than 150 children.

Although there were fewer incidents involving
incendiary kites, balloons and other devices being
launched from Gaza as compared to the previous
period, at least 11 fires were reported. Israel must
calibrate its use of force and use lethal force only as a
last resort and in response to imminent threat ofdeath or
serious injury. Hamas must prevent the indiscriminate
launching of rockets and mortars towards Israel. It
must ensure that protests at the fence remain peaceful
and prevent provocation. I would also like to reiterate
that the fate of two Israelis civilians and the bodies
of two soldiers missing in Gaza remain an important
humanitarian concern for all.

I am afraid that I also have to raise the alarm on
the deteriorating situation in the health-care sector
in Gaza, particularly the lack of resources, including
medical supplies. According to the World Health
Organization, in July, 254 items, or 49 per cent, of
essential medications, and 225 items, or 26 per cent, of
medical disposables were reported to be at less than one
month's supply at Gaza's central drugstore.

On 20 August, Deputy Special Coordinator
McGoldrick visited a hospital in Gaza and met with
a group of women beneficiaries of projects supported
by the United Nations Occupied Palestinian Territory
Humanitarian Fund. He heard about the large number
of health issues that Palestinian women are facing as a
result ofthe humanitarian crisis. Doctors highlighted the
scarcity of cancer drugs in Gaza and the unpredictable
referral system for treatment outside Gaza as serious
challenges. The United Nations is committed to
working with all parties, including donors, to prevent a
health crisis in the Gaza Strip.

Meanwhile, access to drinking water has improved
with the completion of a new desalination plant, which
will serve up to 200,000 people. I would like to express
my appreciation to the State of Kuwait for generously
funding that project through the Islamic Development
Bank. The past month also saw an increase in the
number of permits given to Palestinian businessmen
and labourers from Gaza.

While those efforts are not enough to fundamentally
change the harsh realities of life in the Gaza Strip, they
serve to lessen the impact of the ongoing humanitarian
and economic crises. The past month also saw serious
movement and access constraints continue on national
staff from United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations in Gaza. Those
restrictions affect nearly all our national staff, who are
unable to leave Gaza for practically any purpose. Israel
must significantly improve the movement and access of

goods and people to and from Gaza as a step towards
lifting the closures in line with resolution 1860 (2009).

The Muslim holiday of Eid Al-Adha and the Jewish
commemoration of Tisha B'Av coincided this year on
10 August, which led to tensions at Jerusalem's holy
sites. Israeli authorities allowed Jewish visitors to
access Al-Haram Al-Sharif/ Temple Mount on that day
under police protection. In the days before the holiday,
Muslim religious leaders urged worshippers to come en
masse to the Al-Aqsa Mosque for Eid prayers.

In clashes between police forces and worshippers
that took place before and during the entry of Jewish
visitors into the compound, 29 Palestinians were
injured, including the Chairman and members of the
Islamic Waqf Council. According to media reports,
Israeli security forces also sustained four injuries. I
reiterate the call for the status quo at the holy sites to
be upheld in line with the special and historic role of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian of the
Muslim and Christian Holy Sites in Jerusalem.

Following the demolitions of Palestinian homes
in Areas A, B and C of the West Bank on the East
Jerusalem side of the barrier, which Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo briefed the Council on last month
(see S/PV.8583), President Abbas stated on 25 July that
the Palestinian leadership would suspend compliance
with agreements signed with Israel and start putting in
place mechanisms to implement that decision. For the
sixth consecutive month, the Palestinian Government
refused to receive Israel's transfer of tax revenues less
than the full amount owed to it.

On 22 August, however, following months of
consultations, Israel and the Palestinian Authority (PA)
agreed for the PA to receive approximately $568 million
in reimbursed taxes levied by Israel on fuel. That is an
important measure that will temporarily relieve the
PA's financial situation. Disagreement on the bulk of
the tax revenue transfers, however, remains. In that
context, I reiterate my call on both sides to continue
their engagement in a constructive manner and comply
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations.

Turning briefly to other developments in the region,
on 25 August media reported that two unmanned aerial
vehicles had crashed in the southern suburbs of Beirut.
On 26 August, also according to media reports, a

military base of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command in the Bekaa Valley, along
the Lebanese-Syrian, border was targeted in an air raid.
President Aoun and constitutional leaders in Lebanon
have referred to the drone incident as an assault on
Lebanon's sovereignty and a blatant violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The United Nations takes note of
those statements as well as ofthe ongoing investigation
into the incident by the Lebanese authorities. The
United Nations reiterates its appeal to all concerned
to cease violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and fully
implement its provisions. The United Nations calls on
the parties to exercise maximum restraint both in action
and rhetoric.

In conclusion, I would like to repeat, as I said at
the beginning of this briefing, that tangible steps can,
and must, be taken to reverse the negative trajectory of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict - urgently - in order
to counter the rising spectre of violence and the threat
of regional escalation. The United Nations remains
committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis
to resolve the conflict based on international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and prior
agreements, and to realizing the vision of two
States - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in
peace and security.

