Mr. Kongo Doudou (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, on behalf of the
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic, I would like to express our gratitude for
the commitment and enthusiasm of the international
community, and in particular the Security Council's
determination in undertaking a host of initiatives aimed
at finding a solution to the Central African crisis. We
have listened to the other speakers today, most ofwhom
are from the United Nations, including Ms. Valerie
Amos, who we met in Bangui; Mr. Herve' Ladsous, who
presented the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/142);
and Mr. Guterres, who gave a very detailed briefing
and who was also in Bangui and witnessed the situation
firsthand.

I will not speak at length. I simply wanted to say
that the work that has been carried out by all those high-
level United Nations officials and their colleagues,
including the Secretary-General's report on the Central
African Republic just presented, has been earnest,
balanced and well-documented. I will therefore not add
anything on that subject.

I would ask the President of the Council and Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous to convey to the Secretary-
General our gratitude for his efficient work, which
was accomplished within a time frame that took into
account the urgency of the situation facing us. We
welcome the fact that the report takes into account the
various concerns and situations of the national and
international actors involved in resolving the crisis in
my country. I also commend the African Union, which
was closely involved in the preparation of the report.
On behalf of the Government of the Central African
Republic, I can guarantee the Council all the necessary
political support and our full cooperation for the
implementation of the various recommendations.

We support and endorse the accounts presented by
the senior officials of the United Nations, and we appeal
to the members of the Security Council to accept them
as an accurate portrait of the situation on the ground.

In the light ofthe numerous challenges we face - be
they security, humanitarian, political, economic and
social, including the need for national dialogue and to
restore State authority throughout the entirety of the
national territory - we are convinced that the United
Nations alone, through a peacekeeping operation that
must be multidimensional, multifunctional and, I hope,
integrated, can bring to bear the comparative advantage
we need.

In that context, we commend the outstanding work
of the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA) in securing Bangui
and other parts of the country. That Mission must serve
as a model for the new peacekeeping mission. While we
await the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers,
who would be most welcome - even if they came
tomorrow, we would roll out the red carpet - and in
the light of the procedural lead-time of approximately
six months, it would be most desirable to see the
operational capacity of MISCA increased, in keeping
with the Secretary-General's call for the sending of
approximately 3,000 additional personnel.

I appeal to the wisdom of the members of the
Security Council to endorse the report submitted by
the Secretary-General before them. I very much hope
that their deliberations will lead to the swift adoption
of a strong resolution authorizing the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation, in close coordination and
cooperation with the African Union.

We must act now to prevent the Central African
Republic spiralling further into chaos and becoming
the breeding ground for international terrorism. Boko
Haram are not far away - less than 4,000 kilometres
from Bangui. We have seen Janjaweed elements among
the ex-Seleka forces. We have received threats on the
Internet, as everyone will be aware - threats that we
must take seriously - from Al-Qaida and, in particular,
from Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Those are
serious threats. If we do not tackle that problem and try
instead to push back the critical and crucial decision
before the Security Council - the decision to swiftly
establish a peacekeeping operation - then the Central
African Republic will be lost because terrorism,
whether we like it or not, is steps ahead of us, we who
are fighting for peace.

One again, I appeal to the wisdom of the members
of the Security Council. We are losing a great number of
human lives every day. The hospitals are overflowing.
The situation we face, as described by Ms. Amos,
Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Guterres, is a reality.

Let us not allow for a great many more lives to be
lost to delays. Taking a decision now would allow for a
mission to be deployed in the coming six months. But
if we wait another six months to take the decision, the
mission would be deployed in approximately 12 months.
That would be time wasted that could be used instead to
protect human lives.

Let us not allow the threat of a humanitarian crisis
to become reality, even if it is already all-too-real. All
of those who have come to Bangui have seen upon
landing at the airport that it has become an enormous
camp for displaced persons, where more than 100,000
of our countrymen and countrywomen are living in
deplorable and atrocious conditions.

I take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks
to President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of
the Congo, the Mediator of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), and President Idriss
Deby Itno, ECCAS Chair-in-Office, for the role they
have played and their continuing efforts with a view to
restoring peace in the Central African Republic.

I would also like to thank the African Union for
its commitment and leadership in promoting peace in
Central Africa. In that regard, I express my wish that
political leaders heed our hope that a peacekeeping
operation be established. There are no alternatives for
survival. We also express the wish that the political
leadership and military command of that future
peacekeeping operation be in the hands of Africans, in
close cooperation with the African Union.

To conclude my remarks, I would like to
underscore my gratitude to all of our bilateral and
multilateral partners who continue to provide many
types of support actions towards resolving the crisis,
especially to France, which swiftly deployed its forces
in Operation Sangaris; the United States of America,
which provided logistical support for the deployment
of MISCA components; and the European Union, the
World Bank and the non-governmental organizations
that are working tirelessly on the ground.

(spoke in English)

Please, we need the Council's help. If we delay it,
it will be too late. We may lose the country. There may
be partition. The north will become a safe haven for
extremists. Boko Haram is not far. We have already
received threats. Do not let us have to leave our country.
Please, be with us and think about the children - the
girls that are being raped. People are being killed.
There is just too much emotion. I am sorry.

