Mr. Liden (Sweden): It is good to see you,
Mr. President, sharing in this important debate.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.

This debate is indeed very timely. Drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime are
posing increasingly difficult challenges to international
peace and security. Apart from its devastating health
and socio-economic effects, the narcotics business
contributes to international instability and constitutes a
threat to the security of States. In recent years, there
has been a growing concern about a possible nexus
between the financing of terrorist groups and narcotics
profits. In some parts of the world, the huge profits
generated through drug trafficking fuel corruption and
undermine State authority, economic development and
the rule of law.
While the responsibility to address the narcotics
problem rests primarily with Member States, the
challenge is international and requires global and
regional cooperation. The 2005 World Summit stressed
the need to overcome the global narcotics problem
through international cooperation and national
strategies.

The United Nations and its various agencies have
taken important steps to strengthen the international
response to drug trafficking, through both international
regulation and assistance in capacity-building. These
efforts must continue. The European Union (EU)
thanks the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for its important work to assist Member
States in building capacity to address illicit drugs,
crime and terrorism. Efforts must be integrated in
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding support and
development cooperation. The European Union stands
ready to support the United Nations in developing a
more robust answer to new demands in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, including addressing drug
trafficking, other forms of organized crime and
corruption.

The European Union Drugs Action Plan for 2009-
2012 outlines European Union priorities in cooperating
with third countries and regions. The Action Plan seeks
to enhance international cooperation, inter alia, to
address trafficking routes and prevent the diversion of
chemical production. The European Union has declared
drug trafficking, especially the West and Central
African routes for storage and transit, a priority in the
fight against organized crime. We are addressing the
transregional nature of drug trafficking through a
global programme covering Latin America, the
Caribbean and West Africa, as well as some Maghreb
countries. Efforts are undertaken in cooperation with
UNODC.
Transnational threats such as drug trafficking and
other forms of organized crime affect all countries, but
are particularly devastating for developing States and
countries in transition. In West Africa, criminal
entrepreneurs have exploited vulnerabilities in the
wake of armed conflicts across the region. Adding to
the problem, Latin American drug traffickers have
linked up with West African crime groups. The threat
assessment recently published by UNODC paints a
grim picture of the threat of organized crime to West
Africa and to all of us. A similar picture is painted by
the European Police Office. This shows the truly
international character of the challenge we are facing.

As the link between Latin American drug cartels
and West African traffickers is becoming more
apparent, the EU has continued its support to Latin
American efforts in relation to drug supply reduction,
while at the same time trying to improve intelligence
coordination and practical cooperation between the two
regions.

An important element of the European Union's
efforts in West Africa is the EU mission in support of
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau. The EU and
its member States are also contributing to the struggle
against drug trafficking in West Africa through some
70 projects aimed at institution-building, policy
support and law enforcement.

The European Union reaffirms its support to the
Economic Community of West African States Regional
Action Plan on illicit drug trafficking and organized
crime. In July, United Nations agencies, in cooperation
with INTERPOL, launched the West Africa Coast
Initiative to work in synergy to support this regional
plan. This was an important step towards strengthening
the coherence of the international response to
organized crime in the region.

Apart from West Africa and Latin America, the
European Union is focusing its efforts on helping
Afghanistan to address its drug trafficking problem.
There have been some positive developments during
the past two years, including a decrease in opium
poppy cultivation and greater regional counter-
narcotics cooperation. However, the production and
trafficking of drugs remain important sources of
finance for insurgent groups and fuel for corruption.

The European Union supports the National Drug
Control Strategy and will maintain the counter-
narcotics dialogue with Afghanistan. Our joint efforts
are focused on law enforcement, public health and
rural development programmes, including the
promotion of alternative development. Regional
stability is also of key importance. The Council of the
European Union recently adopted a plan for
strengthened action in Afghanistan and Pakistan. We
will continue to pursue cooperation initiatives and
strongly support UNODC activities in the region.

The fight against the illicit trafficking of drugs
must focus on all aspects of supply and demand, as
well as on illicit financial flows. Better regulatory
frameworks and extended efforts in building national
capacities in the areas of rule of law, socio-economic
stability and public health are all central elements in
meeting this challenge.

Let me assure the Council that the European
Union will continue to be an active partner in
international and regional efforts to address the threat
posed by drug trafficking and other forms of organized
crime also in the period to come.

