Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his report on the implementation of paragraph 5 of Security
Council resolution 955 (1994). As members know, the
establishment of an international tribunal was at the explicit
request of the Rwandan Government, and in the interest of
establishing justice and the rule of law, which had been
lacking in our country since 1959.

The key points in the minds of the Government and
the people of Rwanda included neither punishment nor
vengeance, but rather justice: the establishment of the rule
of law, in other words, the establishment of a basis for
breaking the vicious circle of impunity that had prevailed
in the country for over 35 years. Members will recall that
the outcome of the Security Council's deliberations was
not exactly what was expected and needed by the people
of Rwanda and their Government.

I should like to recall here that one of the reasons
that could have prompted my delegation to vote against
that resolution - which we ourselves had requested -
was the question of the location of the seat of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda. The Tribunal should
sit in Rwanda given that it is a tribunal for judging
Rwandans. In fact, the people of Rwanda, like all peoples
of the world, need to see justice done for their sons and
daughters. The Germans, the French, the Jews and the
other peoples of the world did, notably after the Second
World War. We cannot see why this right should be
denied the Rwandans, a people who wish to use justice as
a foundation for national unity following the genocide of
1994, for reconstructing a country destroyed by injustice.
But also, and more importantly, how will the survivors of
the genocide and the butchers forgive if they do not see
justice done?

For practical reasons, my delegation believes that
shifting the seat of the Tribunal away from Rwanda will
entail mobilizing immense resources to ensure that the
guilty are there to be tried and for travel and subsistence
costs for witnesses and plaintiffs. My delegation is afraid
that the International Tribunal for Rwanda will make a
very poor showing indeed, given that Rwanda has no
resources and the Organization is always complaining
about the lack of finance.

The Government of Rwanda has already decided to
work with the International Tribunal and support it as it
wishes to cooperate to the extent that cooperation is
possible and to the extent that the interests of the
Rwandan people are not put at risk. Within this
framework of cooperation, my delegation, while
preferring the seat of the Tribunal to be in Rwanda, is not
opposed to its being located in a neighbouring country
and close to Rwanda in order to minimize the effects I
mentioned of its being outside the country.

My delegation takes this opportunity to thank
Tanzania, which, in Arusha, will once again play a
historic and symbolic role for Rwanda. My delegation
shares the concern expressed by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 42 of his report (S/ 1995/ 134) about the justice
and fairness the International Tribunal needs. None the
less, the fact that this argument has been used in favour
of relocating the Tribunal outside Rwanda does not mean
that my delegation agrees with it in any way. Our
 

Government has no less a concern for and a sense of justice
and fairness than any one, witness that it was the
Government of Rwanda that asked for the International
Tribunal. My delegation would wish that other arguments
could be found for relocating the seat.

I should like to conclude by thanking the Secretariat's
Office of Legal Affairs, which regularly contacted my
delegation about the International Tribunal. Given
Rwanda's current situation, such contacts are necessary and
facilitate cooperation. I should like to recall that the
concern for justice in Rwanda shown by the Security
Council implies that serious thought must be given to
support for the Rwandan courts competent to supplement
the work of the Tribunal.

