Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (Spoke in French): In its capacity as penholder on the issue
on today's agenda, our delegation has the pleasure
of presenting draft resolution S/2018/164, which has
been submitted for our consideration with a View to
the renewal until 28 February 2019 of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). This balanced draft
reflects the realities on the ground, and its crafting
enjoyed the full and comprehensive cooperation of all.

My delegation wishes to thank, on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council, all of
the States members of the Council that participated
in a constructive spirit during the consultations and
negotiations leading to the elaboration of this draft
resolution. Our hope is that the draft, which enjoys the
support of all member States and of other stakeholders,
will meet with the approval of the Council so that it can
be adopted by consensus.

In essence, the draft resolution takes note of the
Secretary-General's report on Guinea-Bissau dated
9 February 2018 (8/2018/110), extends strong support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and proposes an extension ofthe mandate ofUNlOGBIS
for a period of one year, until 28 February 2019.

Through this draft, the Security Council voices its
concern vis-a-vis the persistentpolitical and institutional
crisis that has been stoked by the main Guinea-Bissau
political actors. In this regard, the Security Council
urgently calls on the stakeholders to put the interests of
the people above all other considerations and calls upon
the Government of Guinea-Bissau to adopt concrete
measures to ensure peace, security and stability in
the country.

Furthermore, the Security Council stresses the
importance of holding legislative elections in 2018 and
presidential elections in 2019. To that end, the Council
calls for implementation of the recommendation of
the strategic review mission concerning the need for
UNIOGBIS to refocus its efforts by availing itself of
the good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by supporting, inter alia, the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) road map, while facilitating an inclusive
political dialogue, the national reconciliation process
and the upcoming electoral process, with a view to
ensuring the holding of inclusive, free and credible
legislative elections in 2018, within the timetable
set forth in the mandate of the Council. It further
commends the crucial role played by the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau and welcomes the extension
until 31 March 2018 of its mandate.

In that same vein, the Council supports the efforts
of ECOWAS and of the African Union to secure an
expeditious settlement to the crisis plaguing Guinea-
Bissau and welcomes the decision of ECOWAS of
4 February 2018 imposing sanctions on those obstructing
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement, which
is the sole consensus-based framework for arriving at a
lasting solution to the crisis. The Council also commends
international partners, including the United Nations,
the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries for
their concerted efforts to step up cooperation with the
Government of Guinea-Bissau.

Lastly, the Council extends its willingness and
readiness to take additional measures in the event of
any deterioration in the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to formally call
on the Security Council and bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue to support Guinea-Bissau, in the
interests of the civilians in that country.
