We thank the French presidency for giving Member States an opportunity to present statements for this important debate on children and armed conflict. We also thank Belgium for its invaluable leadership of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict. Ireland aligns itself with the statement submitted by the observer of the European Union. In what is already a year of important anniversaries for the United Nations, 2020 also marks 15 years since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which led to the creation of the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We thank the briefers - the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter; the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, Henrietta Fore; and Mariam, representative of the National Children's Parliament of Mali - for their key insights and for shedding light on the current situation. Too often, debates at the Security Council can feel detached from their impact on the ground, but the children and armed conflict agenda has catalysed enormous change in the lives of some of the world's most vulnerable. Since the introduction of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, over 155,000 children have been released by parties to conflict. The Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, supported by Ireland, have made an important contribution to that progress. For our part, we will continue to advance our efforts to protect the most vulnerable, which include the initiative we are leading on strengthening the protection of civilians from humanitarian harm arising from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. However, much remains to be done. The recent Secretary General's report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) underscores just how prevalent grave violations against children remain, having verified over 25,000 cases in the past year. That is unacceptable, as are the 4,400 instances of humanitarian access to children being denied. More must be done to strengthen the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which could benefit from further transparency and robust evidence- collection systems. Accountability is essential to our efforts to foster compliance with international law. We must also guarantee child protection in humanitarian and conflict situations, ensure reintegration and uphold commitments to the children and armed conflict agenda. Addressing the needs of children affected by armed conflict requires a holistic approach, combining the three pillars of the United Nations - human rights, peace and security, and development - to ensure support throughout childhood and adolescence. For that reason, we welcome the French presidency's focus on the empowerment of children through access to education, skills and livelihood opportunities. That is a priority for Ireland, as reflected in our development policy, A Better World. A lack of access to education in armed conflict situations not only violates the rights of children but also limits their future opportunities. In conflict situations, education is often cast aside or, worse, is a target for warring parties. That furthers the cycle of poverty and vulnerability. We call on Member States to take concrete measures to deter the military use of schools by armed forces and groups, in line with the Safe Schools Declaration, which Ireland supports. We must acknowledge that girls are at a particular disadvantage in such situations, as they are 2.5 times more likely to be out of school than boys in countries affected by conflict, making them increasingly vulnerable to exploitation and abuse. Those risks are being compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic, with school-attending children, particularly girls, at an even greater risk of dropping out of school permanently. Earlier this year, Ireland hosted two events on our Drive for Five initiative: a global call to action to ensure adolescent girls have access to safe, good quality education. We heard from numerous brave young voices who had escaped conflict situations to fulfil their educational aspirations. Similarly, we were especially pleased to listen and learn from the powerful words of our briefer Mariam. Young people deserve to be heard and engaged in peace and security. We know that, for children to flourish and to become the leaders and peacebuilders of tomorrow, an education is essential. On 17 June, Ireland was elected as a member of the Security Council for the term 2021-2022. When we assume our seat on the Council next year, we will work to advance the children and armed conflict agenda, the achievement of peace and security, and the values of multilateralism.
