Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemal) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, let me thank the delegation of the
Kingdom of Morocco for having organized this open
debate. We also express our appreciation to Ms. Judy
Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador Momen for their
presentations, as well as the Secretariat for the report
before us (S/2012/746), concerning the progress made
in improving the coherence, efficiency and internal
accountability in peacebuilding activities.

Seven years after its establishment, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) has not yet reached its full potential
or entirely fulfilled the purpose for which it was
originally established. However, it is clear that it has
made significant achievements; the contribution of the
Commission to the countries under its care is increasing
over time. Evidence of this is the expansion of country
configurations through the advisory role of the PBC,
working to secure the foundations for lasting peace and
national reconciliation.

Building on what the Security Council's debate in
July (see S/PV.6805) when we met to consider the fifth
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2012/70),
my remarks will focus on the following six points.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission should help
to ensure that donor support is in line with national
peacebuilding plans, and accommodate national
priorities that address the root causes of conflict and
the actions to overcome them. We agree with the report
of the Secretary-General, and the established practice
of the Commission itself, that the countries directly
concerned must set the course and provide leadership
in the implementation of those plans.

Secondly, the Commission should help ensure that
collective efforts generate coordinated and coherent
action in the field by all stakeholders, including by
exploring such alternatives as simple and flexible
collaboration with other partners, such as foundations
and the private sector. This aid must at all times
complement and support the efforts and initiatives
undertaken by national actors, and the entire process
should be initiated upon the request and consent of the
country under consideration.

Thirdly, in order to enhance its role in building
partnerships within and outside the United Nations
system and with the competent authorities of the affected
country, the Commission should be, as far as the United
Nations is concerned, the builder of bridges between
various intergovernmental bodies of the Organization,
such as the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. In that sense,
and as we pointed out in July in this very Chamber,
the Commission is a link between the Security Council,
whose mandate is limited to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. The latter two
bodies have mandates in development and democratic
governance.

For that reason, the boundary between peacemaking
and peacebuilding is not clear, which is why a good
understanding between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission would enhance compliance
with the mandates of both bodies, especially on the
ground. It is important to forge alliances between
these bodies, and between the United Nations and the
multilateral financial institutions.

Fourthly, the report of the Secretary-General
prominently addresses the issue of women's
participation in peacebuilding processes. We endorse
the notion that women are key agents for attaining
lasting peace. During our presidency of the Council in
October, we promoted a presidential statement on the
matter (S/PRST/2012/23). In that respect, we recognize
all efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General to
ensure the participation of women and the availability of
experts on gender issues in peace processes, especially
peacebuilding processes.

Fifthly, it is critical that in the earliest stages of
any peace process broad sectors of society and a wide
range of relevant national actors be included in order
to better address the root causes of conflict and give
greater legitimacy to the consolidation of peace and all
that it entails. The active participation of national actors
supports the national responsibility in the achievement
ofpeacebuilding goals and ensures that national policies
are developed in a way that benefits the common good.
In this, women can also play a conciliatory role.

Sixthly, all efforts made by the United Nations
and partners on the ground will be for naught if
national capabilities are not generated and democratic
institutions whose role is recognized and respected by
the population are not built.

In that regard, we find it relevant to refer to civilian
capacity and the availability of experts in developing
countries who can contribute to developing national
capacity and establishing peacebuilding institutions.
That entails both the idea of national ownership and
participatory processes and focused international
cooperation, which also favours South-South
cooperation.

In conclusion, we have taken note of the suggestions
and recommendations that the Secretary-General
makes in his report. We welcome the vast majority of
them without hesitation.

This is the last formal meeting of the Council in
which we will participate with colleagues with whom we
have worked intensively in the past year - including,
seated to either side of me, Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri and Ambassador Peter Wittig, as well as
Ambassador Nestor Osorio, Ambassador Baso Sangqu
and Ambassador Jose' Filipe Moraes Cabral. We shall
genuinely miss them. Each one of them, with his
support teams, singular contributions to the work of the
Council and unique personality, has made a profound
impression on us. Working with them has been an
unforgettable experience. We wish them every success
in their future endeavours, which will no doubt serve
to confirm to the rest of us elected members of the
Security Council that life goes on after serving on the
Council.

