Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Special Envoy Haysom for their comprehensive updates
on the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) and for their efforts to support the Sudan and
South Sudan in settling the outstanding issues between
the two countries on Abyei.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendations on the adjustment of
the UNISFA mandate and would like to share the
following observations.

Kazakhstan considers that long-term stability
and peace in Abyei can be achieved only through the
full implementation of the Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security
of the Abyei Area of June 2011 and the cooperation
agreement of September 2012. We note the importance
of the work carried out by the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel under the leadership of
President Mbeki to provide political support to advance
implementation of the agreements.

We are worried that, despite the stable security
situation, there has been insufficient progress on
the final status of Abyei. We therefore support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to enhance
the mission's role in the settlement of border disputes
and the final status of Abyei, in close collaboration with
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel.

We commend UNISFA for successfully facilitating
stability and reconciliation between the two
communities and mitigating intercommunal violence
in Abyei. We underscore the important role of the
UNISFA police component in maintaining law and
order through community-based interactive patrols
and the capacity-building of community protection
committees. UNISFA should continue its negotiations
with both sides to establish community protection
committees in northern Abyei, as well as to support
joint peace committee meetings.

Despite some delays in the operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(J BVMM), the two Governments have made important
steps towards the full functioning of the Mechanism.
We reiterate that the Mechanism plays a critical role
in maintaining stability in Abyei and in preventing
confrontations along the Sudan-South Sudan border.
We therefore generally support the Secretary-General's
proposals to make several changes to the UNISFA
concept with regard to its military, police and civilian
components. At the same time, any decision on such a
reconfiguration should be made in discussion and by
agreement among the two countries.

We also underscore the importance ofthe suggestion
to foster the nexus between peace and development by
implementing programmes that would benefit both
communities, and we join the Secretary-General's call
on donors to allocate funding for projects that focus
on development and reconciliation. We hope that those
recommendations will be accepted during the renewal
of the UNISFA mandate.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to Special
Envoy Haysom and the Ethiopian military contingent
for their dedication to and laudable efforts in preserving
peace and stability in the Abyei Area, and we assure
them of Kazakhstan's full support.

