Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
thank Ms. Hoppe for her introduction of the Secretary-
General's report. The United States believes that the
report effectively outlines steps that States need to take
and the tools at their disposal to reduce the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and to
enforce United Nations arms embargoes. We
particularly note those recommendations in the report
that call for concrete actions by States and increased
coordination among donors.

The United States has been a key player in the
international effort to reduce the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. We apply strict controls
on weapons transfers, both import and export,
including a robust end-user monitoring system, strong
controls over brokers and effective stockpile
management practices. The United States also
continues to render assistance to other States in their
efforts to implement the United Nations Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well as
the International Tracing Instrument, through our
assistance in small arms and light weapons destruction,
stockpile security and management, end-user controls
and the establishment or strengthening of brokering
controls.

In its presidential statements of June 2007, the
Security Council laid out concrete steps for States to
implement the Programme of Action. In particular, the
Council encouraged all States to strengthen physical
security and stockpile management, destroy surplus
and obsolete small arms and light weapons, ensure that
all small arms are marked at the time of manufacture
and import, strengthen export and border controls, and
control brokering activities. The United States has
played an active role in encouraging States to mark all
its weapons and trace illicit small arms. We trace
nearly 50,000 weapons for foreign law enforcement
agencies per year. We have also been active in the
implementation of the International Tracing
Instrument.

I have a few comments on the Secretary-
General's recommendations.

The report stresses the importance of end-user
certificates. We are supportive of that approach but
would urge States to go one step further and establish a
more comprehensive end-user monitoring system.
Illicit brokers have proved that a certificate can easily
be forged. A robust end-user monitoring system,
however, would allow States to conduct physical
pre- and post-shipment inspections, as well as random
inspections following a weapons shipment to verify
that the small arms have not been transferred without
prior approval and are being used as intended. The
recipient State would be responsible for establishing
sound customs and import procedures in order to verify
the accuracy of the shipment.

Illicit brokering was also highlighted in the
report. The United States participated actively in the
United Nations Group of Governmental Experts on
brokering. We would urge States to take a close look at
the recommendations put forward by the Group. If
implemented, those recommended provisions could go
a long way in reducing arms embargo violations and
other illicit transfers.

The report also makes frequent reference to
possible areas for Security Council action with respect
to arms embargoes. Almost all examples and
recommendations in the report are drawn from the
most difficult and complex cases which have involved
both embargoes and peacekeeping missions in
countries or areas where there has been a complete or
near-complete breakdown in civil order. There is a
legal maxim that says "hard cases do not make good
law". We should not look to those most difficult and
complex cases as a source of rules for general
application in future arms embargoes and/or
peacekeeping operations.

Moreover, the report implies that it is the
principal duty of the Security Council or its
components or of peacekeeping missions set up under
its authority to enforce arms embargoes. It is not.
Enforcement of arms embargoes is primarily a duty of
States Members of the United Nations. It is our View
that the establishment of comprehensive national laws
and regulations is key to the enforcement of arms
embargoes and sanctions and is the cornerstone for the
reduction of illicit small arms and light weapons
proliferation. However, we would caution against
actions that increase the burden on States through
additional studies and mandates, since more assistance,
not more reports and meetings, is required for the
international community to reach our common goal.

We would also caution against efforts at
standardizing practices without some indication that
such standardization will be effective at combating the
illicit trade or do not duplicate already existing and
effective regional best practices.

Finally, the United States welcomes the inclusion
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission in
the report's consideration of ways to address small
arms issues in peacebuilding efforts. We want to see
the Peacebuilding Commission succeed in its role of
marshalling support for sustainable peacekeeping. We
welcome greater coordination that helps reduce the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

