Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, the Secretary-General and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for their briefings.

(spoke in English)

I once again congratulate Cote d'Ivoire on its
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate, which is of the utmost importance not only to
Member States but also to the Security Council.

At the outset, I would like to say that my delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
fully represents the views of African Member States on
the topic that we are debating today. I am honoured to
make this statement at a time when the African Union is
making remarkable progress in the effort to strengthen
its cooperation with the United Nations. I believe that
this debate comes at the right time, as the African
Union seeks the Security Council's endorsement of a
predictable cost-sharing framework for the funding of
peace-support operations led by Africa and authorized
by the Council.
On a number of occasions in this Chamber,
members of the Security Council and Member States
have called for effective United Nations cooperation
with regional bodies, particularly the African Union.
We may recall that in November 2016 the Council
held a debate on modalities of stronger cooperation on
peace and security between the United Nations and the
African Union (see S/PV.7816). The Security Council
welcomed the efforts of the regional organization to
establish a predictable cost-sharing structure for the
funding of peace-support operations authorized by the
Council and led by Africa. My remarks focus on the
progress made by Africa with a View to strengthening
its capabilities to streamline its partnership with the
United Nations in the areas of conflict prevention,
mediation, conflict resolution and sustaining peace in a
predictable and sustainable manner.

Building on previous arrangements, the
Chairperson of the African Union and the Secretary-
General further demonstrated strong commitment
towards strengthening the strategic partnership
between the two organizations. That was reinforced
by the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
which was signed in New York on 19 April 2017 and
has been mentioned by many speakers. Accordingly, let
me take this opportunity to commend the work done by
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission to follow up on the relevant provisions of
resolution 2320 (2016), particularly the consultative
process undertaken between March and April 2017.
I am delighted to note that the consultative process
was conducted in a true spirit of partnership and
cooperation. I look forward to the realization of deeper
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations on more substantive matters of mutual interest.

Last month, the African Union relaunched its Peace
Fund. The Fund entails three core aims: first, mediation
and preventive diplomacy activities; secondly, capacity-
building; and thirdly, peace-support operations. The
Fund will certainly allow the African Union to meet
its commitment to finance 25 per cent of its budget
for peace operations, while also enabling it to finance
mediation and preventive diplomacy activities.

Rwanda believes that, while African Union member
States are primarily responsible for financing the Peace
Fund, that does not preclude the role of partnership in
supporting peace and security activities of the African
Union. Strengthening cooperation with partners such
as the United Nations in the context of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations remains highly
relevant and imperative. This comes at a time when the
current international peace and security architecture
is under extreme pressure given the complexity of
the peace and security challenges that the world
is facing today. Building an effective partnership
between the two organizations is therefore strategic for
collective security.

My country appeals for an enhanced form of
partnership, which must be based on the respective
authorities, competencies and capacities of the
two organizations. That partnership must observe
the principles of burden-sharing, consultative
decision-making processes, comparative advantage and
division of labour, as well as mutual accountability.

The continent is not seeking handouts or charity
but a partnership of collective responsibility in
addressing conflicts on the continent. I believe that
the co-financing of African Union-led peace-support
operations authorized by the Security Council on
a case-by-case basis is an opportunity for us all to
enhance our partnership in the spirit of the United
Nations-African Union partnership framework, based
on the principles of mutual respect, shared values and
comparative advantage.

In that respect, the African Union has called on the
African members of the Security Council to propose
and to champion a draft resolution on financing African
Union-led peace-support operations that are authorized
by the Council. That is in the spirit of building on what
has been achieved through resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017).

The draft resolution proposed by the African
members of the Security Council has embedded within
it important elements that are of mutual concern, such
as accountability, compliance of policies related to
human rights and cases of sexual exploitation, conduct,
discipline and coordination.

Africa is ready to play its part. Indeed, it is already
doing so in many ways. Apart from the significant
reforms and Peace Fund governance arrangements
in place, the continent currently hosts the largest
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and the majority of peacekeeping personnel are from
Africa. With more sustained and predictable financing
for African Union-led peace-support operations, we
can significantly improve our capacity to prevent,
respond to and manage crisis situations in a timely and
efficient manner.
The crux is that there is clearly agreement on
the urgency of improving the international peace
and security architecture to address today's security
challenges and to reach a consensus solution to
predictable and sustainable financing for African
Union-led peace-support operations authorized by the
Security Council. I believe that the problem lies in our
different understanding of the sense of urgency and of
the best way to exercise our collective responsibility
to prevent and respond to conflicts. Rwanda believes
that a well-funded and predictable African Peace and
Security Architecture is not only an African priority;
it is our collective priority for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security.

