Mr. Mucyo (Rwanda) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to address the Security Council today on behalf
of my country, Rwanda. Following the terrible
hardships that Rwanda endured in 1994 - genocide
and massacre that took the lives of more than a million
innocent people - my country, with the support of the
international community, took the course of national
reconciliation among all Rwandans in order to rebuild
our society on the basis of brotherhood, solidarity and
justice with respect for fundamental human rights.

There have been many programmes and activities
to promote and strengthen the rule of law and
democracy. But there can be no national reconciliation
without justice. It is justice that will make it possible
not only to eradicate the culture of impunity but also,
and above all, to restore a society in which safety and
security prevail.

At the domestic level, a large number of persons,
including ge'nocidaires, have been detained. Many
people have been orphaned, widowed or maimed; we
have seen genocide and massacres. To resolve these
problems we have undertaken a new experiment with
the establishment of the gachacha system of justice
based on the Rwandan national tradition of
participatory justice, in which the population - whose
members were the only eye-witnesses to the acts of
genocide - relates the facts, uncovers the truth and
helps arrest and try suspects.

I take this opportunity sincerely to thank all the
countries that are supporting us in our efforts to rebuild
our country. The Rwandan Administration cannot face
the country's post-genocide situation alone. Rwanda
earnestly hopes that the support it has enjoyed in the
past in strengthening its capacities and in developing
programmes of justice and of national reconciliation
will continue and will be strengthened.

Let me mention, in addition to our domestic
efforts and achievements, the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. As someone said only
yesterday, the 1994 atrocities in Rwanda are one of the
darkest pages in human history. The Tribunal's
essential task is to fight against forgetting and for
justice, which will contribute to the reconciliation that
is indispensable in Rwanda.

The mandate of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda constitutes a challenge: if justice
is not brought to Rwanda and if certain countries
continue to harbour those suspected of genocide and
revisionists, no people in the world can feel safe. Far
beyond a single people, all of civilization could
disappear. If crimes of this kind go unpunished, all of
mankind will be impoverished. Justice for Rwanda will
quite simply be the triumph of human rights. It is
essential to bring to trial those suspected of genocide.
That is why we hail the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda; that work must
continue, and it must be strengthened. Even though the
number of judgements that the International Criminal
Tribunal has handed down so far remains insufficient,
we are encouraged by the work that the Tribunal has
accomplished. This is certainly not the time to reduce
its capacities; it is the time to build them up.

Rwanda supports efforts to reorganize the Court's
services. We welcome the Prosecutor's investigative
efforts, even though the number of arrests of suspected
ge'nocidaires is insufficient compared with the number
of those responsible for genocide who are scattered
about the globe. We assure the Prosecutor of our
complete cooperation. We also support an increase in
the number of judges with a view to expediting trials.
Further, Rwanda is particularly pleased by
reorganization efforts and by the various programmes
established by the Registry. None the less, it would be
good for that service to attach high importance to the
following consideration.

The Tribunal's programme of information on its
mandate and activities should reach the great majority
of the population. If possible, a radio station could
broadcast information on justice in general. In this way,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda would
be better understood by the population.

Initiatives for assistance to potential witnesses
should be increased and extended to the whole country.
Rwanda has long been very concerned about the
situation of witnesses before, during and after trial. The
reorganization of the witness protection service
responds to these needs. We hope that not only will the
physical safety of witnesses be truly ensured; in
addition, we must not forget their mental state,
especially during cross-examination by the lawyers for
defence. The case of widows who faint on the witness
stand speaks eloquently to this.

It is urgent also to provide access to AIDS
medication for those who were rape victims at the time
of the genocide. Let us remember that they are slowly
dying. We know that those who raped them and are
now held in Arusha have free access to AIDS
medication.

We encourage the Tribunal's recruitment of
Rwandans, but at the same time, we appeal for greater
care in the choice of persons recruited. That would
prevent the abusive sharing of fees among the defence
counsels and detainees or the hiring of individuals
suspected of genocide, of which there have been
instances.

This justice so indispensable for the
reconciliation of Rwandans would carry greater weight
if the headquarters of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda were based in Rwanda. We are
aware that is our obligation to facilitate the activities of
the Tribunal. But it is hard for us to understand the
desire to locate the Court's headquarters in Arusha.
The reasons stated in 1994 no longer seem relevant.
There are many reasons to transfer the headquarters of
the Court: a reduction of the travel expenses of staff
and witnesses; the speeding up of investigations and
trials - especially when we will soon be starting the
gachacha hearings and when a great deal of
information will be brought before the Court; and a
better awareness of the Tribunal's work among the
wider population, which would greatly contribute to
our policy of unity and reconciliation. We recall that in
Rwanda, justice appears more pedagogical than
punitive.

It would be very difficult to talk about justice and
reconciliation without considering compensation for
the victims. It is our duty to ensure that the survivors of
the genocide are compensated. We want to see the
victims who survived the genocide participate more
fully in the activities of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and we especially hope that the
Court will have greater latitude in taking decisions
granting compensation to victims.

Please recall that in Rwanda, beyond the
divisions of foreign origin, a people was murdered.
Mothers and young women were raped. Children were
slaughtered. So that a people can never again be
massacred in silence, help us to continue this work of
justice, unity and reconciliation: justice for the accused
but also justice for the victims.

I wish to conclude by emphasizing that the
criticism of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda must be taken as constructive criticism and not
an attempt to denigrate the work of courageous
individuals attentive to the mission entrusted to them.

