Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We very much welcome this
annual debate on peacekeeping and the implementation
of resolution 2378 (2017), which takes place within
the context of our collective efforts to strengthen
peacekeeping and move from words to action in making
peace operations fit for the twenty-first century. I want
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for sharing her very
important perspective and the important work that she
and her organization do.

I believe that this is an appropriate occasion to pay
tribute to the thousands of women and men peacekeepers
who do a tremendously important and courageous job
every day in implementing decisions by the Security
Council, often in complex and dangerous circumstances.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the observer of the
European Union.

We stand firmly behind the Secretary-General's
reform agenda, while putting prevention and sustaining
peace at the heart of our efforts. We also strongly support
the Secretary-General's action plan for peacekeeping
initiative to strengthen global partnerships. Its
holistic approach, in which performance together with
peacebuilding, partnerships, people and politics form
the basis, will make United Nations delivery more
effective and efficient on the ground, but that requires
that the United Nations as a whole be able to engage
flexibly and effectively throughout the conflict cycle,
from prevention to transition. Peacekeeping is one of
the most effective instruments available in that regard
and a crucial means to protect civilians and create
conditions for successful political processes. It is also
our most costly and exposed instrument, and it will
be truly effective only if all other parts of the system
fall into place. Today, I will focus on three aspects
that we find particularly important to the discussion
on peacekeeping and performance, namely, situational
awareness, strong leadership and accountability of
our peacekeepers.

First, for the Council to be able to engage effectively
in conflict prevention, management and resolution,
access to candid and timely information and analysis
is critical. That is also crucial for ensuring the safety
and security of both peacekeepers and civilians. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to
streamline and coordinate information and situational
awareness within the Secretariat and encourage
the continued implementation of the new policy on
peacekeeping intelligence.

Secondly, the Secretary-General's reform agenda
foresees a greater delegation of authority to the field.
That, together with the multidimensional nature
of peace operations, requires well-prepared and
cohesive leadership on the ground. Crisis management
situations also require clearly defined roles and chains
of command.

Thirdly, making peacekeeping more effective and
efficient is a shared responsibility between troop- and
police-contributing countries, Member States, the
United Nations and host States. It also requires a broad
approach to performance encompassing military, police
and civilian personnel. We welcome the development of
a comprehensive performance policy on peacekeeping.
Harmonized and integrated standards and guidelines
are crucial in the field. In addition, enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, not least of which the African Union, is
important for increased effectiveness. Uniformed units
must have the right training, skills and equipment to
be able to protect civilians as well as themselves and
to deliver on mandates. We need to hold troop- and
police-contributing countries accountable in that regard
but also support predeployment training, including
in human rights and international humanitarian law.
Sweden, as a contributing country, will continue to
take full responsibility for its units so that they are
fully trained and equipped to meet the challenges that
they face in their peacekeeping missions. We also
commit to continue our support to other troop- and
police-contributing countries through training and
capacity-building.

Experience clearly shows that women's participation
in peacekeeping missions increases operational
effectiveness and performance. Women's participation
and active engagement in peace processes and
peacebuilding are also crucial for achieving sustainable
peace. We must all step up our efforts and deliver on
promises to include more women in those processes
and in our missions. We also stress the importance
of the full implementation of the human rights due
diligence policy, the human rights screening policy and
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. Those are all important measures for preventing
violence and abuse in connection to peacekeeping, and,
as such, they contribute to strengthening the legitimacy
of United Nations operations. Cases of abuse, such as
those we heard during Sarah Blakemore's testimony
here today, are unacceptable and must be followed up
both for the victims and to ensure accountability for
individual perpetrators.

Lastly, in two weeks' time the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations will be adopted. We will endorse the
Declaration and call on others to do the same. We
believe that the performance of peacekeeping can be
improved if we all live up to our joint commitments and
the implementation of the Declaration.

