Mr. Kumar (India): We would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this open debate. It
not only allows us to focus on the multidimensional and
evolving threat from the foreign terrorist fighters; it
also underscores the need to correctly contextualize the
problem and build the right narrative in order to ensure
sustained focus to address this challenge. It must be
mentioned that while the current intensity of focus on
foreign terrorist fighters, including in resolution 2178
(2014), is rather recent, the threat itself is of some
vintage.

Foreign terrorist fighters are only one facet of
the broader challenge of international terrorism.
Nevertheless, it is one that needs to be addressed,
and the Security Council is to be commended for
establishing a new legal and normative framework for
doing so. The foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon is
a manifestation of international terrorism's growing
threat to international peace and security. It is evidence
that the terrorism supply chain, including radicalization,
recruitment, financing, planning and communication,
is global.
The resilience and evolution of the threat also
underscore the fact, as we have maintained and
advocated all along, that we must eschew segmented
and partial approaches. In addition to responding
to specific aspects of the foreign terrorist fighters
phenomenon globally, we need to comprehensively
address the twin challenges of the sophisticated
worldwide economic and operational infrastructure of
terrorism, and interlinkages among the global terror
networks.

Internationally, the emerging dimensions of
the foreign terrorist fighters threat also give acute
relevance to the global agenda on countering terrorism,
as universally agreed under the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy of 2006 and its review
held earlier this year. More than anything else, they
underscore the need for a comprehensive international
normative framework to combat terrorism. We feel that
the time is ripe for us to make expeditious progress
and conclude the draft Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism that we piloted in 1996. We
cannot permit ourselves the luxury of endless theoretical
debate. The price we will pay for procrastination will
be in human lives. The General Assembly needs to
come to a consensus agreement on a comprehensive
convention to outlaw international terrorism.

In addition, given various facets of the foreign
terrorist fighters challenge, including its transnational
nature, and the fact that no country is isolated
from this threat, robust international cooperation
with clear operational modalities - including for
information-sharing, tracking travel routes, recruitment
networks, communication methods and financing
channels is an imperative that we all need to pursue
with focus and vigour. It is also necessary for States to
ensure that their territories are not used to indoctrinate,
train, equip and finance the terrorists. We also need to
work both individually and collectively to challenge
and repudiate the terrorist narrative. We condemn
terrorism and believe that no cause or grievance can
justify taking recourse to terrorism.

 

We in India remain concerned about the foreign
terrorist fighters phenomenon and its impact on
security of countries internationally. We believe that
it is important to address this challenge in the larger
context of terrorism and are taking such steps as are
necessary to deal with it. Just yesterday, the Global
Counterterrorism Forum adopted the Hague-Marrakech
Memorandum on Good Practices for a More Effective
Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon.

Resolution 2178 (2014), which the Security Council
has adopted today, is far-reaching. It should provide
a framework for collective and individual action to
address the menace of foreign terrorist fighters, setting
out a permanent obligation for all Member States. We
hope it will be followed up and effectively implemented.
The international community has to back its words with
deeds. The resolution is a useful addition to the legal
framework to deal with the scourge of terrorism.

