Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to express our sincere thanks to
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his briefing. We assure him of our full
support in his efforts. We would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his briefing.

We align ourselves with the other members of
the Security Council who have condemned in the
strongest terms the attacks last Saturday against the
two ARAMCO facilities, Abqaiq and Khurais, in the
sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. These attacks are a
stark violation of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. We emphasize our full support for
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and all the measures it
has taken to ensure its safety, stability and territorial
integrity. Attacks of this kind necessitate the activation
of the arms-embargo measures pursuant to relevant
Security Council resolutions.

In my statement I would like to address two
main issues: the political developments and the
humanitarian developments.

With regard to political developments, nine months

have elapsed since the entry into force of the Stockholm
Agreement. In that period we have seen continued
stalemate and a lack of any tangible progress. However,
the Redeployment Coordination Committee continues
to hold its meetings, and the parties are still abiding
by the provisions of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement,
in particular the activation of the de-escalation and
ceasefire mechanisms. This is very encouraging, as it
helps to build trust, assists in implementing the different
stages of the Agreement as provided for in the concept
of operations, allows for the making ofa tangible move
forward in creating an environment of trust between
the two parties leading to the implementation of the
agreements on the exchange of prisoners, detainees and
the forced disappeared and on Taiz understandings,
which has been under siege for more than four years.

We express our concern about the latest
developments in a number of areas in southern Yemen.
We look forward to the concerted efforts of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in hosting talks in Jeddah
between the representatives of the Yemeni Government
and representatives of the Southern Transitional
Council. We hope that such talks will lead to the return
of security and stability and thereby maintaining the
unity and sovereignty of Yemen.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, its
repercussions are worsening the crisis in Yemen,
especially with such imminent challenges as food
scarcity, the spread of epidemics and continuous
impediments that obstruct humanitarian assistance.
We renew our appeal to all parties to cooperate with
humanitarian relief agencies, refrain from imposing any
restrictions on, or placing obstacles to, their movement
and ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.

We would like as well to express our concern on a
subject Mr. Lowcock just raised, that is, the inability of
employees of certain non-governmental organizations
to reach some areas in the north of the country. We
also express our deep concern of what he mentioned
about the inability of United Nations to reach the FSO
SAFER oil tanker in Ras Isa, to undertake the necessary
assessments and verification of the situation, which
portends a grave environmental crisis in the Red Sea.

In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast position that
there is no military solution to this crisis. We renew our
call on all Yemeni parties to fully implement the three
elements of the Stockholm Agreement and to support
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to reach a political solution based on the three agreed-
upon terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015). That would lead to an end to
this crisis, preserve the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Yemen and prevent any
interference in its internal affairs.

