Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China abstained in the voting on resolution 2547 (2020), on the rollover of the technical mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), primarily for the following reasons. First, the resolution failed to respond to the dire situation prevailing in Haiti. According to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/944), Haiti is still mired in a political deadlock, and the Haitian people face a deteriorating security environment and worsening livelihoods. The political, economic and social crisis in Haiti, far from being alleviated, has shown signs of worsening further. Various parties unanimously expressed concern over the situation in Haiti during the Council's discussions held on 5 October (see S/2020/979). The Council, in adopting a mere technical rollover resolution, has failed to demonstrate the importance that it attaches to the current grim situation in Haiti. It has not satisfied the concerns of the countries in the region. It has failed to send a strong message and to live up to its responsibilities. Secondly, the draft resolution failed to take account of China's constructive views and the consensus of all parties. China took an active part in the consultations on the draft and put forward constructive and highly consensual amendments with popular support, embodying such ideas as promoting human rights, reducing violence, protecting civilians, implementing good governance, combating corruption and conducting free, fair, transparent and credible presidential elections. Regrettably, the penholder turned a deaf ear to those constructive suggestions, and China's legitimate concerns and consensus among all parties were therefore not fully reflected in the draft. To achieve stability in the country, ultimately Haiti can rely only on itself. We urge the Haitian Government and the various factions in Haiti to abide by a people-centred approach, put aside their differences, enhance mutual trust and reach a political solution through inclusive dialogue and extensive consultations. It is hoped that BINUH will intensify efforts and make more progress in pushing for dialogue between the Government and the opposition in Haiti, while stepping up political mediation and promoting peace through development. For its part, China stands ready to work with the members of the Council to continue to support BINUH in implementing its mandate and play a positive role in promoting stability and development in Haiti.
