We thank Germany, the President of the Security Council for this month, for convening today's open debate via video-teleconference on peace operations and human rights. Over the past seven decades, United Nations peace operations have evolved as an important tool for the international community to respond to armed conflicts that threaten international peace and security. The mandates of United Nations peace operations have become increasingly complex over the years. United Nations missions are progressively called upon to facilitate political processes by promoting dialogue and reconciliation, protecting civilians and their human rights, and assisting in restoring the rule of law. Such robust mandates call for greater calibration of their terms of engagement in the field, the availability of adequate resources and clear and unambiguous recognition of the threats they face while performing their duties. It is well recognized that all United Nations peace operations contribute to promoting respect for, and protection of, human rights through the fulfilment of their respective mandates. We need to understand the linkage between United Nations peace operations and human rights in the context of the specific mandate with which they are entrusted. It is therefore all the more important that the mandates of peace operations, whether with an explicit human rights component or not, remain context-specific. Protection-of-civilian mandates in peace operations envisage working with the host Government and humanitarian actors to identify threats to civilians, implement existing prevention and response plans, and strengthen civil-military cooperation and joint planning. While the Council has been proactive in issuing such mandates, much remains to be desired with regard to clear terms of engagement and resource allocation for field operations. It goes without saying that all United Nations peace operations are conducted with full respect for human rights. There should be zero tolerance for human rights abuses by United Nations personnel. United Nations personnel engaged in peace operations must be adequately trained and prepared to respond appropriately to human rights violations and abuses in accordance with their mandate and their competence. The use of force must be employed in accordance with necessity and proportionality and, above all, without endangering the cardinal principle of impartiality. Observing those principles comes with obvious operational challenges, especially in situations where the non-State actors do not follow any principles, let alone those relating to human rights rules and norms. The Security Council must therefore be doubly careful in entrusting responsibilities to the peace operations. Overloading mandates runs the risk of compromising their effectiveness and credibility. Protecting the protectors is a key aspect that should be accorded due importance. India has been a major contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations over past several decades. We wish to highlight several points based on our experience as a major troop- and police-contributing country. First, on the question of training, the Centre for United Nations Peacekeeping, in New Delhi, is providing predeployment training to all personnel prior to their induction, covering various aspects of human rights pertaining to the mission environment. Those training modules are approved by the Integrated Training Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United Nations. Secondly, detailed screening of personnel is carried out to confirm that they have not been involved in any kind of misconduct. Thirdly, in-mission training on human rights issues is being conducted in the field, focusing on the practical aspects of conducting peace operations while keeping in view the human rights perspective. It has been our experience that military peacekeepers' knowledge of various aspects of fieldcraft is critical in assessing, observing and responding to human rights violations by armed actors across the spectrum. The Indian contingents and military observers are engaged in sharing information and escorting human rights teams. Contingents are maintaining area domination to facilitate the unimpeded operation of humanitarian agencies, while observers are undertaking joint field verification and reporting, in accordance with their mandates. The presence of military peacekeepers in the field and access to local armed forces provide them with a unique comparative advantage and makes them a key partner in recording relevant human rights information. Their task, however, becomes extremely challenging if there are competing and multiple subcomponents of the mandate with limited resources. Going forward, we would also like to highlight some gaps that need to be addressed in order to maintain the credibility, legitimacy and effectiveness of United Nations peace operations. While adequate predeployment training is already being provided to troops and experts, given the dynamic nature of peacekeeping missions, what is needed is more focused situation-based in-mission training once they are deployed. In addition, effective coordination must be established both at strategic and tactical levels between human rights components and their civilian and uniformed colleagues. Mandates must be reprioritized after an assessment of the situation on the ground and adequate resources must be provided to support all mission components. Respecting and protecting human rights in United Nations peace operations is non-derogable. It is not a question of whether but how. The Council needs a better understanding of the operational challenges on the ground in order to enable United Nations peace operations to deliver on their mandates, which seek to promote human rights.
