Mrs. Simvura (Burundi) (spoke in French): First
of all, I should like to convey to you, Madam
President, the apologies of Her Excellency
Ms. Antoinette Batumubwira, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Burundi. For reasons beyond
her control, she was obliged to leave the Chamber in
order to catch her flight this afternoon. She requested
that I read out the following message to the Council.

"Permit me at the outset to express the
regrets of His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Burundi, who is unable to attend this
meeting. The President, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
requested that I wish you, Madam President,
every success in this meeting and express
Burundi's commitment to work within the United
Nations and the African Union for regional and
international peace and security.

"Burundi's presence at this meeting, and its
commitment to strengthen the relationship
between the United Nations Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council,
are based on three considerations.

"First, since 1 April 2008, Burundi has been
a member of the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Therefore, the Government of
Burundi is preparing to contribute to that
important task with every means at its disposal.

"Secondly, over the past 15 years, Burundi
has benefited from the support and assistance of
the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, and of the African Union, in particular
its Peace and Security Council.

"In that regard, our experience as a country
that has seen the deployment of Organization of
African Union observer missions and the African
Union Mission in Burundi, followed by the
United Nations Operation in Burundi, equips us
today to make a valuable contribution to the
analyses and debates on issues relating to joint
efforts between the United Nations and the
African Union aimed at restoring and maintaining
peace. Beginning with peacekeeping efforts by
the United Nations and the African Union,
Burundi has now moved on to the peacebuilding
phase. In that connection as well, Burundi's
contribution will be enriched by our experience.

"Thirdly, and finally, our participation in
this meeting is relevant because Burundi is taking
part in peacekeeping operations in Africa. A
Burundian national defence force battalion is now
in Somalia as part of the African Union Mission
in Somalia. A second battalion is preparing to
deploy to Somalia. Although we have been
saddened by the death of a soldier in that
operation, the Government of Burundi continues
to believe that it has a duty to contribute in this
way to peace on our continent, all the more so
because our country has enjoyed the support of
many African countries and countries from other
continents. In that regard, I wish in particular to
refer to the large South African contingent that
has already contributed a great deal in the
context, initially, of African Union and,
subsequently, of United Nations peacekeeping
efforts in Burundi. Our military and police
officers are also participating in observer
missions in Darfur and Cote d'Ivoire. Burundi
also plans to send troops to Chad.

"It is in the light of all these considerations
that the Government of Burundi is here today. We
hope that the draft resolution to be adopted at the
end of this meeting of the Security Council on
Cooperation with the African Union will enjoy
the full political and financial support necessary
for its implementation. At stake is the credibility
of our two organizations - and, more so, that of
our overriding commitment to maintain regional
and international peace and security."

