Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, please allow me to join the previous speakers in
commending the initiative and leadership of China to
convene today's important meeting.

Ensuring peace and security on the African
continent is a high priority of the international
community. United Nations peacekeeping operations
in Africa account for the largest portions of both the
budget and personnel of United Nations peacekeeping
operations as a whole. At the same time, the Security
Council has been scaling-up efforts to strengthen its
strategic partnership with the African Union (AU).
This partnership is duly recognized as a model regional
arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In addition, the African Union is
increasingly serving as a first responder to crises in
Africa before United Nations missions take over, as
seen with the African missions in Burundi, the Sudan,
Mali and the Central African Republic. The United
Nations and the African Union have also deployed a
landmark hybrid operation in Darfur.

As a result of such joint efforts, we are achieving
notable progress in securing peace and security in
Africa. However, many countries on the continent still
face daunting challenges that have become increasingly
complex, transboundary and asymmetrical in nature.
These include terrorism and violent extremism,
transnational organized crime, climate change and
migration crises, among others. It is becoming apparent
that the United Nations simply cannot tackle such
multifaceted challenges alone. The United Nations
needs to work with all relevant stakeholders, including
Member States, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, the private sectors
and civil society.

Against this backdrop, I would now like to highlight
the following three points to provide a way forward
in our collective efforts to enhance the capacities of
African countries in promoting peace and security.

First, the United Nations should respect the
ownership of African countries in maintaining peace
and security on the continent, while helping them,
the African Union and subregional organizations to
scale-up their relevant capacities. At the operational
level, the African Union has proven its commitment
and effectiveness through its peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore, the AU has been moving forward to show
its potential as a reliable partner at the strategic level
too, as exemplified by its pledge to finance 25 per
cent of its future peace operations through the African
Union Peace Fund and the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative.

Wemustalsohighlightthe importance ofsubregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the East African Community,
given that they have played critical roles in mediation,
prevention and the resolution of tensions. However,
while our African partners should take the lead
in promoting their own peace and security, the
international community must help with predictable and
sustainable resources. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea has steadily increased its financial contribution
to the African Union through the AU Peace Fund and
the Korea-AU Cooperation Fund in recent years.

Secondly, we need to pursue a comprehensive and
integrated approach in order to achieve sustainable
peace and development in Africa. The challenges we
collectively face are difficult to solve with static ideas
and singular responses. Unless the root causes are
addressed through all stages of crises and conflicts, we
will not achieve lasting peace and prosperity. In this
connection, the concept of sustaining peace, as defined
and elaborated by the historic twin General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions 70/261 and 2282
(2016) in April last year, offers a way forward.

At the same time, the activities of the diverse
stakeholders - including the African Union, the
African Development Bank, the World Bank, civil
societies and the private sectors - need to be better
implemented in a coordinated and collaborative manner
to ensure synergy moving forward. In this context,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can play an
important role by using its convening power to mobilize
and coordinate various stakeholders. As the Chair of the
PBC this year, the Republic of Korea has been working
to proactively leverage its unique convening power to
help The Gambia and the countries in the Sahel region
to build and sustain peace in their respective countries
and region. In addition, we have been making efforts
to strengthen the PBC's partnership with international
financial institutions, including the World Bank.

As part of such efforts, recently a PBC delegation
visited the World Bank in Washington, DO, and the
PBC annual session in 2017 focused on partnership for
financing and peace, and came up with an agreement
to hold a dialogue with the World Bank on an annual
basis. The Republic of Korea will continue to step up
these and other efforts throughout its tenure as the
PBC Chair, including a visit to the African Union later
this year.

Thirdly, we must bolster our efforts to listen to the
voices and grievances of local communities. As people
living in rural areas suffer disproportionally from
the instability caused by violent extremism, armed
groups and ethnic clashes, we must do more to amplify
their voices and note their perspectives and concerns.
Indeed, if vulnerable people are not heard, protected,
or provided with the prerequisite levels of support to
ensure that they have every opportunity to thrive, they
are more easily at risk of falling into the exploitative
hands of armed groups, or being indoctrinated with
extremism and terrorism. In this regard, I would like to
encourage the United Nations to further strengthen its
strategic engagements with local communities. In fact,
the Republic of Korea is financially contributing to the
development of a planning framework for improved
engagement of communities and other actors by
peacekeeping missions.
Before closing, I would like to reiterate that the
Republic of Korea is committed to working closely
with the United Nations, African Member States and
organizations, as well as other key stakeholders, in
order to enhance peace and security in Africa.

