Mr. Jinga: At the outset, I wish to congratulate
the Republic of Korea, and Ambassador Cho Tae-yul
in particular, for the excellent work he did as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2017. As we
have just heard, under the leadership of the Republic
of Korea the Commission made good progress in
enhancing the effectiveness of the Peacebuilding
Commission and in improving its advisory role to
the Security Council. I wish to focus my intervention
on what the Commission has been doing this year to
continue on that positive track.

The Sahel region is a clear priority for our work
region. As was just mentioned by my predecessor, last
year the Security Council emphasized the importance
of the convening role of the PBC in mobilizing deeper
commitment and partnership among the United
Nations, the countries of Sahel and other international
and regional partners, with a View to advancing the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, in collaboration with the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. In
March I attended the sixth meeting of the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel in Chad. The
meeting stressed the need for a holistic approach
to address the multidimensional threats facing the
countries of the Sahel region and their people and
called on regional and international partners to act with
greater synergy and unity of purpose.

To further that objective, the Commission's annual
session, which is scheduled to take place in the fall
this year, will focus exclusively on the Sahel. The PBC
will bring together Member States, representatives of
countries of the Sahel, senior officials of the United
Nations, including the Secretary-General and Deputy
Secretary-General, and representatives of regional
organizations, international financial institutions
and civil society organizations. The purpose of that
important event will be to discuss ways of mobilizing
deeper commitments and partnerships in support of
efforts to build and sustain peace in the Sahel under
the umbrella of the updated Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Chambas,
will present in July.

The annual session is a good example of how the
convening role of the PBC can improve its advisory
role. It is through its engagement with all the relevant
stakeholders to discuss broad peacebuilding issues
that the PBC can provide comprehensive advice to
the relevant United Nations bodies and support their
deliberations. To do that in an effective way, the
Commission will further enhance its working methods
and strengthen cooperation with key partners. With
regard to the advisory role of the PBC to the Council,
most important - and I wish to support a point raised
earlier by my predecessor - the Commission must
better time its calendar of work based on the activities
of the Security Council. Early preparation is key if
we wish to provide strategic advice to the Council, if
requested, when possibl a couple of weeks ahead of
Security Council meetings on specific issues. At the
same time, the PBC must submit advice to the Security
that would complement advice the Council receives
from other sources.

The Commission is also working towards further
strengthening its relationship with the African Union.
On 18 July, on the margins of the Security Council
meeting with the African Union Peace and Security
Council, the PBC will convene a joint event with the
Peace and Security Council to explore opportunities
for collaboration.

Its engagement with the Gambia is another
important area of work for the Commission. Upon
the request of the Government of the Gambia, the
PBC continues to provide a forum for the country
to engage with the international community. Two
months ago we convened a high-level meeting,
chaired by the State Secretary of Romania, as Chair
of the PBC, which was attended by the President and
the Minister of Finance of the Gambia, the European
Union Commissioner for International Cooperation
and Development, the President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States,
the Permanent Observer of the African Union, as
well as senior officials of the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and the Peacebuilding Support Office. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the Gambia to present
its peacebuilding priorities ahead of the successful
International Conference for the Gambia, which took
place in Brussels last May, and demonstrated once again
the convening role of the Peacebuilding Commission.

In addition, the existing country-specific
configurations - for Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra
Leone - continue to do important work in support
of longer-term peacebuilding and sustaining peace
strategies. At the beginning of this week, the PBC
held a substantive meeting at which we heard reports
from the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
and a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support on progress in enhancing
synergies between PBC and Peacebuilding Fund.

Lastly, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing the informal interactive dialogue that will
take place today. A discussion on the advisory role
that the PBC can play when the Council is considering
the formulation, review or drawdown of peacekeeping
operations and special political mission mandates is
very timely and important. I look forward to a fruitful
discussion and to further strengthening the relationship
between Council and Commission.

