Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to join others in welcoming High Representative
Ashton to the Council today, and I thank her very much
for her remarks. The European Union (EU) remains an
indispensable partner to the United Nations and to the
United States. It is an important leader in international
efforts to address the world's most pressing challenges.
Today's briefing illustrates the considerable benefits
that strong United Nations partnerships with regional
organizations can generate in the interest of advancing
our goals of international peace and security.

I would like to highlight four areas that we find
most noteworthy. First, the United States appreciates
the EU's leadership in promoting stability in the
European region. The EU has played a very important
role in assisting Kosovo and Serbia in normalizing
relations through dialogue, bringing together Prime
Ministers Dacie and Thaci for discussions as well as
facilitating the historic meeting between Presidents
Nikolic' and Jahjaga.

We agree with High Representative Ashton that
that dialogue has produced concrete results that will
promote stability in the region. A resolution of the
differences between Kosovo and Serbia will allow both
countries to move forward on their respective European
paths. We also welcome the efforts of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in helping to
strengthen Kosovo's institutions.

We also commend the EU for its ongoing engagement
in Georgia, particularly through its monitoring
mission. We appreciate the joint efforts of the United
Nations, the EU and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) over the past several
years to help create space for direct dialogue between
Georgia and Russia to address outstanding concerns
and normalize relations. And we deeply appreciate the
EU's contribution to peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through the Security Council-mandated
European Union-led peacekeeping force.

Secondly, the United States welcomes the EU's
efforts to advance peace and security beyond Europe.
The Iranian nuclear issue remains a matter of serious
concern for the entire world. We must continue to
consult and work together to ensure that Iran cooperates
seriously with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), comes clean about its past and present nuclear
activities and reassures the international community
about its nuclear programme, including by complying
with relevant Security Council resolutions and its
nuclear safeguards obligations.

We are pleased that the Iranian negotiating team
has confirmed that the next round of talks between the
five plus one group and Iran will take place in Almaty
on 26 February. We appreciate the critical role that High
Representative Ashton has played in our diplomacy
to address that issue. It is time for Iran to discuss
substance, and we hope the talks will make concrete
progress regarding the international community's
concerns about the nature of Iran's nuclear programme.

Also, we greatly appreciate High Representative
Ashton's statement that the European Union strongly
condemns the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
latest nuclear test and urges that country to refrain from
further provocative actions. The United States will
continue to take the steps required to defend ourselves
and our allies. We will strengthen close coordination
with allies and partners and work with our Six-Party
Talks partners, the Security Council and other United
Nations Member States to pursue firm action.

The EU is also a valued partner in the Middle East
peace efforts, including as a member of the Quartet,
which supports a comprehensive resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. We remain committed to working
with our EU partners, including through the Quartet,
to encourage the parties to create an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of direct negotiations
without preconditions. Only through direct negotiations
between the parties can Palestinians and Israelis address
all permanent status issues and achieve the peace that
both deserve.

Turning to Syria, we fully share the concerns
expressed by High Representative Ashton regarding
the ongoing violence, grave humanitarian rights abuses
and war crimes, and we agree that the international
community must come together to help end the
suffering of the people of Syria. The United States
joins the EU in continuing its support for the efforts of
Joint Special Representative Brahimi to find a durable
political solution to the crisis in Syria.

Thirdly, the United States welcomes the EU's
commitment to provide technical assistance to bolster
security and development in societies emerging
from conflict. In Afghanistan, the EU's expertise
on policing issues has been critical in assisting
Afghanistan in establishing and training an effective
civilian police force. The EU's efforts complement the
work of the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the United States and other international
actors working with Afghanistan to promote a stronger
political, security, economic and social future for the
Afghan people.

In Mali, the United States welcomes the EU's
pledge to provide financial and logistical support to
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
through the African Peace Facility. We commend
the EU for its commitment through the EU training
mission in Mali to train the Malian defence and
security forces, with an emphasis on civilian oversight,
the protection of civilians and respect for human rights.
And we welcome the EU's efforts, in coordination with
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other partners,
to resolve Mali's interrelated political and security
challenges through the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali.

In the wider region, the EU strategy for security
and development in the Sahel, which is focused on
capacity-building and countering violent extremism,
complements the United States regional approach,
including through the Trans-Sahara Counter-Terrorism
Partnership, to strengthen the capacity of Governments
across the Sahel to better address threats to peace and
security.

Finally, we strongly support the EU's efforts to
promote and protect human rights, both in its bilateral
engagements and through the United Nations. The
United States shares the EU's commitment to promoting
and protecting the fundamental human freedoms, such
as freedom of expression, combating gender-based
discrimination and violence, and promoting the rights
of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender individuals.
Respect for human rights is the cornerstone of stable
democratic societies and essential to regional and
international peace and security.

In closing, the United States reiterates its
commitment to working with the European Union in
support of United Nations principles and activities
in the maintenance of peace and security around the
world.

