The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Buyoya for his briefing.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today's meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/27.
It was so decided.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Chad.

At the outset, I would like to add my voice to that
of the Secretary-General in expressing my condolences
to the people and Government of Pakistan, who once
again have fallen Victims to terrorist barbarism.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative
of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, for their
statements.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the main responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Charter also envisages, in Chapter VIII, partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) has often been discussed
in Security Council debates. It is still relevant - I
would even say strategic. How could it be otherwise
between the Security Council, which is responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and Africa, which unfortunately is the stage for most
conflicts and where many United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed?

Chad commends the progress made in the
partnerships between the two institutions. We believe
that the two organizations are complementary and
pursue the same goals with regard to issues of peace
and security. By way of illustration, I would cite
certain axes of the focus of the cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union concerning
peacekeeping operations. At the institutional level, we
note the cooperation on various aspects of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, and specifically the
early warning system, preventive diplomacy, mediation,
electoral assistance, the maintenance of peace and
addressing issues of post-conflict reconstruction. We
would like to strengthen this cooperation in particular
by improving exchanges of information and joint
assessments.

We encourage the Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security of the African Union and the United Nations
to step up its efforts in order to establish a common
understanding of the causes and motives of conflict
in Africa and to promote a joint approach to resolving
them. We also encourage the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council to consider
ways to strengthen their partnership in the areas of
conflict prevention, settlement and management and
peacekeeping operations. We propose that they venture
to work together towards an armed conflict-free Africa
by 2020, in accordance with the solemn declaration
made on the occasion of the AU's fiftieth anniversary.
In the same vein, we urge both Councils to resolve the
conflicts in Libya, northern Mali, Darfur, the Central
African Republic, South Sudan, the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia as a matter of
priority.

Given those conflicts, it is important that we
meet together the new waves of challenges, which are
terrorism, extreme violence and organized transnational
crime, in particular in West and Central Africa, the
Sahel, the Maghreb and the Horn of Africa. In this
regard, the United Nations must consider the possibility
of instituting a five-year plan to support efforts aimed at
achieving those objectives. In addition, it is important to
support the Panel of the Wise of the African Union and
to strengthen cooperation for the good offices among
the envoys of the two organizations. In addition, as the
ten-year programme to strengthen the AU's capacities
is set to end in 2016, the United Nations and the AU
should accelerate the work carried out in the Joint Task
Force that was established at the fifteenth meeting of
the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa in
order to design a successor programme that could take
on the African Union's Agenda 2063.

With regard to transitions, we welcome the support
provided by the United Nations, and in particular its
African Union offices for the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
(MISCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We urge the offices to continue to support the planning
and management of the onset, deployment and operation
of African Union missions and to make communication
between the two organizations more effective in

preparation for the possible transfer of responsibilities
to the United Nations.

We are anxiously waiting to see what lessons may
be learned from the transition of the two African Union
operations to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and the specific recommendations that could provided
to inform future transitions.

We should keep in mind that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
in the Sudan, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), MISCA and MINUSCA were first
initiated by African regional economic communities
and the African Union. The Security Council
intervened later to take up the baton. Besides this, these
organizations' approach to imposing peace, unlike
classic peacekeeping, seems to be bearing fruit on the
continent. We all remember the prowess of the Rapid
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and AMISOM's success in Somalia against
Al-Shabaab. We should also consider ways and means
for bringing peace, since we are beginning to realize
that there is less and less peace to keep. The partnership
between the two organizations should therefore also
be looking at information from the various operations
being conducted in Africa and adapting to the changing
situation.

Concerning the financing of operations undertaken
under United Nations mandate, concrete measures
designed to make their arrangements more predictable,
lasting and flexible have been proposed by the
African Union-United Nations Panel of Experts led by
Mr. Romano Prodi. The fact is that the two financing
mechanisms are based on voluntary contributions,
used for financing capacity-building, and obligatory
contributions levied by the United Nations for financing
Security Council peacekeeping operations. We deplore
the Council's refusal to take the slightest step forward
in how this is implemented, as demonstrated by
the positions taken by some delegations during the
negotiations for resolution 2167 (2014), introduced by
Rwanda, and the presidential statement we have just
adopted (S/PRST/2014/27). It appears that the Security
Council prefers staying with the status quo to moving
forward. That, in our View, is regrettable.

Regarding deployment when a crisis occurs, we
commend the AU Peace and Security Council for its
efforts to operationalize the African Standby Force and
its capacity for rapid deployment. We hope the AMANI
Africa II military exercises scheduled for 2015 will
enable it to prove its effective operationalization. Africa
must make good as soon as possible on the commitment
made at the AU Malabo summit of 26 and 27 June by
ensuring that the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises (ACIRC) is operational. ACIRC's
purpose is to provide the continent with a speedy
military capacity for intervention in conflict situations
as a short-term measure, creating the conditions for
a broader deployment of AU and/or United Nations
peacekeeping operations, while waiting for the African
Standby Force to become operational.

ACIRC is a significant step towards enabling Africa
to take on the task of providing its own security. It is
based on the willingness of Africa's leaders to produce
their own rapid response to crises on the continent. As
we speak, a forum is being held in Dakar on security in
Africa at which African leaders are considering ways
and means of activating mechanisms such as ACIRC
that can enable them to deal with multiple challenges.
That willingness has been demonstrated in the wake
of the crisis in Mali. At that time, owing to Africa's
inability to intervene to fight the drug traffickers,
terrorists and other jihadists who were heading for the
southern part of the country, non-African forces had
to intervene, despite the fact that it is up to Africans
to take on full responsibility for their security. It will
be important to know how the United Nations and its
partners can support that initiative in order to speed up
deployment of our forces during crises on the continent.
We welcome the significant role of the European Union
and the United States of America in their efforts to
support African Union operations, as well as the
China-African Union Strategic Dialogue for Peace and
Security in Africa.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the United Nations, which has spared no
effort to help grow the African Union's capacity. We
also thank the African Union for its contributions to
the maintenance of peace and security, particularly
in Somalia, the Sudan, Mali and the Central African
Republic, and in the fight against the Lord's Resistance
Army. We urge the United Nations and the AU to
take measures inspired within the framework of
the declaration of 2014-2024 as the Madiba Nelson
Mandela Decade of Reconciliation in Africa, in order
to put an end to conflicts on the continent. It is in the
international community's interests to cooperate with
Africa and participate in its rebirth.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the members of the Council.


