Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
extremely difficult to think of any arguments that are
compatible with the conscience of humankind when we
look at the failure of the international community to
deal with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We cannot
remain silent when the Palestinian people are not
enjoying the freedom they deserve and their rights are
being systematically violated. We have seen the effects
on the ground and we have seen the loss of life as a
result of the attacks that have occurred, which are a
violation of human rights.

We have reviewed the recently released Quartet
report and we believe that silence is unacceptable. But
we also agree that it is extremely important for us to
think about new approaches, new ways by which we
can revive the peace process and resolve the question
of Palestine.

The Palestinian people are suffering on a daily
basis. They have done so for more than 50 years now, and
that is unacceptable. There is no ethical argument that
can be put forward in support of the present situation.
It runs counter to human logic and international laws
and customs. There is very little hope left for the
Palestinian people.

The roots of the crisis affecting the Palestinian
people need to be recognized. The illegal occupation
must be recognized, and the international community
must make efforts to focus on the root causes of the
situation. We also need to focus on the consequences of
decades of occupation. The two-State solution, which
has been accepted by the Palestinians and the Israelis
alike and supported by the international community,
has fallen victim to the current situation. There have
been a number of factors that have hindered the two-
State solution. We would like to reiterate that it is a very
serious error to confuse or conflate the actual causes
of the conflict and to draw equivalencies between
the actions of the Palestinians and the actions of the
Israelis. The Palestinians have an inalienable right to
their freedom and they want to be able to have hope in
their daily lives.

I will not dwell on the effects of the occupation.
We are all well aware of those effects. I also will not
dwell on the determination of the occupying Power
to continue to engage in its settlement policy and to
occupy Palestinian lands. I am not going to dwell on
references to the new generations of Palestinians, who
have ever only known life behind segregation and who
live in isolation under the blockade in the Gaza Strip. I
will not dwell on the lack of respect for holy sites and
their inviolability.

I would like to talk about the scope for hope
and justice for the Palestinian people. Of course,
there have been attempts made by some to blame the
Palestinian people for the occupation, for which they
are not responsible. Palestinians are suffering from the
systematic impact of the occupation and the blockade.
We have seen Israel's systematic policy of settling
Palestinian lands and of separating the West Bank and
Gaza Strip, both geographically and politically. That
has only strengthened the extremists in their actions.

The Palestinian Authority has been unable to
control the situation. They recognize that the occupying
Power has a consistent policy that goes against the two-
State solution and the principles of peace. Allow me to
highlight what the Secretary-General has said in this
very Chamber:

(spoke in English)

cc

as oppressed peoples have demonstrated
throughout the ages, it is human nature to react
to occupation, which often serves as a potent
incubator of hate and extremism." (S/PV. 7610, p. 2)

(spoke in Arabic)

Today we are at a very critical juncture in the Middle
East. International efforts are necessary to resolve the
question of Palestine. Today, we have an opportunity to
again address that key issue in the region. We cannot
squander this opportunity. We must make real progress.
In that context, the Egyptian Government has issued
a call for a just and comprehensive peace between the
Palestinians and the Israelis.

I recall that there a firm and lasting peace has been
established between Egypt and Israel. I would also point
out that it is possible for the Israelis and Palestinians
to achieve the same type of peace. We want to see
an independent Palestine emerge in accordance with
existing international resolutions, and we believe that
the Palestinians and the Israelis should be guaranteed
the right to live in peace.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt therefore
recently made two visits, to Israel and to Palestine.
Egypt is striving to listen to and learn the viewpoints
of both sides in order to enable the parties to resume
negotiations. It is our hope that those efforts will be
successful. We believe that the settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which has raged for many decades
now, would have a very positive impact on the Middle
East region.

Furthermore, I would like to reaffirm that the
situation remains fragile. We have an opportunity here
that must be seized in order to establish peace between
Israel and Palestine, and ending the occupation of the
Palestinian territories would be key in that endeavour. I
also believe that the crisis affecting our Syrian brothers
and sisters must be resolved.
