Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): It is an honour
to have you chairing this meeting, Sir. It is also a great
honour for us to have heard the inspiring words of
President Ramos-Horta - not only his uplifting
account of Timor-Leste's extraordinary journey, but
also his reminder of the Council's heavy and noble
responsibility. We are sorry for his family bereavement
but blessed by his decision nevertheless to keep his
engagement with us.

Many thanks also go to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing today, and to all the personnel of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) for their continued contribution to the
stabilization of Timor-Leste. Allow me to express our
gratitude for all that they have achieved.

I would like to focus on three topics: first,
developments in Timor-Leste; secondly, the standard
that UNMIT's drawdown sets; and thirdly, the nature
of the United Nations presence once the mission has
left.
First, this will be a pivotal year for the future of
Timor-Leste and its people, who will be asked to elect
a President and a new Parliament. As Timor-Leste
works towards these important milestones, we are
pleased to note the consolidation of peace and stability
in the country, along with its encouraging economic
growth and development. The holding of free, fair and
accountable elections in March and June is important
for the future of Timor-Leste and its democratic
credentials. We commend the conduct of political
parties that have continued the calls for calm during
the elections and for refraining from potentially
inflammatory rhetoric.

The resumption of primary policing
responsibilities by the Timorese police force last year
has been a success. Again we note that there has been
no subsequent increase in violence in Timor-Leste as
we approach the one-year anniversary of that handover.
The national police can be proud of their achievements.

Turning to my second point, 2012 is also an
important year in Timor-Leste for United Nations
peacekeeping - a year which, we hope, will set a
standard for future peacekeeping-peacebuilding
transitions. Last year's handover of full policing
responsibility was a successful example of that in
action. Peace and security have prevailed and Timor-
Leste has remained stable.

We commend the development of the Joint
Transition Plan by the Government of Timor-Leste and
UNMIT, and hope that it can set a standard for future
peacekeeping-peacebuilding transitions, and an
example for others to follow, where the United Nations
and a host State produce a comprehensive, detailed
plan for safeguarding the future stability of a country,
supported by the Security Council.

It is important that this process succeed for its
own sake, and also to illustrate that the United Nations
and Member States can manage a process of transition
without jeopardizing stability. However, the
development of the Plan should not lead to
complacency, and we encourage UNMIT to pursue
rigorous scenario analysis and contingency planning,
including in advance of elections, in case conditions
for drawdown are not met or there is a change in the
security situation on the ground.

UNMIT's withdrawal will be a key test for the
United Nations in ensuring that its drawdown takes
place safely and effectively, while safeguarding
stability in Timor-Leste. While we hope and expect that
peace and security will prevail in the coming years, we

should also take this opportunity to reassure the
Government of Timor-Leste that the withdrawal of
UNMIT does not mean that the Security Council will
turn its back on the country.

This brings me to my third and final point on the
post-UNMIT United Nations presence. We sincerely
hope that the United Nations and the Government of
Timor-Leste will continue the cooperation that they
enjoyed in the development of the Joint Transition Plan
in order to present a clear proposal for the shape,
concept and objectives of the post-UNMIT United
Nations presence.

We need a timely decision among the options
contained in the Joint Transition Plan, drawing on the
input of the relevant United Nations agencies and the
international community. We need to ensure that tasks
and resources are allocated and configured to achieve
maximum efficiency and effectiveness. Objectives,
priorities and benchmarks to measure progress must be
clear, as must the criteria for success and withdrawal.
Our goal should be transition to a regular United
Nations country team presence as soon as is
realistically possible.

In the meantime, the transition from UNMIT to a
new form of United Nations presence will represent an
important milestone on the path of continued stability
and growth in Timor-Leste. We are also grateful to
President Ramos-Horta for his very tempting
invitation.

