Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset, on the occasion of the presentation of
the third report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (S/2008/330), to
express my heartfelt thanks to the Secretary-General
for the United Nations assistance from which my
country has benefited for some 15 years. My sincere
thanks go also to all members of the Security Council,
who are constantly following the developments in the
situation, and for the proposed solutions that they are
tirelessly providing. In addition, I wish to thank the
international community as a whole - all those who,
near or far away, observe and act when they deem it
useful.

My delegation takes note of the third report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi. That report, like the previous ones,
is very well documented and provides as many details
as possible on the developments in the situation,
supported by relatively convincing explanations. It is
full of information, just as the period covered has been
full of events, although we note some anachronisms
and contradictions.

From reading the report, one gets the impression
that the country is once again entering an infernal cycle
of violence, at a time when the international
community was expecting the re-establishment of
peace and recovery through a decisive mobilization
aimed at development. Undoubtedly, it was in the
context of fear and uncertainty caused by the attacks of
the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL) on
Bujumbura and a number of other areas that the report
was written against a background of pessimism.

Very fortunately, subsequent events have made it
possible to regain confidence and to look to the future
with greater optimism. Indeed, the FNL's long-awaited
return to the negotiation table and the resumption of
the work of the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism are reassuring both to Burundians
themselves and to the international community. Here, I
should like to thank all actors, particularly the Security
Council, the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi, the
South African mediation and the Peacebuilding
Commission, which did their utmost to make that
return possible.

However, that optimism may fade once again if
useful measures are not taken to consolidate the gains
already made, while we mobilize to achieve other
milestones in order to move decisively forward. We
cannot predict here the outcome of the negotiations
08-35110
under way. But, however they may develop, the
Security Council and the international community in
general must help us ensure that it will not be possible
to turn back. The spectre and the psychosis of a new
war must be banished forever. That will be possible if,
in particular, the Chairman of the FNL, Agathon
Rwasa, also returns to the country to take part in
political life.

Moreover, certain political parties that are
adopting a belligerent posture, even though they are no
longer supposed to be in the opposition, should be
brought to reason. The same applies to other political
parties or factions, groups and even individuals who -
hiding behind a constitution that is ill conceived and,
for the time being, impossible to revise - prefer to
sow disorder in order to test the Government.

We note other points in the report that are
deserving of our comments. We shall not dwell on
them here; there are other forums and many
opportunities to discuss them. We will address only
those related to institutional deadlock, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and transitional
justice.

In paragraph 91 of the report, we read, "All
political parties represented in Parliament are reminded
in this regard of their obligations to those who have
elected them, and to the country as a whole". That is
particularly true because many members of parliament
themselves do not know that they have a mandate from
the people. A number of them even seem to be unaware
of which political parties they belong to, even though
they were elected on closed lists of candidates
submitted by well-known political parties. Others have
simply left their parties and claim to be independent.
All of them are distorting good democratic practice.
We must find mechanisms to restore order and to
oblige everyone to act within a legal framework. If the
08-35110
constitution turns out to be an obstacle, then it will
have to be revised.

The threat to peace can also stem from
discontent, even from despair brought about by the
uncertainty faced by former soldiers and combatants,
who have returned to civilian life without sufficient
means to reintegrate into society. That is all entirely
true. That is why the Government is in the process of
knocking at every door in order to find additional
resources to take up the challenge of raising the living
standards of these people. Will it manage to do this?
Perhaps, if the appeals that it is making are heeded.

As concerns transitional justice, first of all it
should be acknowledged that judicial reform has not
yet achieved the desired results. Here we would like to
praise the substantial support that the Peacebuilding
Commission has given us in this regard, and we appeal
to all who wish to offer support and can do so to do the
same. We are thinking, in particular, of our partners
who promised funds during the round table held in
Bujumbura in May 2007, and would ask them to
discharge their obligations.

As for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
it has had some difficulty in getting started for several
reasons. The most plausible of those is that some
groups and individuals who are not prepared to face up
to the evidence against them prefer to confuse the issue
as they rush to obtain support against the process. We
would ask the United Nations to be cautious, because
some will seek to use it for that purpose.

