Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate at such a crucial time,
when popular protests and major political changes are
continuing in the Middle East. In addition, we do not
see any tangible progress in the Israeli-Palestinian
political process.

The Middle East remains at the centre of the
world's attention due to the recent well-known
revolutionary upheavals. Despite some undeniable
differences, these events have a great deal in common.
The causes behind them are based on Governments'
inability to adapt to new conditions of social
development and to carry out effective reforms. The
peoples and Governments of the region face not only
tremendous social and political challenges, but also
new opportunities and perspectives. We strongly
condemn the use of force against peaceful
demonstrations and urge all parties to show utmost
restraint. Kyrgyzstan, which has gone through similar
revolutionary changes recently, believes that the only
way to address these problems is through dialogue and
reforms.

Kyrgyzstan strongly calls for the resumption of
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations as soon as possible. In
this regard, we support the statement of the Middle
East Quartet of 20 May 2011 with an appeal to
overcome the current obstacles and resume direct
bilateral negotiations without delay. But we regret that
the most recent meeting of the Quartet, held on 11 July
in Washington, DC, ended without substantive
agreement. It is essential that a new meeting be held as
soon as possible to take active measures to promote the
negotiation process. We consider it important that this
process continue in order to find ways to achieve a
long-term settlement of the situation and to reach a
peace agreement providing for the coexistence of two
States in peace and security, in accordance with
2

previously defined and accepted parameters.
Kyrgyzstan hopes that the Quartet will play an active
role in finding a solution acceptable to all parties
concerned.

Kyrgyzstan favours the settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict through political diplomatic means
on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map of the Middle East Quartet. I would like to note
that the time to consider the accession of Palestine to
membership in the United Nations is rapidly
approaching, as we have discussed that issue at length
both informally and formally. In that regard,
Kyrgyzstan considers it extremely important to achieve
rapid progress in the peace process and to overcome
the current worrisome impasse. We also urge the
parties to demonstrate their strong will and unwavering
commitment to peace and to eliminate all obstacles
impeding the resumption of direct talks.

For us, it is quite obvious that the continuing
construction of Israeli settlements in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, and those regular announcements
of its expansion, will not contribute to an early solution
of the problem. Quite the contrary - at least as we
have seen from recent events - it leads to even greater
disturbances, escalating violence and civilian deaths.
Kyrgyzstan supports the implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions concerning Jerusalem and
calls for a stop to the building of Israeli settlements.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the peoples
of the Middle East have been suffering from conflict
and confrontation for several decades. The time has
come to reach a final and comprehensive settlement
that would resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
believe that maintaining the current situation is totally
unacceptable.

