The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

Let me begin by again welcoming Ambassador
Saikal to the Security Council and to New York. We look
forward to working with him and with partners from the
various branches of the Afghan Government. I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his informative briefing
and for the critically important efforts of the entire
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
team to support the Afghan people.

As we meet today, the Government of Afghanistan
continues to face significant challenges in delivering the
security, good governance and economic opportunity
for which its citizens yearn. Today I wish to speak
to some of those enduring challenges and what the
international community can do to help the Afghan
Government succeed in its efforts to overcome them.

As we all know, the Taliban and other
anti-Government groups continue to pose a serious
security threat. In recent weeks we have all been
horrified to witness the Taliban's attacks, including the
one earlier today on a patrol near the Wagram air base.
That follows the raid of 9 December on Kandahar airport
and the attack of 12 December in Kabul that targeted a
guesthouse attached to the Spanish Embassy. Scores of
innocent Afghan civilians have been killed or wounded
in those and other attacks, as well as two Spanish police
officers who were killed in the 12 December attack
and for whose deaths I would like to extend our deep
condolences to the Permanent Representative of Spain.

The United States is committed to continuing to
help the Afghan people confront this security threat.
In October, President Obama announced plans to
maintain the current level of 9,800 United States troops
in Afghanistan through most of 2016. They will remain
engaged, together with those of our allies and partners,
in the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, in training,
advising and assisting Afghan security forces. We will
continue to support counter-terrorism operations to
destroy the remnants of Al-Qaida.

We also continue to support and invest in
Afghanistan's relations with its neighbours. In that
regard, the recent Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
ministerial meeting on 8 December in Islamabad was
a step in the right direction. We welcome the renewed
commitments made there to support Afghan-led efforts
to enter into negotiations with the Afghan Taliban,
and we will continue to work with all countries in the
region, including China and Pakistan, to create the
conditions necessary for a peace and reconciliation
process between the Afghan Government and the
Afghan Taliban, including elements such as the
Haqqani network. The choice facing the Taliban is
clear - to engage in good-faith negotiations for peace,
or to continue to fight a war they cannot win and face
the consequences. We urge all members of the Council
to come together in sending that clear message.

Beyond the region, the international community
should continue to provide robust political, financial
and security support to Afghanistan. The progress the
country has made is real, but it is also fragile, and the
Afghan Government and people continue to warrant
our firm support. Two major conferences in 2016 - the
NATO Summit to be held in Warsaw in July and the
Afghanistan development conference to be held in
Brussels in October - provide important opportunities
for Member States to renew and extend such support.

As we continue to work to degrade and destroy
Afghanistan's violent extremist groups, all parties,
including the United States, must ensure that they
are doing everything they can to minimize harm to
civilians. To that end, I would like to repeat President
Obama's heartfelt apology and condolences for the
incident in which staff and patients were killed and
injured when a United States military air strike
mistakenly hit a Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF)
hospital in Kunduz. When others flee conflict and
disaster areas, MSF charges in, and the work its staff
does is quite literally lifesaving. We in the Council
have been repeatedly briefed by MSF on crises
around the world in which the organization's staff and
volunteers serve with professionalism and courage.
No nation does more than the United States to avoid
civilian casualties, but in this case we failed to live up
to our standards. President Obama has insisted on a
transparent, thorough and objective accounting of the
facts and circumstances of the incident as a critical step
towards ensuring full accountability. The United States
is committed to helping MSF rebuild the hospital and to
making payments to those affected.

Immeasurable as is the pain inflicted by that air
strike, it is important to distinguish a mistake of that
nature from the deliberate and deplorable targeting
of civilians by the Taliban and other violent extremist
groups. Our message to those forces is clear. There
is only one path to peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan, and that path is not through military
action but through an Afghan-led reconciliation that
builds on the democratic and human-rights gains that
the country has made since 2001. The Taliban's attacks
harm the Afghan people, destabilize the country and
betray the group's disregard for the people's lives. They
must stop.

As we all know, the efforts of the Afghan
Government to build greater security and stability
cannot be founded on military efforts alone. Good
governance and economic development are critical to
shoring up Afghan citizens' support for the Government.
In 2014, more than 7 million Afghans, including
millions ofwomen, cast their vote in elections, marking
the country's first democratic transfer of power in its
history. The National Unity Government formed by
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
reflects the genuine wish of the people for a peaceful
transition. Since then, the Government has made
meaningful progress towards building more transparent
and accountable institutions that can deliver basic
services to the Afghan people. It has also committed to
making progress on electoral reform, which is critical
to strengthening public trust in democratic processes.
The recent recommendations announced by the Special
Electoral Reform Commission are a welcome step. It is
now up to the Afghan Government to implement those
pledges.

We have also seen the Unity Government undertake
significant efforts to lay a foundation for sustainable
and inclusive economic growth. To give just a few
examples, the recent agreement between Afghanistan
and Pakistan allowing construction to begin on the
Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project will bring much-needed Central
Asian energy to both countries. And the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, which the
Afghan Government adopted in September, outlining
39 reforms and a road map for cooperation between it
and international donors, could boost crucial support
for the country's development. If implemented, those
and other efforts will help foster greater opportunities
for the Afghan people, and thereby lock in broader
support for the country's democratic future.

I would like to close by reminding everyone why it
is so important that these efforts succeed. As everyone
here knows, on 28 September the Taliban seized the
city of Kunduz, which it held parts of until it was fully
expelled on 13 October by pro-Government forces.
The group's treatment of the local population during
that time provides a window into how it would rule
were it able to retake control of more of Afghanistan.
According to a United Nations report (S/2015/942),
shortly after taking control of the city the Taliban
carried out house-to-house searches using prepared
lists containing the names and addresses of human-
rights defenders, particularly women - women
active in public life, non-governmental organization
(NGO) workers, United Nations staff, journalists and
Government officials, including lawyers, judges and
prosecutors.

The persecution of women was particularly
harrowing. The Taliban looted or burned down three
radio stations run by women, a girls' high school and
numerous women's NGOs. One of its targets was a
women's shelter run by the NGO Women for Afghan
Women, whose residents the Taliban called runaway
sluts and immoral girls. The office, a news report said,
appeared to have been attacked with sledgehammers,
the windows shattered, the walls and door frames
smashed. Of the shelter's director, Hassina Sarwari,
who managed to escape Kunduz before the Taliban
could capture her, the local Taliban commander said: "If
we had captured her, she would be hanged in the main
circle of Kunduz city". Even the city's only woman civil
engineer, whose job it was to help restore roads, was
persecuted and run out of town.

Like so many of the women's rights advocates
and professional who fled Kunduz and received death
threats, Hassina is too afraid to return. Yet the head
of Hassina's organization, a woman named Manizha
Naderi, said that they would find a way to open a new
women's shelter in Kunduz. She said it would be hard
to find women willing to go, but that "people need
us, so we will have to come up with a plan. If we stop
working, it is a big victory for the Taliban".

Groups like Women for Women are not willing
to give the Taliban the victory that would come with
abandoning Afghans in need. We cannot either.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

