Mr. Carmon (Israel): Allow to me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able
stewardship of the Council this month, and thank you
for convening this important debate. My delegation
wishes to welcome the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr.
Mike Smith, and thank him for his informative briefing
and for all his efforts in reviewing the organization of
the Directorate and its methods of work.

Israel views the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate as fundamental pillars of
the United Nations system's efforts to help Member
States deal with the scourge of terrorism. As such, we
strongly support the work of the Committee and
CTED.

Earlier this year, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee endorsed the revised organizational plan for
CTED, which will serve to strengthen CTED and
improve its operations. As Mr. Smith noted in his
briefing, CTED today spends less time focusing on
whether States understand the threat of terrorism and
more on assessing their capacities and capabilities. In
that respect, CTED plays a crucial role as a facilitator
between donor and recipient countries on technical
support and assistance. Israel, for its part, supports
those efforts and is poised to provide assistance.

As my delegation has previously noted, the
preliminary implementation assessment will be useful
in evaluating Member States' capabilities. We wish to
stress that follow-up and review are crucial to the
process. The preliminary implementation assessment
must move beyond the paper stage to concrete and
practical action. Israel looks forward to reviewing its
own preliminary implementation assessment and
seeing how the assessment can be integrated into our
national counter-terrorism strategies.

Israel also welcomes the need for CTED to
participate in the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, which was established to
assist Member States in their implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The

unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of the
Strategy gave it a universal mandate and marks an
important achievement for the international
community. The challenge, however, remains in how
the Strategy's commitments will be translated into
concrete action to prevent terrorist acts and prosecute
and punish those who carry them out.

The Strategy and Task Force are also fundamental
in reminding us that terrorism has real consequences
and grave effects on civilians, who are the primary
targets and victims of terrorism. While our debate this
morning focuses on the technical aspects of countering
terrorism, we surely cannot forget the heavy price we
all pay when terror strikes in the heart of our cities and
towns. Every victim has a name, and each victim has
his or her own story. We cannot forget the human
dimension - the face, so to speak, of the victims -
even when discussing the technical aspects of
countering terrorism.

Israel is a country that has been forced to live
under the threat of terrorism since its inception. The
vast majority of Israelis have firsthand knowledge of
the devastating effects of terrorism. In fact, practically
no family in Israel has been spared by terrorism,
whether it be a loved one or friend, a neighbour or co-
worker who was stolen away by a cruel, heartless and
crushing act of terrorism. Beyond that, terrorism has
disrupted and devastated daily life, as civilians must
constantly live in fear of the next attack. Sadly, Israelis
still feel today the threat of terrorism every day and
everywhere, whether it be to our north, our south or
even in the heartland of our country, as seen less than
two weeks ago in the devastating and ruthless terrorist
attack at the Mercaz HaRav seminary in Jerusalem,
where eight boys were coldly murdered by a terrorist.
We were disappointed, Mr. President, that, despite your
efforts and those of many others, the Council was
unable to condemn that heinous terrorist attack.

Over the years, Israel has learned how to confront
terrorism, a global phenomenon that has unfortunately
become known to many nations around the world.
There are various tools available to confront terrorism,
in addition to the venues we are discussing today. The
Israeli experience has shown that there is great value
and importance in the work of local authorities,
national agencies and individuals on the ground, not
only in preventing and responding to attacks and
treating the victims, but more so in refusing to allow
terrorism to derail and hijack our daily life.
While Israel has experienced terrorism as a
specific threat, it has been noted time and again that
terrorism knows no geographical boundaries or
limitations and transcends borders and nations. Hence,
it is incumbent on all States to adhere to their
obligations under international law, including the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Council, in
particular resolution 1373 (2001), which calls on States
to enforce their borders, prevent the movement of
terrorists and refrain from supporting terrorists or their
activities.

Despite the real urgency and need for States to
implement resolution 1373 (2001), it is alarming that
some Member States of this world body are not only
negligent in shouldering their responsibilities, but
actually host, support and sponsor terrorism. Surely the
international community must impress on all States the
need to end such behaviour. There can never be any
justification for terrorism, and any attempt to explain
or excuse it should be condemned.

Israel remains poised and ready to continue
working with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
CTED to advance its objectives and improve its
cooperation and engagement with Member States. We
welcome the extension of the mandate and are
confident that the revised organizational plan of CTED
will contribute to that effort and situate CTED in a
central position to assist Member States in combating
the global scourge of terrorism.

