Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me also to congratulate Sweden on organizing
this open debate under the presidency of its Prime
Minister, Mr. Stefan Lofven.

Resolution 2427 (2018), which the Security
Council adopted today, is an important contribution to
strengthening the children and armed conflict agenda,
which, as the Council knows, is particularly close to
Luxembourg's heart. I can say that with great conviction
because, in 2014, I myself presided over a meeting of
the Council, during which resolution 2143 (2014) was
adopted (see S/PV.7129). In order to maintain some
momentum in the consideration of this issue by this
organ, a more frequent adoption of relevant instruments
is desirable.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. My thanks also go to the Executive Director of
UNICEF for her briefing. I also listened very carefully
to the moving testimony of Ms. Yenny Londofio.

The Secretary-General's annual report on the plight
of children in armed conflict (S/2018/465) begins with
the sad fact that in 2017 violations of all types sharply
increased as compared to the previous year. Those
violations are the unacceptable daily fate of more than
21,000 children living in conflicts. We must strongly
condemn all violations committed against children
and commit ourselves to working resolutely for respect
of the rights of the child, in particular those living in
armed conflict.

The report is the result of extensive consultations
within the United Nations system, at Headquarters and
in the field, and with the Member States concerned.
We have confidence in the safeguards, including the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, to verify the
accuracy of all information contained in the annual
report and its annexes.

From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Syria, from Afghanistan to Myanmar, from South Sudan
to Mali, children are being killed and maimed. They
are abducted, recruited by force and sexually abused
by Government forces as well as non-State actors. In a
context of repeated abuses, the protection of children
must be systematic. Child protection programmes in
times of armed conflict must have have the support of
sufficient capacity and means to ensure that children
can be released and reintegrated into their families
and communities in a sustainable way. We emphasize
the crucial importance of integrating child protection
advisers with their specific mandate in United Nations
operations on the ground. We note with satisfaction
that 10,000 children were formally released in 2017 and
an unknown number were able to lay down their arms
through other means. We realize that this is only the
beginning of a process in which these children must be
supported on the psychosocial and educational fronts
in order to sustainably break the cycle of violence and
ultimately consolidate peace. The actors on the ground
must be given the means they need to enable them to
take on those tasks and achieve their objective, which
I believe was one of Ms. Londofio's main appeals
this morning.

I should congratulate the Security Council on
its adoption of resolution 2419 (2018), in recognition
of the importance of strengthening the inclusion of
young people in the negotiation and implementation
of peace agreements. The marginalization of young
people is detrimental to achieving lasting peace and
combating violent extremism. In that context, the right
to education is fundamental to building lasting peace.
Schools continue to be the target of deliberate attacks
and school infrastructure is routinely looted or diverted
from its primary purpose for military uses, acts that
deprive children of their right to an education and can
breed intolerance, a resort to violence and weakened
community resilience. We urge all Member States
that have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration, and we call on all States to take concrete
measures to discourage the parties to conflicts from
using schools for military purposes.

Lastly, while progress has been made in recent
years, much remains to be done. The increase in the
numbers of serious acts of violence against children
and of their perpetrators suggests that too many parties
are shielded from international justice. There should be
no impunity for those responsible for crimes against
children. The important role played by the International
Criminal Court in complementing national proceedings
in that regard remains central and essential.

We reiterate our unequivocal support for
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who has been working tirelessly
for the protection of children in armed conflict, and
we continue to provide concrete support to her Office
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We therefore responded positively to her request
for financing the secondment of a liaison officer in
Brussels with the aim of strengthening relations with
European and Atlantic institutions in the context of
implementing their guidelines on children and armed
conflict. That includes developing a strategic road
map and implementing standard monitoring and
reporting procedures for the six serious violations
against children identified by the Council. We have
also supported a research project of the United Nations
University in partnership with UNICEF, which has
just ended with the publication of a study for United
Nations staff in the field entitled Cradled by Conflict,
on preventing. protecting and disengaging children
from extreme violence.
We build the future with our children, which is why
we must protect them if we want a future founded on
lasting peace.

