Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the two International Tribunals for the
briefings they gave us this morning.

The work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) is at a crucial
stage. Both must complete trials at first instance by the
end of 2008, less than three weeks away, while
finalizing all their work in 2010. My delegation would
like to acknowledge the enormous commitment
demonstrated by the staff of both Tribunals with regard
to the goals set out in the completion strategies.
Nevertheless, we must be realistic and acknowledge
that the vast amount of pending work could have a
significant impact on the deadlines that have been
established.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, we are concerned about the
number of obstacles impeding some trials from being
referred to national judicial authorities, especially
those relating to procedural guarantees and witness
protection. We are also concerned that 13 accused
persons are still at large, including Felicien Kabuga.
States with information on those persons should honour
their obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal. Failure

to cooperate could directly compromise the Tribunal's
goals and legacy in the Great Lakes Region.

It is clear that the workload of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has
increased in the past year. The Security Council has
reacted correctly in adopting this morning's resolution
extending the mandates of judges and allowing for the
appointment of additional ad litem judges. Despite
those measures, it appears unlikely that the Tribunal
will be able to carry out its completion strategy in the
time frame that has been set.

On a positive note, however, we wish to
underscore that Radovan Karadzic has been arrested
and delivered to the Tribunal authorities. Once again,
we recognize the work carried out by the Serbian
authorities in this context and we encourage Serbia and
other States of the region to continue such cooperation
and to focus their efforts on ensuring the capture of
Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.

The Security Council Informal Working Group on
international tribunals has worked throughout this year
to establish the parameters for an international
mechanism to take on those residual issues which will
be pending once both Tribunals have ceased to
function. The ongoing dialogue with the authorities of
both Tribunals has been decisive in the progress
achieved so far. On behalf of my delegation, I would
like to thank them for this important cooperation. We
would also like to acknowledge the work of Belgium as
chairman of the Informal Working Group and to thank
Belgium for its generosity which has made it possible
for the Working Group to visit the offices of the
Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague. The exchanges
that will be possible during those visits will
undoubtedly be of great value in this regard.

The correct application of justice is an ongoing
process which does not end with a judgment or with
the conclusion of a trial. In particular, in dealing with
residual issues and without wanting to undermine any
of those issues listed by the representative of Belgium
in his statement today, this Council must ensure that
adequate protection is guaranteed to both victims and
witnesses, that sentences are duly served and that post-
sentencing judicial process is followed. The eventual
success of the Tribunals will be measured by the legacy
they leave to those national authorities which succeed
them. For that reason, it is crucial that public access to
the archives be guaranteed.

Finally, the lack of human and material resources
cannot be allowed to compromise the objectives of the
Tribunals. We consider it a matter of utmost
importance to pay attention to the considerations and
concerns expressed by both Tribunals and reiterated
today by both Tribunal Presidents with regard to the
retention of experienced staff. We recognize and
welcome the measures taken so far by the Secretariat in
this regard and we urge that necessary additional
measures be taken to allow the Tribunals to efficiently
and effectively complete their work.

