Mr. Steinmeier (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
inviting non-members of the Security Council to
participate.

In Syria and Iraq, we are witnessing the return of
barbarism. We are faced with an enemy that is not only
a threat for Iraq or Syria or the Middle East, but a threat
to all of us. We need to act. Fortunately, the international
community has heard the call in Newport, Jeddah and
Paris. Nations have met to confront the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) together. The Security
Council consolidated the international alliance against
this brutal enemy that is violating the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and violating humankind
itself.

Next week, under our chairmanship, we will discuss
joint action against ISIL among the Foreign Ministers
of the Group of Seven (G-7), as well as at the G-7
Deauville Partnership meeting of Foreign Ministers.
This is what I think we need to do.

First of all, we continue to need humanitarian
aid. We need to alleviate the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons.
I would like to thank the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies for their hard work. Germany
has so far provided $65 million for humanitarian aid
and shelter. I visited Erbil a few weeks ago and I was
shocked by the dire situation of refugees. Now, with
winter approaching, we must work even harder to
provide shelter for those who have fled ISIL attacks.

Humanitarian aid is necessary, but it is not
sufficient to stop the violence. That is why the German
Government decided to provide the Kurdish security
forces with weapons, ammunition and equipment, as
well as training, which we are of course undertaking
in close coordination with the Government in Baghdad.
However, even humanitarian and military assistance
will be futile if we lack a broader strategy against
ISIL - a strategy that incorporates the necessary
military means and tools into a political strategy. What
are the aspects of such a strategy?

First, we have supported the formation of a new
Government in Iraq, which includes all ethnic, religious
and political groups. I wish Prime Minister Haider
Al-Abadi, who has our full support, every success. I
also welcome presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20,
which was adopted today, as proof of the great support
from all around the world, far beyond the Middle East
region.

Secondly, the battle ground is Syria is different
from the one in Iraq, and is even more complex.
Germany will continue to strengthen moderate voices
and structures - they are, from my point of view, the
only alternative to dictatorship and terrorism. We are
grateful for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
to explore the basis for a political solution. We must
coordinate our engagement very closely with United
Nations institutions. We hope that the Secretary-
General's Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, will
bring new ideas, and hopefully a new approach, because
we cannot allow ourselves to fail again, perhaps in the
third round of the Geneva process.

Today we arejustified in focusing on Iraq and Syria,
but we should not forget that some of the neighbouring
States are bearing a huge burden. To ease the hardship
of Syrian refugees and the strain on Syria's neighbours,
I will host a conference, together with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
in Berlin on 28 October. The goal of the conference is
to increase support for the countries most affected by
refugee flows from Syria, namely, Lebanon and Jordan,
but also Iraq and Turkey.

Thirdly, we need to stop the flow of foreign fighters
and financing to ISIL. The Security Council will take
further action in that regard. We welcome the planned
draft resolution on foreign terrorist fighters. Yesterday,
I met my new colleague from Turkey, and we agreed to
cooperate very closely, especially in the security sector.

Today we are worried about the latest news after
the ISIS attack on the Syrian city of Ayn Al-Arab and
surrounding villages. Again people had to escape.

History has shown that challenges as large as this
can only be solved together. Germany is willing to do
its share and to work together. I hope that all sides,
especially in the region, will lend their active support
as well. If we come together on this, we will reach a
new level of cooperation, and we will succeed.

