Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am pleased once again to welcome the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to this sixth round of
talks between the European Union and the United
Nations. I cannot but note the excellent degree of
cooperation based, as the United Kingdom Ambassador
so appropriately noted, on the fact that we share a
set of values and principles. That valuable common
denominator between our organizations allows me to
affirm that the relationship could not be any better.

I have a lengthy statement that I will not read out
in full, but I will simply touch on the most important
points, on the undestanding that the full version will be
posted on the website of the Mission of Spain. I shall
begin with the review processes, of which there are two
of particular importance to my delegation: the reviews
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1325 (2000).

With respect to the review ofresolution 1540 (2004),
which will conclude under the Spanish presidency of
the Council in December, as we all know, I should like
to stress the major support and deep commitment of
the European Union to ensuring that non-State actors
truly have no access to weapons of mass destruction.
With regard to the review of resolution 1325 (2000), I
believe that it is perfectly obvious that the European
Union has been intimately involved in all processes
related to the women and peace and security agenda.
That was particularly evident in the adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015).

Turning to prevention, Spain attaches great
importance to the fact that the European Union shall
assign a major role to prevention in its global strategy.
In that regard, I draw the attention of Council members
and non-members listening in on this meeting today
to Spain's organization of the first Conference on
Preventive Diplomacy in the Mediterranean, held a few
days ago in Alicante, in which high representatives of
the European Union participated. The conclusions of the
Alicante Conference will be circulated by the Mission
of Spain to the members of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

With respect to Iran, I stress the very important
role played by the European Union with regard to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that was agreed
with Iran in July 2015, and later endorsed by resolution
2231 (2015). As facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), I can bear witness to the major
role that the European Union continues to play in
that process.

Several comments have already been made today
concerning the Middle East, but I wish to reiterate
Spain's full support for such initiatives as that being
undertaken by France, in its capacity as President ofthe
Security Council, to convene the ministerial meeting
held in Paris on Friday. The role of the European Union,
as reflected in the work of the High Representative in
the context of the Quartet - to which the Ambassador
of New Zealand referred at length 4 clearly shows that
the Union's resolve is firm. I endorse the statement of
the Ambassador of New Zealand to the effect that once
the report of the Quartet has been issued, the Security
Council should support this process in some way.

As to Syria, the High Representative noted that the
European Union is the greatest contributor to efforts to
resolve that situation, so I will not dwell on it. I will,
however, mention Libya, where the European Union has
decided, in full respect for international legality - as
several speakers have noted - to support the stability
of the country and fight the human traffickers working
along its coasts. One example of this is the European
Union Operation Sophia, dedicated exclusively to
saving lives in the Mediterranean. It has no other
purpose. Specifically, on 26 May the Spanish frigate
Reina Sofia rescued 206 people injust one day, 35 miles
off the coast of Libya. In its first year of operations,
Operation Sofia has saved over 15,000 lives. The next
challenge facing the Operation will be the fight against
arms trafficking. We hope to enjoy the support of all
Security Council members to that end.

The European Union has a very clear commitment
to Africa. I would define relations between the
European Union and the Security Council by the word
"complementarity". I believe that complementarity is
especially evident in two operations: the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. I also note the commitment of the European
Union to assist in operationalizing the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crisis.

With regard to migration, we are all aware of the
tragedies taking place every day in the Mediterranean,
to which the European Union has actively responded
with all instruments at its disposal. We value the
onset of high-level dialogues to promote cooperation
with the countries of origin and transit of regular
migrants. Packages of comprehensive incentives
have been approved for 16 countries, highlighting the
effectiveness of our action in that area. Lastly, I point
to the migratory agreement reached with Turkey, which
is yielding positive results.

In conclusion, I should like to refer to the statement
made early by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Senegal, who very eloquently described the relationship
between the European Union and the United Nations,
especially the Security Council. I believe that his
statement can be summarized by asserting the
European Union's comprehensive commitment to the
entire United Nations agenda. I say this as a member of
the European Union, of which I am very proud.

