Monsignor Kassas (Holy See): My delegation
congratulates the President on New Zealand's
presidency of the Security Council this month and
commends him for convening this timely open debate.

The Holy See continues to monitor closely the
situation in the Middle East, which is deeply afflicted
by various conflicts that continue to intensify.
Unfortunately, the international community, which
seems to have become accustomed to these conflicts,
has not yet succeeded in working out a sufficient
response.

A particular worry is the situation in Syria, where
the dramatic humanitarian situation affecting more than
half of the population calls for renewed commitment
by all in order to arrive at a political solution to the
conflict. We should not continue to look helplessly from
the sidelines while a great country is being destroyed.
The situation in Syria requires putting aside many
particular interests in order to prioritize those of Syria
and of the Syrians themselves.

In Syria as well as in Iraq, we continue to be gravely
concerned about the terrorist acts perpetrated by the
so-called Islamic State. This is a challenge not only for
the region but for the entire international community,
which is called upon to cooperate with unity ofpurpose
in order to thwart this terrorist plague, which is
expanding its activities into different countries.

By having to take care of millions of refugees,
Lebanon and Jordan also bear the brunt ofthe conflict in
neighbouring Syria. They urgently need the solidarity
of the whole international community. The Holy
See hopes that the land of the cedars will be able to
resolve, as soon as possible, this period of institutional
instability arising largely from the vacancy for more
than a year now of the presidency of the country.

While being aware of the sufferings of entire

populations, I wish to point out the sufferings that
Christians and other minority ethnic and religious
groups are suffering, forcing many of them to leave their
homes. The diminution of the Christian presence is a
grave loss for the entire region, where Christians have
been present since the very beginnings of Christianity
and where they wish to continue cooperating with their
fellow citizens in building harmonious societies and
working for the common good as promoters of peace,
reconciliation and development.

My delegation wishes to express appreciation for
the agreement that has been reached between Iran and
the 5+1 group.

On 26 June, the Holy See and the State of Palestine
signed the comprehensive agreement that follows
the basic agreement between the Holy See and the
Palestine Liberation Organization of 15 February 2000.
That agreement is indicative of the progress made by
the Palestinian Authority in recent years, above all in
the level of international support it has obtained, as
exemplified by General Assembly resolution 67/19,
which, among other things, recognizes Palestine as
a non-member Observer State. The Holy See hopes
that this agreement may in some way promote the
achievement of the two-State solution, bringing a
definitive end to the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian
conflict that continues to cause suffering to both
parties, and that the agreement may offer, within the
complex reality of the Middle East, a good example of
dialogue and cooperation.

As Pope Francis said during his pilgrimage to the
Holy Land last year:

"The time has come for everyone to find the
courage to be generous and creative in the service
of the common good, the courage to forge a peace
which rests on the acknowledgment by all of the
right of two States to exist and to live in peace
and security within internationally recognized
borders."

In that context, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the peace process can move forward only if it is
directly negotiated between the two parties with the
support of the international community.

