Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana salutes you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We were greatly impressed that, in preparation for
your assumption of the onerous responsibilities of that
office, you visited several hot spots in Africa and read them
the Riot Act, so to speak. The visits reflect the concern and
determination of the United States to find solutions to
conflict situations in Africa which, unfortunately, constitute
the bulk of the Council's programme of work these days.
I wish to assure you, Madam President, of the full support
and cooperation of my delegation during your presidency.

May I also pay a warm tribute to your predecessor, Sir
John Weston, and his delegation for the excellent manner
in which they led the Council in January. Sir John's
presidency will certainly go down in the records of the
Security Council as the most successful law-and-order
presidency.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the Council is
considering the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) in this formal, open meeting. In two days,
on 8 February 1996, UNAVEM. III will be one year old.
The most important achievement of this period is that an
atmosphere of calm prevails throughout Angola, after more
than two decades of war.

The Lusaka Protocol and the coming into effect of
the cease-fire were momentous developments for the
people of Angola in particular and of southern Africa
generally. This was the year in which Mozambicans
consolidated the gains of peace. In South Africa apartheid
was relegated to the museum of history, as a democratic
and non-racial society proudly took its rightful place
among the family of nations. Southern Africa was thus
entering an era of great hope and expectations.
Unfortunately, the people of Angola still face the difficult
challenge of turning that hope into a reality.

As the mandate of UNAVEM. III comes up for
review, it is appropriate that States Members of the
United Nations should have the opportunity to contribute
to this important discussion. The members of the
international community have closely followed and
monitored the developments in Angola, and we hope to
benefit at today's meeting from the views and insights of
some of them regarding the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

The delegation of Botswana was one of those that
called for the speedy deployment of UNAVEM. III peace-
keepers in the past year. We did so in the firm belief that
the presence of the international community in Angola
would play a vital role in creating conditions in that
country for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
and the peace accords. UNAVEM. 111 has now been in
Angola for almost a year, and we are convinced that its
presence has contributed in no small measure to the
stabilization of the situation in that war-weary country
through the enforcement of the cease-fire, which, thank
God, is holding. Botswana is therefore satisfied that
UNAVEM. 111 has made an important contribution to the
peace process in Angola, and we commend the men and
women of UNAVEM. for a job well done under trying
conditions.

Yet my delegation continues to be deeply concerned
that, although one year has passed since the launching of
UNAVEM. III and the peace-keeping mission in Angola
has nearly reached its authorized strength, it is a fact that
the Lusaka Protocol remains unimplemented in a number
of key areas. This is a constant reminder that the peace
process still remains fragile. The Secretary-General's
report correctly points out that

"the quartering of UNITA troops - one of the
central elements of the peace process - has not
made any significant progress." (S/1996/75, para. 14)

 

The quartering of UNITA troops is indeed central to
the peace process because it would have a salutary effect
on other key areas, such as the formation of a national
army, an end to military offensives and the return and
resettlement of refugees and internally displaced persons.
The international community must bring pressure to bear on
UNITA to demonstrate, in deeds rather than in words, its
commitment to the peace process. It should quarter its
troops in accordance with the pledge made by Mr. Savimbi,
as reflected in paragraph 15 of the Secretary-General's
report. No further delays should be countenanced, as they
pose a danger to the gains made in the past year. The
Council must be united in sending a strong message to
UNITA that procrastination and prevarication cannot be
accepted.

We welcome the Government of Angola's release of
all prisoners in its custody, the withdrawal of Angolan
armed forces from Pedra do Alemao, the commencement of
the quartering of the rapid reaction police and the
termination of the contract with Executive Outcomes. These
are positive steps on the part of the Government of Angola,
to which UNITA should respond in kind.

Botswana has noted that the Government of Angola
and UNITA recently reached an agreement on a new
timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
We have also noted the establishment of a "conflict
prevention group", which should enable the military
authorities, especially field commanders, to defuse tensions
or eliminate cease-fire violations. The Angolans themselves
must make the effort to eliminate any possibilities for the
resumption of hostilities. It is important for the Angolans to
realize that the international community will not judge them
merely by the agreements that they have freely entered into
between themselves but, rather, on whether they deliver on
such commitments and do so in a timely manner.

The assassinations, abductions, looting and extortion
mentioned in paragraph 25 of the Secretary-General's report
should not be allowed to continue with impunity, lest they
become a permanent feature of life in Angola. The
disarmament of the civilian population is a priority area and
must be pursued vigorously. As the report indicates, it is
the vulnerable groups of society that fall victim to the
criminal elements, and it must never be forgotten that it
was the ordinary people of Angola who bore the main brunt
of the war. It is unacceptable that they should be subjected
to these inhumane acts, even in conditions of relative peace.

The unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance is
clearly an essential aspect of the peace process. We
condemn the confiscation of relief supplies, vehicles and
radios by UNITA and its imposition of restrictions on the
movement of relief flights and road convoys, as
mentioned in paragraph 27 of the Secretary-General's
report. The Security Council should call upon UNITA to
desist from creating obstacles to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and to honour its promise to
facilitate the work of humanitarian organizations.

A lot still needs to be done to advance the peace
process in Angola. UNAVEM. has an important role to
play in the difficult task ahead. My delegation therefore
shares the View of the Secretary-General that the mandate
of UNAVEM. 111 should be extended for another six
months. It is our hope that during this period the Member
States of the United Nations will individually and
collectively do all they can to ensure that the parties to
the Lusaka Protocol, especially UNITA, honour their
commitments, in accordance with the revised schedule of
implementation.

