Mr. Thoms (Germany): At the outset, please allow
me to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
not only for organizing today's open debate, but also
for Luxembourg's active chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I would also
like to recognize and thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office for their work in keeping this
significant issue at the top of our agenda, and I would
add, also very present in the public discourse.
Germany aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.

The Council's instruments on children and armed
conflict are among the most developed and innovative
mechanisms at our disposal in the United Nations. They
demonstrate the potential of multilateral cooperation
and renew our faith in the effectiveness of the Security
Council on thematic issues. In that regard, we very
much welcome the adoption today of resolution 2143
(2014). It is another important building block in forming
a solid framework for the protection of children in
armed conflict. We especially welcome the focus on
the importance of protecting schools and hospitals in
armed conflict, which builds on resolution 1998 (2011),
adopted during the German presidency of the Security
Council in 2011.

Groups that recruit and use children in armed
conflict violate the most basic principles ofinternational
law, irrespective of whether they are State or non-State
actors. They violate the promise that each generation
makes to the next that the world should be left as a
more secure and more prosperous place for those who
succeed us. I would like to make the following three
points.

First, we must resolutely support the "Children, not
soldiers" campaign of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and
UNICEF, which was launched just yesterday. Ending
the recruitment and use of children by Government
armed forces in conflict by 2016 is a realistic goal.
We need to seize upon the existing political will of
the concerned Governments to realize that objective.
Germany stands ready to support those Governments
that have committed themselves.

Secondly, Germany strongly advocates the
continued and comprehensive inclusion of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding missions and special political missions.
We wholeheartedly support the commitment that the
Council has made in the resolution adopted today. In
that regard, the Council should remain in close contact
with such child protection advisers in order to provide
greater clarity on the training and resources needed for
the protection of children in each situation.

Thirdly, the international community must seek
innovative solutions on how armed non-State actors
can be compelled to cease the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict. It is important that the
Special Representative also be allowed to reach out to
non-State actors in order to set up action plans to end
violence against children in armed conflict. Such action
plans have proven a very effective tool to ensure the
protection of and a better life for, children in conflict
situations.

We have established a system which is good and
effective. We should thus gather all our efforts to
ensure that all provisions for the protection of children
in armed conflict are implemented fully.

