Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, please allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We are
convinced that your wealth of diplomatic experience will
allow the Security Council to carry out with honour the
very important tasks facing it in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We would like also to
pay tribute to Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana for his
very skilful and effective guidance of the work of the
Council in March.

In the Republic of Tajikistan, there is a very acute
awareness that the situation emerging in Afghanistan
constitutes a threat to international peace in the region.
That incredibly bitter conflict has gone on for many
years. During that time, the factions involved in the
conflict have made wide and indiscriminate use of heavy
weaponry against populated areas, including the capital,
Kabul. They have laid mines, causing casualties among
civilians, including women, children and the elderly.

In this poor, undeveloped country, the conflict has
almost completely destroyed the health-care system,
severed communications and disrupted the provision of
essential foodstuffs, power and water. There have been
outbreaks of dangerous diseases and epidemics. In sum,
the situation, with no exaggeration whatsoever, could be
characterized as a humanitarian tragedy. That is the very
sad picture we see when we study the very
comprehensive report on Afghanistan submitted by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

This is why the international community, and first
and foremost the United Nations and its Security Council,

 

must undertake the most vigorous measures to induce the
Afghan parties to the conflict to cease hostilities and to
promote the prompt settlement of the conflict by peaceful
means.

The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan has
every reason to express great concern at what is taking
place in Afghanistan. Afghanistan and Tajikistan have rich,
long-standing historical ties. The people of Tajikistan have
great respect and sympathy for the Afghan people and
empathize with their pain and their tragedy. At the same
time, we cannot but be alarmed that in a country where the
conflict rages on an ever greater scale, narcotic drugs are
being produced without controls and are being distributed
and transported through the territory of a number of States.
This was confirmed by the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 19 December 1995.

The illegal arms trade is continuing as well. We are
especially concerned over the fact that from several regions
of Afghanistan, armed attacks are being launched across the
Tajik-Afghan border. In that context, I should like to recall
that the Security Council took a decision to open up in
Taloqan, in northern Afghanistan, a United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) communications
centre. However, that decision has not yet been
implemented.

The international community understands that the
persistence of the situation in and around Afghanistan is
unacceptable. Various proposals have been put forward for
future steps. In particular, the Government of the Islamic
State of Afghanistan believes it essential to set up a contact
group along the lines of the one for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ideas have been put forward on an arms
embargo and on convening an international conference on
Afghanistan. It would seem that there is a rational core in
these ideas. However, what is of primary importance, in our
View, is to make the most effective use of the already
existing mechanism: the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan. It is equally important and urgent to require
the warring parties to the conflict to cease hostilities
immediately and declare a moratorium on the use of armed
force. That demand should be made of all Afghan factions.

At the Special Commemorative Meeting of the
General Assembly on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, the President of the
Republic of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov, said:

"We call upon the international community to promote
the earliest return of peace to this long-suffering land.
Overcoming the Afghan crisis requires not only the
constructive participation of States in the region, but
also effective action by the United Nations."
(Ofificial Records of the General Assembly, F iftieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 40th meeting, p. 25)

The Republic of Tajikistan is prepared, together with
members of the world community, to make its own

contribution to the attainment of that goal.

