My delegation commends you, Sir, for convening today's timely open video- teleconference of the Security Council on children and armed conflict, and expresses its deep appreciation to the briefers for their enlightening interventions. Since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), 15 years ago, there has been meaningful progress in our efforts to protect children from armed conflicts. However, the Secretary-General's annual report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) clearly illustrates that significant gaps remain between our goals and the harsh realities on the ground. Government forces and non-State armed groups alike have increased the intensity and frequency of their attacks against children, and sexual and gender-based violence against children horrifically persists unabated. In addition, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic raises grave concerns regarding the safety and well-being of children in armed conflicts. As the Secretary-General emphasized in his April global appeal to "protect our children" amid the pandemic, children in armed conflict are among the most vulnerable groups and deserve to be accorded our highest priority. Itis in this context that I am particularly concerned over the Secretary-General's report that the denial of humanitarian access to children saw a shocking increase of over 400 per cent in 2019. Full, comprehensive and unhindered humanitarian access to children, including those in detention, should form an integral part of our efforts to minimize the negative impact on children. Against this troubling backdrop, and while aligning myself with the statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, I would like to highlight the following four points of particular importance to my delegation. First, the Republic of Korea urges all parties to conflict to support the Secretary-General's timely appeal for an immediate global ceasefire to collectively tackle the COVID-19 crisis. Any military threat or attempt to incite violence must stop. The entire global population is now facing a common threat, and protecting vulnerable populations, especially children in armed conflict, requires us to work together in solidarity to silence the guns. In this regard, my delegation strongly hopes that the Security Council will be able to unite to come up with substantive measures to support the Secretary-General's urgent appeal for an immediate global ceasefire. It is better late than never. Secondly, the reintegration of children affected by armed conflict is a strategic investment that can help break the vicious cycle of violence. The Republic of Korea, as a member of the Steering Committee of the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers, commends and supports the work of the Office of the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. Child reintegration programmes must take a community-based approach to avoid stigmatization, and I emphasize the importance of education and vocational training programmes, which help ensure that communities enjoy the concrete benefits that reintegration programmes bring. Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for all violations against children. Strengthening accountability and ending impunity are key to ending gross violations and preventing recurrence. Violators must be held accountable through both national and international justice systems. Furthermore, we must support and strengthen the tools we have to document and address violations, including the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism, the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the Secretary-General's annual report. Fourthly, the Republic of Korea strongly supports the child-protection mandate in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We particularly emphasize the important role carried out by senior child protection advisers and sections in peacekeeping missions, and believe that they should be adequately resourced to implement child- protection mandates, including in the context of transition and downsizing. Efforts to prevent violations against children today are a high-yield investment that will prevent future violence and crimes. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its driving commitment in working with the United Nations, as well as all Member States, with a view to better protecting children from the scourge of armed conflicts.
