Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I join other
representatives in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. Namibia aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Let me at the outset reaffirm Namibia's
unequivocal and unwavering support for and solidarity
with the people of Palestine in their quest to exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination. Namibia
believes that the right to self-determination is a
fundamental human right and that the international
community is duty-bound, in accordance with its legal
and political obligations, to assist the Palestinian
people to achieve this right as soon as possible.
Namibia was once an occupied territory. Its people
know too well the harsh reality of living under
occupation. We wish to see the people of Palestine
emerge from the chains of oppression just as we
emerged from them 21 years ago.

This year began with dramatic events in the
Middle East, marked by the democratic aspirations and
demand for freedom, justice and human rights. The
situation in Palestine is even more urgent. However,
Israel's unlawful construction of settlements and its
demolition of Palestinian homes and property,
including the historic Shepherd Hotel, continue to
undermine efforts to return to the path to peace,
increase tensions and further destabilize the situation
on the ground, which is yet another attempt by the
occupying Power to overshadow international goodwill
towards the people of Palestine.

Namibia believes that the construction and
expansion of illegal settlements and the erection of
walls of separation and annexation are serious
impediments to peace and obstacles to the realization
of the two-State solution. The illegal construction of
Israeli settlements in and around East Jerusalem in
particular is nothing but an attempt to alter the legal
status of the city and its physical, demographic and
cultural character. They must cease. We call on Israel,
as the occupying Power, to stop these provocative
activities, which are illegal under international law and
constitute an obstacle to peace.

Israelis are entitled to live in peace and security,
which must be acknowledged. However, the pursuit of
security by Israel should not create insecurity for other
people in the region, in particular not for civilian
populations.

We continue to witness the ongoing deplorable
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which is a clear
punishment of the entire population of Palestine. The
hardship and misery being imposed on Gaza is morally
unjustifiable and unacceptable by any human standard.
The blockade must be lifted immediately and the
human rights of the population respected.

The Security Council must take appropriate
measures and demonstrate its resolve to protect the
civilian population in the occupied Palestinian
territories in a manner consistent with international
humanitarian law. The international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should not cherry-
pick, acting as a matter of expediency at times, while
ignoring the plight of a people who have been
dispossessed of everything, including human dignity,
for more than 60 years. Furthermore, the Council
should not fail to discharge its responsibility to protect
the civilian population as part of its commitment to
maintain international peace and security and its duty
to implement its resolutions relating to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and the broader Arab-Israeli
conflict.

Israel and Palestine must resume negotiations to
build confidence, which is a clear and necessary step to
build a harmonious future. The international
community must not shy away from its responsibility
to help the people of Palestine, who have been
yearning for freedom for more than 60 years. The time
for the international community to act is now. It must
garner the necessary political will to act with
consistency to uphold international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and all relevant Security Council
resolutions, with which all States Members of the
United Nations, including Israel, are bound to comply.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Namibia's
full support for Prime Minister Salam Fayyad's plan to
end the occupation of Palestine and achieve the
independence of the State of Palestine, living side by
side with the State of Israel in peace and security. We
call on the Security Council to demonstrate effective
leadership and support for that plan.

