Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council on a decisive issue that goes to the core of the
Council's role in maintaining international peace and
security and building the defences of peace. This, of
course, is the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for convening this debate, and the
introductory speakers this morning for their
presentations.

My statement today will obviously not be able to
do justice to all the challenges presented in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/579), so I would
like to briefly draw attention to three issues.

First, we need to ensure there is greater
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Australia is concerned about the increased
indiscriminate targeting of civilians with explosive
weapons, including improvised explosive devices
(IEDs). The most recent Secretary-General's report on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2010/463) reported an
82 per cent increase in IED incidents, which is an
alarming trend. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for further systematic data collection
and analysis of the human costs of the use of explosive
weapons.

Secondly, we support the Secretary-General's call
to move away from a selective approach to addressing
the protection of civilians. We must acknowledge that
peacekeeping is but one tool at the disposal of the
Council in protecting civilians. The most effective way,
of course, is to prevent the conflict in the first place.

In this vein, we welcomed the initiative of the
United Kingdom earlier this month in convening a
meeting of the Council with Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe at the start of the month to provide a briefing
on global hotspots. The Council, as members know
better than I, has a heavy, labour-intensive agenda each
month - much of it predetermined through regular
mandate renewals, reviews of reports by the Secretary-
General, thematic reviews. We think that an early,
focused briefing on hotspots, such as was undertaken
this month, should better prepare the Council to
anticipate trouble and take action as required to prevent
conflict and to protect civilians.

Thirdly, I would like to discuss an issue on which
Australia has been particularly active. Uniformed
components of peacekeeping missions need guidelines
to implement protection-of-civilians mandates.
Guidelines are necessary to enable troop and police
contingents to understand their responsibilities and
adequately prepare and execute protection-of-civilians
mandates. Guidelines will assist peacekeepers in their
engagement with the local population, their
anticipation of threats and the assessment of the use of
force and deterrence permissible under the mandate.
The development of guidelines will also assist in
determining the necessary resources and capabilities
and the overall management of expectations.

Australia has been pleased by the considerable
progress that has been made during the last 18 months
in this area. We are encouraged by the development of
a strategic framework to guide senior mission
leadership in the development of mission-specific
strategies on the protection of civilians, following a
request by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations earlier this year. We look forward to co-
hosting, with Uruguay, another workshop here in New
York on 6 December to enable discussion between the
Secretariat and Member States on that framework. We
have also been pleased to contribute in a small way to
the work under way to develop African Union (AU)
guidelines on protection of civilians, as referenced in
the Secretary-General's report. We will continue to
assist the AU in that endeavour.

Despite some progress, much work obviously and
inevitably remains to be done. Public information
strategies are needed to manage international and local
expectations regarding the ability of a peacekeeping
mission to protect civilians, including the reality that
peacekeepers cannot possibly protect everyone,
everywhere, all of the time. Australia encourages
United Nations missions to develop risk mitigation
strategies where insufficient resources are available to
physically protect all civilians. As examples, those
could include visits to areas within missions where
there is not a permanent United Nations presence, the
establishment of mechanisms to encourage dialogue
with the local population and the establishment of
effective communication mechanisms to provide early
warning, as is already the practice in some missions.

The use of benchmarks in peacekeeping mission
mandates is an important tool for the articulation of the
Council's expectations. Benchmarks on the protection
of civilians need to be included from the mission outset,
should include effective indicators to measure progress
and need to be used as a basis for determining when a
peacekeeping mission may draw down. To support
such initiatives, as requested in resolution 1894 (2009),
there also needs to be a comprehensive and consistent
approach to reporting on protection of civilian issues as
part of peacekeeping operations.

To conclude, we welcome the presidential
statement that was adopted at the start of today's
debate (S/PRST/2010/25). As we know, the majority of
casualties in a conflict are civilians. The Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, the preceding speaker,
has just reminded us very well of what that means: the
loss of life. As the Secretary-General's own report says,
the unstinting and rigorous attention of the Council to
the protection of civilians remains vital and must be at
the centre of not just its deliberations, but more
decisively, of course, its actions.

