Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
honourable judges, Mr. Carmel Agius and Mr. Theodor
Meron, and to Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for
participating in today's meeting. We are equally
grateful to Uruguay for its important work in chairing
the Working Group on the International Tribunals. The
insightful briefings provided by the judges and the
Prosecutor are meaningful instances of the important
work being performed by the International Tribunals,
the establishment of which by the Security Council
was a decisive initiative for preserving the ideals of
international justice and ensuring the prevalence of
justice over impunity. We fully support the work of
the Tribunals, being aware that their legacy will leave
a decisive imprint by strengthening international
criminal justice.

We acknowledge the assessment by Judge Carmel
Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz on the
significant progress achieved in concluding the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the recommendation for the completion
strategy and the delivery of its final verdicts before its
closure by the end of 2017. We are, however, concerned
about staff attrition in the ICTY. In our View, a viable
solution, with support by Member States, should be
found to counter that trend in order to allow the Tribunal
to complete its mandate in a smooth and timely manner.

We recognize the efforts of the Tribunal to complete
its work expeditiously, as well as the judges' efforts to
identify the means to speed up pending cases. In that
regard, we urge the Republic of Serbia to cooperate
fully with the ICTY by handing over, without delay, the
three individuals indicted whose arrest warrants have
yet to be executed, in order to allow the Tribunal to
finalize its work. We also call on other countries of the
former Yugoslavia to cooperate with the Tribunal fully
and in good faith.

Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we stress the importance of States'
cooperation with the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. As such, we call on the States
concerned to investigate, arrest prosecute or extradite,
in accordance with their applicable international
obligations, all fugitives accused ofgenocide and crimes
against humanity residing in their territories. We take
note and commend the Mechanism cooperation with the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and with Rwanda
by keeping the authorities updated on its activities on
the transition of responsibilities and in the provision of
assistance to national jurisdictions. We acknowledge
that the Mechanism continues to draw upon best
practices and lessons learned from the ICTY and ICTR
in pursuing ways to improve its operations, procedures
and working methods and to maintain flexibility in its
staff assignments in order to maximize effectiveness
and efficiency.

We commend the construction and inauguration
last November of the Mechanism's new premises in
Arusha, with dedicated archives and facilities and
allowing for the collocation of the ICTR Mechanism.
As Judge Meron highlighted,

"[it] stands not only as a symbol of accountability
and the rule of law, but as a new model of and
for international justice that must succeed if
international justice and the fight to end impunity
are themselves to succeed in the long run."

We equally welcome the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Olufemi Elias as the new
Registrar for the Mechanism.

It is with great concern that we learned of the arrest
of Judge Aydin Sedaf Akay. We appeal to the Turkish
Government for his release. His detention violates the
principle of the independence ofjustice and the judges'
privileges and immunities, thereby creating a feeling of
uncertainty for otherjudges.

Finally, we would like to highlight that the tenets of
international criminal justice embodied in the Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
were crucial for the recovery processes following the
appalling events that occurred in those territories.
The establishment of the Tribunals as a response to
the atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda were instrumental in preserving trust in
international law and ensuring that those responsible
for serious human rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law faced trial and were held
accountable, thatjudicial mechanisms were put in place
as a deterrent and a warning that such crimes would
not left unpunished and that redress to the victims was
guaranteed. Ultimately, the Tribunals made a tangible
contribution to the fight against impunity and the
strengthening of international criminal law.

