Mr. Seepanovic' (Montenegro): Allow me
to congratulate you, Madam, on your country's
presidency and to thank you for organizing this annual
open debate on Security Council working methods.
We appreciate Argentina's leadership and devotion
to the Council's working methods, as well as the
results achieved so far under your chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court and the Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities for their useful presentations
and extend our appreciation and support for their
respective work.

We welcome the tangible progress made in recent
years towards improving the working methods of the
Security Council, including most recently the three
presidential notes adopted since the convening of last
year's debate. It is important to recognize that the efforts
to improve transparency, inclusiveness, efficiency and
openness have been considerable. This is reflected in
holding of open and public debates, wrap-up and Arria
Formula meetings, interactive and informal dialogues,
all of which contribute to enhanced transparency and
improving of the dialogue between Security Council
and general membership.

But there is still a lot of room for improvement
in the working methods. One particular area we feel
deserves our renewed attention is the interaction
between Security Council and the General Assembly.
We believe that the entire membership can benefit from
a more substantive dialogue on issues of importance
and relevance between the two principal organs of the
United Nations.

Another aspect is preventive work of the Security
Council. Montenegro is of the View that Council
should better utilize the options at its disposal so as
to prevent the emergence of conflicts. In that regard,
we deemed useful the horizon-scanning briefings by
the Department of Political Affairs, as they represented
valuable opportunities to identify potential crisis
before developing and act proactively to mitigate the
effects of escalation of violence. In that spirit, I would
like to mention that measures under Chapter VI should
be given priority in addressing crisis around the world.
Only after all means of peaceful settlement of disputes
under Chapter VI have been exhausted, should the
Security Council resort to Chapter VII provisions.

In the context of the responsibility to protect, to
which Montenegro is firmly attached, let me also
welcome the timely initiative of France on the voluntary
restraint in the use of the veto in cases of genocide,
mass atrocities and crimes against humanity. That
initiative, which Montenegro fully supports, is all the
more commendable since it came from a permanent
member. My country strongly believes that Council's
ability to effectively respond to situations of mass
atrocities should not be held hostage by exercising
or threatening the veto. Using veto in the face of
mass atrocities, as we have witnessed for example
in Syria's case, has devastating consequences on
human lives, livelihoods and basic respect for human
rights. It also harms reputation and credibility of the
Security Council and of the United Nations as a whole.
Therefore, we remain very keen to see the idea of the
code of conduct materialize, in the spirit of dialogue
and constructiveness and in the manner that will ensure
the effectiveness and sustainability of the solution. We
hope that voluntary self-restraint on the use of the veto
will open the way for a much-needed and long-overdue
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, in order
to bring the Council in line with contemporary world
realities.

