Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): The Security Council
has convened an open debate on this item for the third
time during this month of April, which attests to the
gravity of the situation on the ground in the occupied
territories. In a mere matter of weeks, the Security
Council has adopted three resolutions on this matter -
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) - but those
resolutions remain unimplemented by Israel, and the
conflict has worsened, resulting in unimaginable
consequences for the Palestinian people and
threatening the stability and security of the entire
Middle East region.

We learn with mounting horror of reports
emerging from the Jenin refugee camp concerning the
massacre of large numbers of civilians, with
monumental destruction inflicted on their lands. The
first eyewitness accounts given by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and by the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Roed-Larsen, reflect
the scope of the truly devastating humanitarian
catastrophe that took place in Jenin.

In this regard, we strongly urge Israel
immediately to fulfil the three requirements put forth
by the Special Coordinator: to lift the curfew
immediately, to expand the assistance provided by the
Israeli forces to humanitarian workers with regard to
equipment and security liaison, and to facilitate the
delivery of water and food supplies to the needy
population. As in any conflict situation, a civilized
nation must comply with its obligations under
international humanitarian law and must allow
humanitarian agencies to have access to the suffering.
We therefore demand that Israel do so promptly.

Furthermore, the sieges and the incursions into
Palestinian towns, which have continued unabated,
must cease forthwith. At this moment, Israeli policies
of aggression have contributed nothing whatsoever to
ensuring security; rather, they have created insecurity
for Israel itself, for the Palestinians and for the other
peoples of the region: that aggression is now
threatening to embroil the neighbouring region by
fuelling deep feelings of anger, mistrust and frustration
over the carnage wrought by Israel on the Palestinian
people and Israel's utter disregard of the condemnation
issued by the international community.

In light of the above, my delegation cannot but
underscore the imperative need to deploy an
international force on the ground, under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

Finally, it bears reiterating that a military solution
cannot resolve this crisis. On the contrary, acts of
aggression have demonstrated tragic results:
indiscriminate killing, wanton destruction of property
and deep entrenchment of the suffering of the
Palestinian people, already under 35 years of
occupation. A way out through this quagmire can be
found following Israel's complete and immediate
withdrawal from all Palestinian occupied territories. It
is only then that a diplomatic and political solution can
be reached, within the framework of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the
principle of land for peace - the underpinning of the
Madrid Peace Conference. Only then can the objective
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
become a reality.

