Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to thank
Japan in its capacity as President of the Security
Council for the leadership it has shown in convening
this emergency meeting. I also express our gratitude
to the eight members of the Council - Egypt, Bolivia,
France, Italy, Senegal, Sweden, the United Kingdom
and Uruguay - who requested this meeting as a matter
of urgency following the recent alarming developments
regarding Jerusalem. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing to the Council, and
the Secretary-General for his statement in this regard.
Before I deliver the rest of my statement in English, I
would like to say something in Arabic.

(spoke in Arabic)

From this Chamber, I would like to commend our
great Palestinian people who are defending Jerusalem
today in its neighbourhoods, streets and places of
worship. I would like to commend those at the Gate of
Amud, in all the villages and Palestinian camps and all
over the world. I would like to commend the honourable
people who support and defend international law, our
rights and the resolutions of the Security Council,
and those - whom we support - who are urging the
United States Administration to withdraw its illegal,
irresponsible and provocative decision, which has no
meaning other than that ofpleasing Israel, the occupying
Power, as it continues its arrogant and unjust defiance of
international law. I would like to thank the 14 members
of the Security Council who expressed their principled
legal positions with respect to Jerusalem.

(spoke in English)

We come before the Security Council today with
a sense of urgency. We urge the Council to act swiftly
to uphold its duties under the Charter of the United
Nations and the integrity and authority of its resolutions
in the light of the violations and provocations against
Jerusalem's legal, political and historical status, and
the Palestinian people's rights and legitimate national
aspirations. The extremely regrettable announcement
by President Donald Trump on 6 December declaring
that the United States recognized Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel, and his decision to move its Embassy
to that city, in direct contravention of Security Council
resolutions and the long-standing international
consensus on Jerusalem, has heightened tensions
and risks the complete destabilization of this volatile
situation, with far-reaching consequences.

The Israeli Government's glee at this decision
underscores the fact that the situation we face today
has been blatantly instigated by the occupying Power.
Rather than complying with the Council's repeated
demands to cease its violations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, the Israeli Prime Minister and
his Government have persisted with their crimes and
with their incessant bullying of world leaders into
endorsing Israel's illegal policies and practices in the
city and even joining it in its attempts to destroy the
possibility of a two-State solution based on the pre-
1967 lines, including by altering and undermining
Jerusalem's legal status, character and demography,
along with that of the rest of the occupied territory,
in grave breach of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.

We have often lamented this impunity, but we
have not addressed often enough the actions enabling
the crimes that have led to the grave reality we now
face. The complicity must be recognized. The decision
by the United States to reward the Israelis' impunity
undermines and essentially disqualifies its leadership
role in the quest for peace in the region. Indeed, world
leaders' resounding rejection of this provocative
decision is indicative of the general rejection of all
such illegal policies and measures and of the immense
concerns about the dangerous implications of this
decision, including the prospects for peace and security
in the region and beyond. We are grateful for the strong,
principled positions that have been expressed by States
and organizations worldwide. The global consensus in
this regard is clear. International law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), must be upheld and respected;
the status of Jerusalem cannot be unilaterally altered
or determined by any State; and this decision by the
United States should be reconsidered and rescinded.

That the Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues
to pose a threat to international peace and security
is beyond question. That has been confirmed by
the national, political and religious sensitivities and
emotions stirred by these developments. Jerusalem's
significance to the Palestinian people, both Muslims and
Christians, cannot be underestimated. President Abbas,
in his statement of 6 December, clearly reaffirmed our
historical, national and religious attachment to the Holy
City. His declaration, along with those of Palestinian
officials and millions of Palestinian citizens, should
leave no question that Jerusalem is a matter of priority
and a redline for Palestinians. There can be no just and
lasting solution to the question of Palestine without a
just solution to the question of Jerusalem. Jerusalem
has long been the heart of Palestine and always will be.

Nor can Jerusalem's significance to all Arabs and
Muslims worldwide be underestimated. It is the first
qibla, and Al-Haram Al-Sharif is the third holiest
sanctuary in Islam. The historic status quo at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif must be fully respected and preserved, as
repeatedly called for by Arab and Muslim nations and
by the international community as a whole, and as
reflected in the resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. We recognize the Hashemite
Kingdom ofJordan and its special role and efforts in that
regard as custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem. And
the clarity and strength of statements made in recent
days - a profound backlash against this irresponsible
unilateral decision - reaffirm the legitimate concerns
and interest of the international community regarding
the question of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem has long been accorded a special
political and legal status, beginning with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947, in which the city
was designated a corpus separatum, and the many
resolutions thereafter that called for protection of the
city's unique spiritual, religious and cultural dimensions
and heritage, and for access to its holy sites by people
of all religions and nationalities, with due regard for
the fact that Jerusalem is sacred to the followers of
the three monotheistic religions, Islam, Christianity
and Judaism. The Assembly has just reaffirmed those
principles by a vast majority in its resolution 72/15 on
Jerusalem, contrary to the false Israeli narrative and
rhetoric in that regard.

Israel has never been recognized by any country
as sovereign over Jerusalem. Its status remains
unresolved, as affirmed in Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and by its designation
for decades as a final-status issue in the Middle East
peace process. Moreover, East Jerusalem has continued
to be occupied territory since 1967 and an integral
part of the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, to
which international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, applies, as reaffirmed by the Council,
most recently in resolution 2334 (2016), the General
Assembly and the International Court of Justice.

We recall the Council's resolutions on Jerusalem,
including resolution 476 (1980) and resolution 478
(1980), which lays out the clear determination that

"all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
which have altered or purport to alter the character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem"

have no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation
of the Fourth Geneva Convention and "are null and
void and must be rescinded forthwith". Resolution 478
(1980) rejected Israel's attempts to forcibly annex East
Jerusalem, deeming the occupying Power's enactment
of its basic law a violation of international law and
demanding that it be rescinded. The Council further
specifically called on all Member States to accept its
decision not to recognize the basic law or any other
such actions seeking to alter the character and status
of Jerusalem, and directly called on "those States that
have established diplomatic missions at Jerusalem
to withdraw such missions from the Holy City". In
resolution 2334 (2016), the Council unequivocally
affirmed that

"it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed by the parties through negotiations".

The decision of the United States cannot change
those facts. I repeat, the decision of the United States
cannot change those facts. Actions taken contrary
to Security Council resolutions have no legal effect
and cannot change the applicability of international
law to the situation, including the prohibition of the
acquisition of territory by force. The occupied territory
of the State of Palestine, which encompasses the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip,
is an established legal and political fact. No policy
announcement can change that reality, nor can it negate
the rights of the Palestinian people, as per international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

The Security Council must reaffirm its clear
position on the status of Jerusalem and its rejection
of all violations of that status regardless of when they
are committed or who commits them. The Security
Council's resolutions remain fully valid and must be
implemented. They are the key to peace. The extremely
negative messages that such reckless action sends to our
people are clear. They say that our beliefin international
law and the international system, our patience and
perseverance, our unending pursuit of peace and
cooperation in good faith with all peace initiatives,
not to mention our historically painful compromise for
peace, based on a two-State solution, have all been to
no avail. They say that those who play by the rules will
lose and those who trample on the law will win. That
must be redressed. The Council must act to restore the
Palestinian people's belief in international law as the
most viable path to the realization of our rights and
freedom. The Council must restore our belief that peace
is possible and ensure that no more generations will
suffer this grave injustice.

As President Abbas has repeatedly cautioned,
the Council must also act in order to avert the risks
of further exacerbating religious sensitivities, which
threaten to transform a solvable political-territorial
conflict into a never-ending religious war that will
only be exploited by extremists, thereby fueling more
radicalism, violence, terrorism and strife in the region
and elsewhere. We call on the Council to denounce
the recent decision about Jerusalem, act responsibly
and assert its authority in the efforts to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We will work with all of
our partners to adopt a Security Council resolution. We
believe that paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter
of the United Nations should be invoked and that it is
applicable in this regard.

We once again urge the United States to rescind its
decision and rectify this serious matter, in conformity
with the relevant resolutions and in a manner that can
salvage the prospects for a peaceful solution and ensure
a future of peace, security, prosperity and dignity for
both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples sooner rather
than later. In line with the relevant resolutions, we urge
States not to recognize such unilateral decisions and the
unlawful situation that has resulted from Israel's illegal

measures, and to ensure that all of their respective
policies and actions, including vis-a-vis Israel's illegal
settlement and colonization of our land, conform to that.

We also call on States that have not recognized
the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, on the basis of the pre-l967 borders, to do so
as a matter of urgency and an investment in peace.
That practical step would accord with the long-
standing international consensus and the international
community's declared commitment regarding a two-
State solution. Considering recent developments, it
would also represent an important contribution to
salvaging the prospects for peace and pushing back
against actions that undermine efforts to achieve a just
and lasting solution that is based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
the principle of land for peace, and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.

We call yet again for collective peace efforts.
In resolution 2334 (2016), the Council advocated
intensifying and accelerating international and regional
diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East without delay.
It is high time for all the parties concerned to mobilize
such efforts. From now on, it must be a collective
process undertaken by the Security Council and the
Quartet-plus-plus-plus. It must be collective, because
when one party dominated the process, that did not lead
to success. It led to what we saw two days ago.

We cannot continue repeating the same failed
formula and mistakes of the peace process of decades
past. It is clear that only a collective effort can resolve
the prolonged conflict. The recognition that all must
do their part and that a multilateral approach is the
more effective path has been central to the Arab Peace
Initiative and the French initiative, as well as to the
efforts of the Russian Federation, China, Egypt and the
Quartet. It is urgent that we expand on and accelerate
those efforts. One party cannot continue to monopolize
the peace process, and especially not one that acts with
a bias in favour of the occupying Power at the expense
of the law and rights of the occupied people.

For their part, in the days ahead, President Abbas
and the Palestinian leadership will continue their
consultations at all levels to address the critical situation
and determine the most appropriate path forward. That
will include emergency meetings of the Palestinian

Liberation Organization's Central Council to affirm
a unified Palestinian national position, as well as the
upcoming Arab Ministerial Meeting in Jordan and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation's Islamic Summit
in Turkey on Wednesday. Our overarching priorities will
remain central to all of those efforts - the protection
of our steadfast people, our land, including Jerusalem,
and our holy sites. That will be true as long as Israel's
belligerent foreign occupation persists. We will make
every effort to bring an end to that occupation and to
achieve a just and lasting peace that upholds the rights
of the Palestinian people, ensures ajust solution to the
plight of the Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
resolution 194 (II) and the Arab Peace Initiative, and
achieves the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, where our people can
finally live in freedom, dignity, peace and security side
by side with Israel and all our other neighbours in a new
Middle East.

