Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the States who have called for a public
debate on an issue that clearly concerns all Member
States of the Organization, since it has to do with
addressing the threat of the acquisition of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) by non-State players. It is,
therefore, essential to face this threat as a united front,
with optimal effectiveness and a full understanding of
what is involved.

The possibility of terrorist networks pursuing
illegal trafficking of technologies and material that
could be used to produce WMD indeed constitutes a
serious threat to the security of all of us. This should
compel us to act without delay to prevent the
irreversible from taking place.

This is why my country would like to express its
full support for - and endorsement of - the goal set
forth by the sponsors of the draft resolution of
addressing this fearsome threat and filling the admitted
gaps in international law. Indeed, there is nothing in
international treaties that could fully protect us against
the risk of WMD falling into the hands of terrorist
groups.

In the absence of binding international standards,
and because of the seriousness and the urgent nature of
the threat, the response to it needs to be articulated and
formulated by the Security Council. It is understood
that, in shouldering this responsibility, the Security
Council is acting in an exceptional manner, since,
clearly, the Charter does not give it a mandate to
legislate on behalf of the international community, but
simply gives it the principle responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, the
Members of the United Nations will accept and
implement the decisions that the Security Council will
take in this area. From this standpoint, it does not even
seem necessary for the Security Council to take action
under Chapter VII. If it does, perhaps it should only do
so for the three first paragraphs of the draft resolution,
as my Brazilian colleague has just proposed. At the
same time, and parallel to the implementation of the
resolution that the Security Council adopts, an
intergovernmental process aimed at finalizing an
international legal instrument on this issue should be
initiated and rapidly completed, perhaps in the
Conference on Disarmament or elsewhere.

That being the case, I would like to recall that,
with respect to the relationship between States and
WMD, widely accepted treaties do exist. Their
relevance and validity must be consolidated and, at the
same time, reaffirmed. In this regard, it is useful to
underscore that the draft resolution needs to limit itself
to filling the gaps that exist in international law, that is,
the relationship between WMD and non-State players.
It should not create obligations for States that would be
in addition to or compete with those that are provided
for by the above-mentioned treaties, or that could
weaken or modify the international regimes established
by two of these treaties.

It is evident that the most effective way to
counter WMD is to completely eliminate them. This is
clearly the principal goal of the three basic treaties and
their protocols, and thus States parties must
scrupulously and fully implement the provisions of
these international instruments.

From this standpoint, I believe it appropriate to
recall that the five nuclear-weapons Powers did
unequivocally commit to eliminate their nuclear
stockpiles at the Sixth Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), over which it was my honour to preside in
2000, here in New York. The 2005 NPT Review
Conference, the third preparatory session of which will
begin next week here in New York, will undoubtedly
offer us an opportunity to clearly assess the progress
made in this area since 2000.

In other words, proliferation in all its aspects and
disarmament are, for us, part of the same equation.
This is why we believe that it is appropriate and
necessary for this draft resolution to reaffirm the need
to work towards disarmament.

Similarly, we believe that the emergence of
WMD-free zones, based on freely agreed
arrangements, would be an ideal contribution to non-
proliferation, as the United Nations Disarmament
Commission expressed very clearly in 1999. We also
believe that this draft resolution must unambiguously
reaffirm the legitimate right of States to peacefully use
nuclear-related materials and technologies.

Lastly, the establishment of a monitoring
committee, whose mandate must be determined in
advance, should include the provision of a sunset
clause. It should also provide unequivocal support for
existing disarmament mechanisms, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons as key means of
implementing the objectives of disarmament and non-
proliferation.

