Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Today is a praiseworthy and memorable day in the
history of the Security Council. More than 30 years
have elapsed, and now all the members of the Security
Council have once again travelled thousands of miles
and have come to the continent of Africa to hold
meetings devoted to the question of the Sudan, a
question that has aroused concern in all parties. The
event itself is a reflection of the Security Council's
support for, emphasis on and contribution to African
issues.
The challenges and threats facing humankind at
the beginning of this new century have become more
complex and are increasing daily. Only by joining
together in cooperation will the international
community be able to achieve collective security and
peace. Without stability and tranquillity on the African
continent, there will be no global peace and security.

African issues are also global issues. We all
breathe the same air and share a common destiny. The
resolution adopted earlier will certainly play a very
important role in helping peace negotiations in the
Sudan. The north-south conflict in the Sudan has lasted
for four decades. It is the longest-running internal
conflict on the African continent. It has resulted in
more than 2 million deaths and done great harm to the
Sudanese people in both the north and the south, as
well as to peace and development in the Horn of
Africa. The tragedy must be brought to a speedy end.
The prompt and effective resolution of this question is
in the fundamental and long-term interests of all the
Sudanese people. It would also be conducive to
maintaining stability and development in the Horn of
Africa.

The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and concerned countries, as well as the
Sudanese Government and the Sudanese People's
Liberation Movement in the southern part of the
Sudan, have worked tirelessly throughout that process.
The north-south peace talks have made significant
progress, resulting in the adoption of six protocols and
one declaration. Today, an important memorandum of
understanding was signed. The peace negotiations have
now reached the final, critical stage, and there is hope
for success.

The Chinese delegation, like others, sincerely
hopes and trusts that the parties will take this historic
opportunity, redouble their efforts and demonstrate
strong political will and flexibility with a view to
signing the comprehensive peace agreement by the end
of the year.

That would not only provide a perfect conclusion
to the process of achieving a proper settlement of the
long-running question of the southern Sudan, but it
would also be conducive to the resolution of the
question of Darfur. At the same time, it would set an
example of success on the African continent and would
encourage all parties to bring conflict to an end
through political negotiation. Its great impact and
profound positive influence would transcend the north-
south process in the Sudan.
It should be emphasized that the signing of the
comprehensive peace agreement will be only the first
step in the north-south process. Comprehensive and
timely implementation of the agreement will be more
important, more arduous and more complicated task.
That will require both parties, from the north and the
south, to continue faithfully to implement their
commitments and to comply with the agreement. But it
will also need the vigorous assistance of the
international community.

China hopes that, once the agreement has been
signed and the implementation begins, the United
Nations will deploy a peace operation and the
international community will immediately begin a
package of programmes to assist the Sudan in
economic rehabilitation and development. Any
procrastination or delay could have a negative impact
on the Sudanese effort to achieve national
reconciliation. The international community should
also assume its important responsibilities and
obligations in promoting and achieving Sudanese
reconciliation, as well as in maintaining stability and
development in Africa. The commitments of the
international community should be turned into concrete
and down-to-earth action; they must not vanish into
thin air.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
China is ready to work with the international
community to make every effort to help the Sudan to
become, at an early date, a country of peace, unity,
stability and prosperity.

