Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too would like to thank Mr. Khalikov for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Darfur, which
is without doubt one of the world's greatest emergency
situations.

I would like to associate myself with those who
have condemned the attacks against the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), including the one on 17 March in Nyala,
which resulted in the death of a Nigerian Blue Helmet,
and the one on 9 March on a UNAMID vehicle in
El Geneina, which injured four troops. We hope that
Sudanese officials will ensure that the perpetrators of
those attacks are arrested. We call upon all Sudanese
actors to cooperate fully with UNAMID, which is in
the Sudan to maintain peace and assist the most
vulnerable. We must ensure that UNAMID's
deployment is completed quickly.

I would also like to call on all parties to
cooperate in order to prevent a worsening of the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. We once again
deplore the decision by the Government of the Sudan
to suspend the activities of several Sudanese
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and to expel
more than a dozen international NGOs that are carrying
out crucial humanitarian activities and which have an
international reputation for seriousness and
impartiality.

Along with the Secretary-General, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
all the countries of the European Union, France hopes
that the Sudanese authorities will reverse their decision
and refrain for further expulsions. The operations of
the NGOs affected by the Government's decision
account for more than half of the humanitarian effort in
Darfur. As OCHA's representative has indicated, that
decision threatens to deprive more than 1 million
people of food, health care and drinking water. In that
connection, we look forward to the conclusions of the
joint assessment currently being carried by OCHA and
the Sudanese authorities to more precisely determine
all the consequences of that decision that once again
puts the people concerned in a situation of unbearable
deprivation.

In that regard, I would like to commend
UNAMID and the agencies of the United Nations
system - including the World Food Programme,
UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization - who are doing their best to avert an
even graver humanitarian tragedy.
We regret the abruptness and speed with which
Sudanese Government agencies have implemented the

expulsion order, including harassment and intimidation
against NGOs still on the ground. We consider it
essential to ensure the protection of the 6,000 people
who make up the national staff of the NGOs that have
been expelled. Clearly, it is also very important to
protect the property of the expelled NGOs.

The continuation of humanitarian efforts in
Darfur is essential for the nearly 4 million people who
depend upon them, in particular the 2.5 million
displaced persons. The challenge is to protect the
people of Darfur. That requires that all parties,
beginning with Sudanese officials, act responsibly
regardless of the circumstances. In that regard, I should
like to emphasize the crucial need for all parties to the
conflict, including the authorities in Khartoum, to
respect the binding norms of international
humanitarian law, in particular those relating to
humanitarian access to victims and the protection of
humanitarian staff.

The issue of humanitarian assistance and the
issue of international criminal justice must absolutely
be kept apart. France reaffirms its support for
international criminal justice and its independence, and
reiterates the Sudan's obligation to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). To punish its own population is
certainly not the correct response. As the representative
of the Sudan has himself said, we too believe in the
value of dialogue and the need to provide a political
solution to this crisis. We also believe that combating
impunity cannot be delinked from the search for peace
in Darfur, or anywhere else in the world. We therefore
look forward to our 26 March discussion with Joint
Chief Negotiator Bassole.

