Let me begin by thanking Mr. Mladenov for his sobering briefing on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory and his concerted efforts to resolve the long-standing question of Palestine. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his written report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234). Since the question of Palestine was first discussed in the Security Council, in 1948, the Council has adopted more than 100 resolutions on the issue, surely more than on any other agenda item on the Council's agenda. However, it is the agenda item that has also seen the least amount of progress. Since 1948, the Palestinian people have seen no legitimate progress in the establishment of a sovereign State of Palestine. They have seen their land, heritage and birthright seized, demolished and resettled by strangers, house by house, village by village, olive grove by olive grove, until the prospect of a peaceful, independent and contiguous Palestine is now in serious jeopardy. The ultimate goal for all of us should be the establishment of a sovereign, independent, contiguous Palestinian State existing side by side with a safe and secure State of Israel, based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine, as has been stated by the Secretary-General, his Special Coordinator and many of us on the Council. South Africa reiterates that the illegal occupation of Palestinian land and the seizure and demolition of the Palestinians' land and structures are illegal. Such actions serve only to incite hatred and violence, as evidenced in the Secretary- General's most recent report. In two days' time, on 23 December, it will be the four-year anniversary of the almost unanimous adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). However, during that time illegal settlements, seizures and demolitions of Palestinian property and structures have continued unabated. Inthe four years since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), more than 46,000 housing units have been announced, approved or constructed. All of those units are without legal validity, constitute a flagrant violation of international law and are a major obstacle to the two-State solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Yet no action has been taken to address those grave violations. Each and every one of those housing units is illegal under international law and a broken promise to the Palestinian people. In that regard, South Africa calls for the full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). In addition, we call on the Council to address and take action against those who have continuously and overtly violated this and previous Security Council resolutions. It is the right, fair and just thing to do. The staggering number of civilian casualties in the occupied Palestinian territory as reported by the Secretary-General is truly appalling. In 2020 alone, six Palestinian children have been killed and 1,048 injured by the Israeli security forces. As stated in paragraph 87 of the Secretary-General's report, "children should not be the target of violence or put in harm's way. They should be afforded special protection from any form of violence". This must stop. Bullets are not a reasonable or proportional response to rocks. Moreover, South Africa fully supports the call by Mr. Michael Lynk, Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, and Ms. Agnes Callamard, Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, for an impartial and independent investigation into the killing of Ali Ayman Abu Aliya, a 15-year-old boy, by the Israel Defense Forces, where there was no threat of death or serious injury to the Israeli security forces. Equally concerning is the number of children held in detention. Indeed, 157 children are currently being held in Israeli custody, while two others are being held in administrative detention without charge or trial. South Africa reiterates its call for the Council to make the long-overdue field visit to the occupied Palestinian territory by those members of the Council willing to do so. That will provide an opportunity for them to witness for themselves the conditions, hardships and challenges faced by the Palestinian people on a daily basis. In recent months, we have seen bilateral agreements that have been hailed as breakthroughs for peace in the Middle East. However, those transactional agreements, which did not include Palestine, a significant stakeholder in Middle East peace, have not yielded tangible results for those most affected by the illegal occupation. Palestinians continue to live under occupation and are denied their most basic civil and human rights. Those bilateral agreements do not change international law; they do not change Security Council resolutions. While Israel's annexation plans may have been suspended, de facto annexation continues with ongoing and increased settlement activity, as we have previously noted. The situation in Gaza is deeply alarming. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the associated restrictions have further impacted the deteriorating humanitarian situation. The health-care sector is unable to cope with the increased demand, and patients with life-threatening non-COVID-19 cases are being denied permits to travel for critical medical care. We call on Israel to end its inhumane treatment of the citizens of Gaza and honour its obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention as an occupying Power. In that regard, we commend the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), its leadership and personnel for their dedication and unfailing support for the Palestinian people in truly challenging circumstances. The Agency's financial situation is truly concerning, and we appeal to the international community to increase its financial support for UNRWA, which is a lifeline of support for millions of people. As I conclude my statement at this, South Africa's last meeting on the question of Palestine, let me reiterate South Africa's long-standing and dedicated support for Palestine's right to fundamental freedoms, human rights and self-determination. South Africa will continue to make every effort to support the Palestinian people and their just cause. That includes advocating for political dialogue between the parties on an equal footing, based on internationally agreed parameters that take into account the needs and aspirations of the Palestinian people. No peace plan or initiative can have any merit or succeed if all parties to the conflict are not included in such political processes as equal partners from the very beginning. Conflicts can be resolved only by treating each party as part of the future solution, not as a potential adversary.
