Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Unfortunately, the Security Council is meeting in
emergency session tonight because a grave crisis is under
way in Sierra Leone. Unfolding events threaten yet again to
undermine the democratically elected government of
President Kabbah. Renewed violence has initiated another
round of human suffering for the people of Sierra Leone, a
people who have suffered too much already.

The American Government and the American people
have viewed events in Sierra Leone with shock and dismay.
Despite the presence of more than 8,500 United Nations
peacekeepers, those who oppose peace in Sierra Leone,
especially the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels,
have initiated new attacks and detained hundreds United
Nations and other international personnel. Such actions are
totally unacceptable, and this threat to peace and security
must be brought to an end.

We all know that peacekeeping is inherently risky. We
commend the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and its troops, and the Secretary-General and
his staff, for their commitment and for their attempts to
respond to the difficult situation in which they have found
themselves. But we must be clear that the fault for the
current tragedy in Sierra Leone lies with the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) and its leader, Foday Sankoh, for their
violations of the commitments undertaken in the Lorne
Agreement.

Unless the situation is resolved and the peace process
put back on track, we could be faced with a resumption of
one of the most ruthless and brutal rebellions in the world.
The conflict could spill over Sierra Leone's borders,
engulfing neighbouring States and threatening stability
throughout West Africa. We could face a general reluctance
to support United Nations peacekeeping in Africa.

We strongly support the United Nations peacekeepers.
They were organized and sent to Sierra Leone not to
impose a settlement, not to enforce the peace, but to assist
in the implementation of the Lome Peace Agreement, an
accord which the RUF signed, then violated, and finally
subverted by launching their recent attacks. RUF actions
against the members of the United Nations peacekeeping
force are outrageous and in direct violation of the Lorne
Peace Agreement. Acting as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) withdrew, and before United Nations forces
were fully deployed, the RUF acted in a deliberate, cynical
manner to subvert and reverse the peace process.

The United States calls on the RUF immediately to
release all detainees, cease all military operations, comply
with its commitments under the Lome Peace Agreement
and respect all applicable norms of international human
rights and humanitarian law. We concur with the view
expressed by regional leaders at the ECOWAS Heads of
State summit in Abuja on 9 May, condemning the actions
of the RUF. We also note that ECOWAS heads of State
warned the RUF leadership that "it runs the risk of
revocation of the amnesty earlier granted to the members
of the movement under the Lome Peace Agreement, as
well as being tried for war crimes if they continue to flout
the Lome Peace Agreement". We welcome the decision
reached in Abuja to convene a special meeting of
ECOWAS defence ministers on 17 May to consider the
practical modalities should ECOMOG forces renew their
involvement in Sierra Leone.

We commend and support the leadership
demonstrated by the regional States and by ECOWAS in
promoting political and diplomatic initiatives to stabilize
the situation.

My Government is seized of this issue at the highest
levels. Secretary Albright has been in regular contact with
the Secretary-General. President Clinton also reviewed the
situation with Mr. Arman this morning. We are consulting
closely with the Secretariat.

President Clinton has asked the Reverend Jesse
Jackson, his Special Envoy for the Promotion of
Democracy and Human Rights in Africa, to return to the
region to work with leaders there for a resolution of this
crisis. Reverend Jackson has been actively involved in
diplomatic efforts to help the people of Sierra Leone to
realize their peaceful intentions.

We have intensified our continuing collaboration at
the highest levels with the Government of Sierra Leone,
with the United Nations in New York and Freetown, with
other regional leaders and with our British colleagues. In
that regard, we join others in acknowledging the United
Kingdom's important contribution in securing Lungi
airport. Our Ambassador to Sierra Leone, Joseph Melrose,
remains in Freetown and is in constant communication
with the Government of Sierra Leone and other key
officials.

Our focus continues to be on finding the best
possible measures to seek the release of all United
Nations and other international personnel who remain

 
detained, to protect civilians, to restore stability and to
reinforce the international presence in Sierra Leone.

The United States will assist the deployment of
additional troops for UNAMSIL. We are working hard with
other interested States to find ways to accelerate the
deployment of remaining battalions. The United States is
prepared to help transport additional troops to Sierra Leone.

We are also examining the possibilities of providing
equipment support for the international forces there. We are
now determining the kinds and quantities of equipment that
can be most helpful. We are working to develop a
coordinated approach with other members for delivery.

We intend to support the commitment West African
nations have made to send additional troops to Sierra Leone
and a United States military team is in Nigeria to determine
what assistance may be needed. The United States remains
committed to working in partnership with Africa. We will
continue our efforts to support and strengthen African
regional organizations and initiatives and their ongoing
efforts to ensure peace and stability throughout the region.

