Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing. I also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/297).

Argentina is closely following the situation
resulting from the threat posed by and the activities of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). I wish to affirm
Argentina's support for the regional efforts led by the
African Union, which, without any doubt, have led to
the recent decrease in the number of LRA attacks.

However, the LRA remains a serious threat. Joseph
Kony has been able to avoidjustice and lead his band of
murderers and thugs for more than 20 years, continuing
to commit egregious human rights violations,
especially against children. I would recall here that
the second report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the abuses
committed in the region affected by the LRA finds Kony
and his accomplices responsible for more than 100,000
deaths and for the abduction of 60,000 to 100,000
children. Those crimes must not go unpunished, and
their perpetrators must be brought to justice.

Joseph Kony and his accomplices have since
2005 had arrest warrants issued against them by the
International Criminal Court for numerous war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Efforts must be redoubled
to ensure that they are arrested.

Argentina supports the United Nations regional
strategy proposed by the Secretary-General and calls
on the States of the region to implement it in order to
put an end, once and for all, to the threat posed by the
LRA and ensure that a long-term is found. We therefore
encourage the countries of the region to continue to
cooperate and to provide troops and equipment for the
African Union's Regional Cooperation Initiative.

As concerns the situation in the Central African
Republic, focusing on today's topic, we are pleased to
hear that the Uganda People's Defence Forces will soon
resume their efforts to fight the LRA in their country.
The Ugandan contingent must continue its efforts
as part of the African Union Regional Task Force,
complementing the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic to fight the LRA.

Argentina also supports the strengthening and
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programmes
being carried out in the LRA-affected regions.

My delegation wishes to highlight the efforts of and
the work carried out by the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in support of
the regional efforts aimed at preventing conflict and
building peace and security in the countries members
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), including the fight against the LRA. In that
framework, we commend UNOCA's efforts to promote
justice and the rule of law, which are indispensable
conditions for the achievement of lasting peace in
the region. We wish also to highlight the review, with
ECCAS, of the framework of cooperation signed in
May 2012, with a view to facilitating its implementation
in areas including security, governance, electoral
processes, illicit arms trafficking and piracy and armed
robbery at sea.

In that connection, we must also stress the
coordination efforts carried out with the United
Nations Office in West Africa aimed at strengthening
the regional fight against piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Finally, Argentina supports the draft presidential
statement proposed by the United Kingdom, and we
ask the Secretariat to duly inform the Security Council
about the situation in the region and in particular the
activities of the LRA.

