Uruguay thanks the Russian Federation for convening this open debate during this extremely meaningful year, marking the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. To make progress in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, we must first strengthen the rights of women and girls, eliminating structural obstacles that impede their equal participation in society. Empowered women are formidable agents of change, essential to achieving sustainable peace and development. Education plays a crucial role in the political, social and economic empowerment of women, equipping them to overcome discrimination and violence, to defend their rights and freely take decisions, making them architects of their own destinies and protagonists of peace. Uruguay underscores the importance of the Safe Schools Declaration to protecting the education of women and girls, especially in conflict settings, and encourages more Member States to join it. States have the responsibility to ensure that the rights of women are protected and to facilitate the participation of women in decision-making and conflict mediation, in prevention and resolution processes and in peacekeeping activities, as articulated in resolution 1325 (2000). Women's skill in rapprochement, negotiation, understanding and empathy has been amply demonstrated. Uruguay supports the presence of women in peace operations and has continuously improved the quantity and quality of such participation, deploying, in this regard, military observers to monitor ceasefires, disarmament and access to humanitarian assistance. Uruguayan women contingents have participated in operational units negotiating with armed groups and carried out prevention and response to conflict-related sexual violence and human rights violations. Such activities have confirmed the unique capacities of women in interacting with local communities and fostering trust, especially in dealing with situations involving the most vulnerable. At the domestic level, the Government of Uruguay has implemented national policies to make the armed forces and police more accessible to women and to facilitate their integration into peacekeeping operations. Despite the challenges posed by the fight against the pandemic, Uruguay has been able to complete its national action plan, which will include targets relating to the training and deployment of women in such operations and their contribution to the protection of civilians. At the same time, Uruguay is supporting and developing strategies, in coordination with the United Nations and other Member States, such as the Elsie Initiative, promoted by Canada, under which Uruguay has conducted a study on barriers to the deployment of women and to their capacity development for such operations. It is clearly more crucial than ever to unite the efforts of States, the United Nations, regional and subregional organizations and civil society to step up the long-awaited and necessary implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, especially in the current circumstances, beset by new challenges from the coronavirus disease pandemic, which threatens to undermine progress to date. The Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network is another example of effective cooperation. Uruguay is co-Chair of the Network, together with Canada. The co-chairmanship began last December with a workshop held in Montevideo on opportunities for the women and peace and security agenda in the America, which brought together representatives of 17 countries of the region. That workshop allowed for the deeper application of the agenda to the regional context and to the specific security issues impacting the Americas. Other activities have been organized throughout the year, focused on implementing the agenda during the pandemic, supporting and protecting women peacebuilders, promoting national action plans, the importance of intergenerational dialogue, and leadership and targeted action to realize the agenda. In conclusion, Uruguay recognizes the invaluable contribution of civil society to upholding the rights of women and therefore calls for the protection of women human rights defenders and peacebuilders and an end to threats against them and their persecution. Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace security agenda has garnered significant normative strength. The time has come for its implementation. Uruguay reiterates its commitment to this agenda and will continue working tirelessly, together with the United Nations, other Member States and civil society, to realize its full and effective implementation.
