Mr. Simpson: It is an extraordinary honour to be
able to address the Security Council today. I am very
grateful to the Ambassador of Peru for hosting this
open debate. I am especially privileged to brief the
Council alongside three remarkable young women from
three continents. The Council has set an important
precedent today: young women acting, leading and
speaking truth to power to help shape a more peaceful
and secure future.

Being appointed by the Secretary-General has
been a once-in-a-lifetime privilege, especially with a
mandate to document the positive contributions that
young people around the world are making to building
and sustaining peace, resolving conflict and preventing
violence. I must also thank the 21 expert advisers
appointed by the Secretary-General to support my study,
and make the point that at least half of them are young
themselves, as well as the institutional members of the
Steering Committee that have overseen the process.

From the very outset, it was evident that addressing
the exclusion and marginalization of 1.8 billion young
people globally was at the heart of the progress study
on youth, peace and security. Nearly a quarter of those
young people - at least 408 million - are living in
situations where they are exposed to violence. In
undertaking this study, it was clear that we could not
afford to make the mistake of reproducing the very
problem of exclusion that we were attempting to solve. We
therefore designed an inclusive, participatory approach,
which was indispensable to the legitimacy of the study
and its findings. We conducted seven regional youth
consultations and supplemented those with national
and online consultations, country-specific research in
27 countries, numerous thematic studies and surveys of
youth-led peacebuilding organizations, Member States
and United Nations entities. To ensure that we heard
from young people who would not normally have a voice
in this type of global policy process, we also facilitated
281 focus groups in 44 countries around the world. We
listened to over 4,200 young people around the globe.
A core message they conveyed is that there is a growing
trust gap between young people and their Governments,
multilateral organizations and even international civil
society organizations. That is a challenge that must be
embraced, not fended off. It reflects a trust deficit that
we have to bridge.

The young people whom we consulted also
understood that they are not trusted by their
Governments and leaders. Instead, they are treated as a
problem to be solved, or worse still, as a threat. As one
young man said to us, "Society gives you an eternal
tattoo, a label of an offender, a failure, or a source
of problems". The stereotypical youth is represented
as a young man with a gun, while young women are
inevitably consigned to the status of passive victims.
Those gendered stereotypes associate all young people
with the risks of violence. In so doing, they deprive
them of their voice, agency and leadership as the drivers
of change and innovators for peace.

Those stereotypes have led to some misleading
policy assumptions. The first among them is that bulging
youth populations necessarily produce an increased
risk of violent conflict. The second assumes that
young refugees or youth migration present new threats
of terrorist infiltration and violent crime. The third
assumption is that most young people are susceptible
to recruitment into violent extremist groups. There is
little to no evidence to support such policy panic, but
the result has still been disproportionate investment
in hard-fisted security measures that address the
consequences and not the causes of violent conflict.
The impact or the cost-effectiveness of those measures
is seldom if ever properly evaluated.

The reality is that the vast majority of young
people are not involved in violence. We should not
romanticize that. Most young people are just getting on
with their lives, but many others are exercising great
courage, creativity and resilience in working for peace
and security - usually voluntarily, and often under
hazardous conditions. Yet that resourcefulness remains
largely unappreciated as a universal social asset, and is
consequently severely undersupported.

But the study paints a picture of how young
people are undertaking peace work in virtually every
society across the globe. They are working across
all the phases of peace and conflict cycles, including
early interventions to prevent the outbreak of violence
in relatively peaceful societies, as well as working to
prevent the continuation or the escalation of violence
in situations of ongoing conflict. They have a key role
to play at the table in formal peace processes and also
in consolidating peace and preventing the recurrence of
conflict through dialogue, post-conflict reconstruction
and reconciliation.

Young men and women contribute to social cohesion
by building peace from the most local level, in their
families and communities, to national, regional and
international levels. They are working across different
kinds of conflict and with different types of violence,
including violent crime, gender-based violence,
political violence and terrorism. They are expanding
their reach through innovative partnerships with local
Government, civil society and civic and women's
organizations, and building regional and global
networks. Furthermore, they are forging new pathways
and spaces through art, culture, sports and especially
through the creative occupation of cyberspace, social
media and the development of new technologies for
peace. Finally, young people continue to contribute
to meaningful change through their peaceful dissent
and protest, seeking justice, challenging corruption,
demanding freedom of movement and expression and
protesting gun violence.
Through that work on peace and security, there
is an alternative opportunity for Member States and
international actors to invest in the upside: young
people's resilient commitment to peace. To do that
effectively, it is necessary to move from exclusion to the
meaningful inclusion of young people. It is ultimately
only through countering the violence of exclusion
that we can prevent the violence of extremism in all
its forms.

For the inclusion of youth to be meaningful, it
must be comprehensive. That requires that politics
be genuinely inclusive of young women and men in
representative political and policy forums that shape
their lives and define their interactions with the State,
as well as having youth at the table when peace is
being negotiated or reconciliation and reconstruction
are being planned. It demands the full economic
inclusion of youth, beyond just jobs, in the development
of their communities and societies, through all of the
Sustainable Development Goals. It is imperative that we
fully protect young people from direct violence and its
traumatic effects, but we also must protect the spaces,
human rights and the enabling environment necessary
for their peace work, including their peaceful dissent
and protest.

It is essential to recognize the unique experiences
of young women, and also the importance of cultivating
positive versions of masculine identity that do not
depend on control and power over women or violence.
It means not only investing in education for peace and
prioritizing the protection of places of learning as safe
spaces and hubs of social cohesion, but also responding
to young people's demands for peace education as
a crucial tool in building and sustaining peace and
preventing violence. It necessitates the leadership and
facilitation of young people in the disengagement and
reintegration of former fighters and those who have
been drawn into violent underworlds.

The interests of young people and the work they
do naturally traverse the pillars of peace, development
and human rights, and they make it clear that protection
and prevention are inseparable. The comprehensive
inclusion of young people, coupled with the necessary
investment in their ownership and leadership, is
indispensable to building and sustaining peace. That is
what it takes to translate the demographic dividend of
youthful populations into an effective peace dividend
for the entire globe - for all societies, and not just
those riven by violent conflict.

Seizing that opportunity will require some
major shifts and a bold reorientation. It demands that
Member States and the multilateral system move from
remedial responses to genuine prevention approaches.
That reorientation requires a significant shift from
investing in hard security based on risk to investing in
youth-led peace work based on resilience. It requires
a commitment to new partnerships, particularly with
civil society organizations and especially those that
are youth-led and youth-focused. It also necessitates a
new culture and societal norms that do not demonize,
romanticize or, worse still, patronize youth, but rather
demand accountability and provide the preventive
incentive required for the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015).

The study provides a series of recommendations
that offer stepping stones towards those changes. It
does so in three broad areas.

First, there is a set of proposals for investing in the
capacities, agency and leadership of youth, including
funding mechanisms, facilitating and protecting an
enabling environment for youth peace work, and
producing age- and gender-disaggregated data so that
we can properly assess progress. Secondly, it includes
concrete proposals for how to expand the meaningful
inclusion in each of the political, economic and
sociocultural spheres that I outlined earlier. Thirdly and
finally, it offers recommendations for building national,
regional and global partnerships and collaborations
through youth, peace and security coalitions at the
national level; developing dialogue and consultation
platforms for young people inside and outside the
United Nations; establishing advisory boards and youth
advisory councils at the country and regional levels;
and utilizing regular reporting mechanisms on progress
to the Council.

In conclusion, I must finally express my
appreciation for the commitment of the young people
around the globe who suspended their disbelief, trusted
that we would listen and spoke candidly. I promised
them that in what I wrote and presented here, they
would be able to see themselves and hear their voices.
That is "the missing peace" in our world. The question
is not whether we address that, it is only about how.

