Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings with regard to the completion strategies of
their respective Tribunals. Their extensive briefings
today together with their reports (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349) reflect the tireless efforts undertaken by
both Tribunals to contribute to the global objective
of fighting impunity for the crimes considered most
heinous by the international community.

In particular, we would like to welcome Judge
Meron and Prosecutor Jallow, who are here in their
dual capacities, as they have spoken on behalf of both
the International Criminal Tribunals where they have
served and the International Residual Mechanism. We
congratulate Judge J oensen on his election as President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We
wish all of them every success in their work.

Nineteen years after the establishment of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
first international criminal tribunal since Nuremberg
and Tokyo, and the first established by the United
Nations, we are pleased that no indictee has escaped the
Tribunal's justice. We also welcome the fact that this
year will see the trials of the last remaining fugitives
from the Tribunal, which is a success not only for the
Tribunal but for international criminal justice in general.

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, we are pleased that the trials are being held
on schedule. We are concerned, however, by the fact that
nine people are still fugitives from justice. The Rwanda
Tribunal can carry out its work successfully only if it
receives effective cooperation from every State. We call
on all States, especially those of the Great Lakes region,
to step up their cooperation with the Tribunal and give
it all necessary assistance in apprehending and handing
over the remaining fugitives.

We acknowledge the considerable progress the
Tribunals have made in fulfilling their mandates.
We commend the fact that both Tribunals continue to
take every possible step to complete their proceedings
quickly while fully respecting and safeguarding due
process. On the one hand, we congratulate them on their
commitment to implementing their completion strategy
in spite of their large workload. On the other hand,
however, we are concerned about reports from both
Tribunals on their difficulties in retaining staff, which is
one of the chief obstacles to the timely implementation
of the strategy. We note that some measures have been
taken to deal with that, as indicated in paragraph 10
of annex I of the report of the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (S/2012/354). We hope that such efforts will
continue in order to reverse the negative trend that the
Tribunals have suffered in the form of the large number
of staff members who have left in search of more stable
jobs, as well as to enable both Tribunals to fulfil their
mandates on time.

It is an honour for Guatemala to chair the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals. For our
part, at this critical stage, we will continue to offer the
Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism our full support.
As the Tribunals' mandates draw to a close, the Residual
Mechanism will have a fundamental role to play in
ensuring that their legacy endures. We note the progress
made with the Residual Mechanism, which the Council
established under resolution 1966 (2010) and which
will begin functioning on 1 July. We are pleased with
the process under way for implementing the Residual
Mechanism and welcome the fact that both Tribunals
have been working together to ensure a gradual transition
to the Mechanism.

Finally, we believe that the Tribunals have had
an important role in strengthening the rule of law and
promoting long-term reconciliation and stability, and not
merely in the Balkans and Rwanda. Their jurisprudence
has had far-reaching effects and has been a source of
inspiration for national and international judicial bodies
everywhere, and particularly in the establishment of the
International Criminal Court. We hope that more steps
can be taken to preserve their legacies and to help pass
on the knowledge and experience they have gained to
other jurisdictions.

