Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
join other speakers in thanking the Spanish presidency
for organizing this debate.

At this meeting, the representative of the Israeli
regime once again levelled unfounded allegations
against Iran that we categorically reject. We believe
that this was another futile attempt to deflect attention
from the threat posed by the Israeli regime, which is
the embodiment of the nexus between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction.

First of all, we believe that the Israeli statement
was the output of a dangerous, paranoid, deperate and
wandering mind that is not even cognizant of what
this Security Council debate is all about. That latter
point is also applicable to the statement made by the
representative of the United Arab Emirates. Unlike
the Israeli regime, Iran has categorically rejected the
development, stockpiling and use of weapons of mass
destruction and is a committed party to all international
instruments banning such weapons. Therefore,
Iran's interest in and commitment to preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
are unequivocal.

Unlike the Israeli regime, Iran has supported
regional and international efforts to achieve the
universality of the international treaties banning
weapons of mass destruction. As is well known, in
1974 Iran proposed the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It was strongly
supported by the international community and numerous
resolutions and decisions were subsequently adopted by
the General Assembly and review conferences of the
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) towards its realization.

But the Israeli regime, which is not a party to
any international treaty banning weapons of mass
destruction, is the only obstacle in the way of the
establishment of the zone and continues to block all
international and regional efforts to fulfil that goal.
Council members may all recall that the 2015 NPT
Review Conference was unfortunately unable to adopt a
final document, mainly due to an external factor - the
pressure of a non-party to the NPT, the Israeli regime,
on certain States parties that ultimately objected to the
adoption of a final document. That happened because
the final document contained a decision on a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East.

As a victim of terrorism and the use chemical
weapons, Iran is fully cognizant of the catastrophic
dangers that transfers of such weapons to terrorists
could entail. We are deeply concerned about the
relationship between terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction. That is why we emphasize that the
international community must join hands in eliminating
that risk by compelling the Israel regime to accede, as
a non-nuclear-weapon party and without any condition
or further delay, to the NPT and other major treaties
banning weapons of mass destruction. Nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
the Israeli regime - which is born out of terrorism and
maintained by committing terrorist acts, occupation,
aggression and genocide - pose the most dangerous
threat to regional and international security and the
viability of the international NPT regime.

I would also like to react very briefly to the
statement made by the representative of the United Arab
Emirates. First of all, the accusations of the Emirates
representative are absurd, hypocritical and farcical for
the following reasons.

First, while they are busy accusing Iran of
interfering in the domestic affairs of other countries,
the jet fighters of the United Arab Emirates are busy
bombing innocent civilians in Yemen and the civilian
infrastructure of that impoverished country. Such
inhumane acts amount to war crimes.

Secondly, the United Arab Emirates and other
partners have exported a host of extremist takfiri
ideologies for decades, and continue to do so, and are
funding and arming terrorists in Iraq, Syria and many
other places. The similarity between the statements
made by the representative of the United Arab Emirates
and some of its partners, on the one hand, and that
delivered by the Israeli representative, on the other,
is not a pure coincidence. It is a sign of the growing
coordination and cooperation against Iran and the
Palestinian people. It is not a pure coincidence that
the United Arab Emirates is increasingly silent on the
Israeli crimes in Palestine - a silence that could be
tantamount to betraying the Palestinian cause.

Finally, we know that the United Arab Emirates
and some its partners in the Persian Gulf region are
depressed over the nuclear deal that put an end to the
fabricated crisis. We also know how hard they attempted
to impede the road to that deal, to no avail. What the
United Arab Emirates officials are doing and saying is
the expression of their frustration over the fruition of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. They in fact
tried to escalate their provocations against Iran in order
to neutralize the detente that the deal brought about in
the region.

