Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We join the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea in welcoming the
new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom.
We wish her every success in her new post. We would
also like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia attends this
meeting on the first quarterly report of 2018 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
mentions the illegality of Israeli settlements in the
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. As
on previous occasions, the situation on the ground is
discouraging. The evident breach by the occupying
Power, Israel, of the resolution in clear violation of
international law and the more than 700 General
Assembly resolutions adopted since 1948 and the 86
Security Council resolutions is a source of concern.

According to the declaration of the Israeli Prime
Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, on 4 February, his
Government has decided to build 350 new housing units
in the settlement of Netiv Ha'avot, which is located
south of the city of Bethlehem in the occupied West
Bank. Such a decision violates resolution 2334 (2016)
and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which affirms, among other things, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
as well as the right of people to self-determination. It
moves us further from the possibility of a two-State
solution.

For that reason, we reiterate our full commitment
to resolution 2334 (2016), on the illegality of the Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
once again call for the quarterly report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of the resolution to be
in written format, which would allow us to know about
its implementation in detail, and for the presentation
of updated maps of all settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories. In that connection, Bolivia
calls on contributors to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to continue to provide their invaluable support of
humanitarian assistance to more than 1 million people
in Gaza and, in general, to the approximately 5 million
Palestinian refugees in countries in the region.

Bolivia calls for intra-Palestinian unity and for a
strengthened presence of the Palestinian Authority in
the Gaza Strip. In that regard, we strongly condemn
the attack on the head of the Palestinian Government,
Mr. Rami Hamdallah, on 13 March during his visit
to the region. We condemn all forms of terrorism,
whatever their origin, and we consider all imposition
of ideas through force and violence to be unacceptable.

We express our firm commitment to all
international efforts seeking a peaceful resolution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that regard, we
support such initiatives as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that seek to ensure a just, lasting peace that will allow
both peoples to live within recognized and secure
borders. Bolivia is convinced that the only long-term
option for the resolution of the conflict is the two-State
solution, in which we finally see the establishment of
a free, sovereign and independent Palestine with pre-
1967 international borders and east Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

