Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-
Office, President Didier Burkhalter, to the Security
Council and to thank him for today's briefing on OSCE
activities under Swiss leadership.

We commend the Chairperson-in-Office for his
efforts to promote security and stability, strengthen the
OSCE's capacity to combat transnational threats, address
protracted conflicts, ensure security after natural
disasters and advance human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We also commend Chairperson-in-Office
Burkhalter's continued engagement on Ukraine and
note that he has repeatedly confirmed the OSCE's
readiness to assist Ukraine in securing a peaceful way
forward.

The United States is closely monitoring
developments in Ukraine. We have consistently
advocated a de-escalation of violence, constitutional
change, a coalition Government and early elections.
The unshakable principle guiding events must be that
the people of Ukraine determine their own future.
We welcome constructive work in the Supreme
Rada and continue to urge the prompt formation of
a broad, technocratic Government of national unity.
Going forward, we will work with other States in
appropriate European and international organizations
to support a strong, prosperous, united and democratic
Ukraine. We urge Ukrainian authorities to seize
the opportunities for OSCE assistance, including
offers from the Chairperson-in-Office, the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the
OSCE Representative on the Freedom of the Media for
mediation, fact-finding missions, election monitoring,
legislative review or other assistance. Welcoming those
measures without delay would provide transparency to
citizens in desperate need ofanswers and accountability.

The United Nations-OSCE agenda is ambitious and
robust, with the two organizations working together
on a wide range of issues, from counter-terrorism
and counter-trafficking to early warning and conflict
settlement to democratization and good governance.
The memorandum of understanding between the OSCE
and the United Nations on joint projects to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime-OSCEjoint
action plan to address transnational threats represent
two concrete examples of the organizations' work
together to tackle key issues of global importance.
We look forward to the full implementation of those
agreements.

The United States views the OSCE as a strong
partner in international counter-terrorism efforts.
The organization has strengthened counter-terrorism
capacities by conducting training programmes that
promote norms and standards of responsible State
behaviour, by sharing and helping to implement best
practices and by providing assistance to participating
States as they develop human-rights-compliant counter-
terrorism policies. The OSCE has led efforts to examine
the role of women's empowerment in countering violent
extremism through a series of expert round tables, most
recently at the International Symposium on Terrorism
and Transnational Crime held in Turkey in December.
We welcome the OSCE's deepened collaboration with
the Global Counterterrorism Forum, established by the
United States and other concerned Governments, with
a core mission to promote the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-terrorism Strategy.

Good relations between neighbours is a vital
indication that our shared objective of cooperative,
indivisible security is being realized. We therefore
encourage the Chairperson-in-Office's Special
Representative for the Western Balkans, Ambassador
Stoudmann, to be ambitious in his efforts to promote
reconciliation and cooperation in the region. We have
already seen encouraging progress in Kosovo, where the
OSCE has been instrumental in helping to implement
the historic 19 April Agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina, in particular through the facilitation of local
elections in northern Kosovo.

We welcome the OSCE's long-standing commitment
and leadership in trying to find solutions to Europe's
protracted conflicts. The international community
should not allow the status quo in Georgia or in the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict or in the Transdniestrian
conflict to persist. The two special representatives
for the Southern Caucuses and Moldova, respectively,
whom the Chairperson-in-Office jointly appointed with
Serbia, should assist the parties in those conflicts to
identify and implement steps that will promote peaceful
settlements.

Outside its region, the OSCE provides expertise that
benefits Asian and Mediterranean partner countries.
The OSCE Border Management Staff College in
Dushanbe, for example, provides specialized training
for border security agencies from across Central Asia,
the wider OSCE region and Afghanistan.
The United States strongly supports the OSCE's
special relationship with Afghanistan, an OSCE
Partner for Cooperation, and values the OSCE's
continued active engagement during this crucial year
of transition. The organization's work in Afghanistan
complements the United Nations own efforts, including
its support for the country's upcoming elections.
Credible, transparent and inclusive elections are critical
to Afghanistan's stability and democratic development.
For that reason, the United States has contributed
approximately $2 million to the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights for the
deployment of an election support team in Afghanistan.
We would welcome additional contributions to the team
from OSCE participating and partner States.

In the area of human rights, we share the
Chairperson-in-Office's focus on implementing
the OSCE's existing commitments in the human
dimension. The OSCE is a premier organization in the
protection of human rights, the promotion of tolerance
and non-discrimination, the advancement of gender
equality and support for citizens' rights to exercise
their fundamental freedoms of assembly, association,
expression and belief. We welcome the Chairperson-in-
Office's goals to work closely with civil society
counterparts and to strengthen OSCE efforts to ensure
that participating States uphold their human dimension
commitments.

The United States is an active member ofthe OSCE,
and we remain fully committed to its important work.
The continued and renewed dialogue and collective
efforts of the OSCE and its participating States remain
as important as ever, and we welcome such goals and
actions in coordination with the United Nations.

