Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
allow me first of all to congratulate you, on behalf of my
delegation, on your assumption of the presidency this
month, and to thank Ambassador Merimee of France for
his distinguished and efficient conduct of the Council's
work last month.

We welcome the adoption of the resolution
extending the peace-keeping work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) for a further
six months and redefining its mandate to reflect the
considerable changes in circumstances and in the needs of
the people of Rwanda. Their overriding requirement is
now for the development of a climate of stability and
confidence, which will encourage further efforts and
progress towards national reconciliation. My Government
is satisfied that, with this resolution, UNAMIR now has
the mandate to offer effective assistance with this process.

We also welcome the outcome of discussions
between the Government of Rwanda and the United
Nations which should ensure that UNAMIR will have at
its disposal the military assets that the Force Commander
believes are necessary to carry out the mandate. We look
to the Government of Rwanda to continue to work with
UNAMIR to ensure the safety of the personnel of all
international agencies and non-governmental
organizations, and to maintain full cooperation to enable
them to carry out their essential humanitarian tasks. We
particularly look to the Government of Rwanda to fulfil
its commitments under the Status of Mission Agreement
and other relevant agreements.

We hope that the Government of Rwanda will draw
confidence from the restatement of the arms embargo in
this resolution to make clear to neighbouring countries
that the embargo applies if the arms are for use in
Rwanda. We welcome the readiness just expressed by the
Permanent Representative of Zaire to cooperate in this
area, and we hope that the consultations with Zaire and
other neighbouring countries will lead to early steps to
tighten the noose on the illicit traffic in arms to elements
opposed to national reconciliation in Rwanda. All
countries in the region must continue their efforts to
ensure that the embargo is enforced effectively within
their jurisdictions, and to prevent activities aimed at the
destabilization of Rwanda from taking place within their
borders.

 

The presence of UNAMIR provides an essential
element of the framework for cooperation between the
Government of Rwanda and the international community to
assist the development of the country and to develop a
climate in which refugees and internally displaced people
can return home in safety. We wish to see the international
community increase its effort towards rehabilitation and
reunification inside Rwanda, in particular through the rapid
delivery of the substantial commitment of aid already
entered into by the international community.

Finally, we pay a particular tribute to the work of the
Secretary General's Special Representative in helping
secure a lasting peace in Rwanda. We also welcome the
Secretary General's efforts to develop a wider political
dialogue in the region as a whole. We hope that all
neighbouring countries will join with the international
community in support of this process.

