We took note of the briefing by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda, as well as her nineteenth report on the progress in the investigation into the situation in Libya. We are concerned that the situation in Libya remains tense and efforts to stabilize it have stalled. We are convinced that a military solution is not an option for Libya. But there is no easy way to settle the conflict, which has already gone on for nine years. It is rooted in the events of 2011, when the Security Council resolution was grossly distorted and violated, leading to the destruction of Libyan statehood and the continued suffering of civilian population. Itis our firm conviction that the way forward is returning to impartial diplomatic work, cooperation and mutual support to help parties engage in negotiations. In this regard, we would like to recall that it must be a Libyan-owned dialogue, and no decisions should be imposed from outside. In our work, we should be guided by the principles of respect for Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. It is up to the Libyans to determine the future of their country. At the same time, it is impossible to overestimate the importance of the United Nations central role in the settlement in this country. We pay tribute to Ghassan Salame and call on the Secretary-General to appoint his new Special Representative as soon as possible for the sake of the Libyan peace process. We would also like to take this opportunity to call on all parties to the conflict in Libya for a cessation of hostilities in order to enable joint approaches to the coronavirus disease pandemic and respect for international humanitarian law. Turning back to the Prosecutor's report, a major question remains: what is the role of the ICC in helping restore peace in Libya and bringing perpetrators of crimes to justice? The ICC has been handling the situation for nine years. We recall that the activity of the Prosecutor was once very vigorous, during the short period of time in 2011 before the foreign invasion of Libya. Once Mr. Al-Qadhafi was ousted, the ICC identified a couple of fugitives and mostly lost interest in the situation. If one starts to evaluate the situation in Libya on the basis of the ICC Prosecutor's reports, one may discover that a number of parties to the armed conflict go unnoticed and apparently excused. The coalition's bombing and destruction are still invisible to the Prosecutor. Even Da'esh fighters, whose destructive role in Libya was recognized by the Council, somehow fall outside the ICC scope of engagement. The activities of the ICC in Libya become increasingly irrelevant. We are convinced that the international community and the Security Council should concentrate their efforts on helping restore peace in Libya. When peace is firmly established, Libyans can decide for themselves how to address the issue of justice.
