Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): On behalf of the Chairs of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), I have the honour to brief the Council
on cooperation among the three Committees and their
respective groups of experts.

The Committees have recognized the grave threats
posed by terrorism and the challenges presented by
terrorists and their organizations in resorting to new
means to finance, plan, prepare, facilitate, recruit and
commission terrorist acts, possibly involving the use
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). They have
also stressed the importance of raising awareness
among Member States of their obligations with regard
to effectively implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions. They also believe that building
Member States' capacity to meet those challenges is
particularly important.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and
the risk of the proliferation of WMDs to non-State
actors, continues to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council, in dealing
with these grave threats, emphasized the importance
of cooperation and coordination between the three
Committees and their respective expert groups.

The three Committees continue to collaborate, and
their three expert groups have continued the practice
of synchronizing their efforts, where appropriate and
feasible, in conducting country Visits. Over the past
year, experts from the 1267 and 1540 Committees have
joined the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) on two
such visits - in May 2016 on the visit to Kazakhstan, and
in February 2017, on the Visit to Tajikistan. Exchange of
information between the three Committees continues
through their respective expert groups,sz especially
with regard to visits, technical assistance needs, and in
reaching out to international and regional organizations
of common interest.

As part of their support to the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the three
Committees have maintained close cooperation
within the framework of a number of CTITF working
groups. In particular, the three groups worked with
the CTITF Foreign Terrorist Fighter Working Group
to develop a capacity-building implementation plan to
assist Member States to comply with resolution 2178
(2014), on curbing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
Their collaborative efforts also continue through their
participation in, inter alia, the CTITF Working Groups
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure, Including
Internet, Vulnerable Targets and Tourism Security;
Preventing and Responding to Weapons of Mass
Destruction (WMD) Terrorist Attacks; Countering the
Financing of Terrorism; and Border Management and
Law Enforcement Relating to Counter-Terrorism.

The 1540 Group of Experts, in its role as a
CTITF collaborating entity, encourages the CTITF
WMD Working Group to focus on the prevention of
the proliferation of WMDs to non-State actors, now
that the Group's work on responses to WMD attacks
is complete.

Pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1267 Committee Monitoring Team continue
to work closely in drafting the Secretary-General's
reports on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh. Four reports have been
submitted, and drafting of the fifth and final report is
under way.

CTED and the 1267 Monitoring Team have also
been collaborating closely on the use of the Internet
and telecommunications technologies for terrorist
purposes. The Monitoring Team participated in the
consultations of CTED and the ICT4Peace Foundation
with the private sector in Zurich, Silicon Valley and
Kuala Lumpur in late 2016, and in drafting a report.
As a result, Microsoft has updated its terms of use and
is now using the 1267 sanctions list as a reference to
determine terrorism-related content.

The three Committees have also actively shared
information on terrorism financing and proliferation
financing. CTED and the 1540 Group of Experts
recently met to discuss the risk of illicit trafficking
through online public trading platforms, such as eBay
and Ali Baba. The three expert groups also coordinate
in the context of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF). In December 2016, they met with the FATF
secretariat to discuss ongoing issues, developments
and challenges.

In April 2016, CTC, the 1267 Committee, Member
States, FATF and other organizations held an open
briefing on depriving terrorist groups of funding,
particularly Al-Qaida, ISIL and their affiliates. In
December 2016, they held a joint special meeting on
practices and lessons learned in preventing terrorist
groups from accessing, raising and moving funds. CTC
continues to invite the other two expert groups to attend
regional and thematic briefings by CTED staff, various
experts, and visiting officials from international and
regional organizations.

The three Committees also recognize the need to
further enhance and strengthen their coordination and
cooperation, where relevant and possible. They will
therefore work to identify further synergies, including
by identifying thematic areas in which joint interaction
may be beneficial within the framework of their
respective mandates. While efforts are considered and
undertaken in the United Nations system on enhancing
the United Nations capacity to meet the challenges of
global terrorism, the three Committees will continue
to implement the tasks and mandates of the Security
Council's resolutions, with the full support of CTED,
the Monitoring Team and the 1540 Group of Experts.

