Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): This is the sixth year that the Syrian people
have endured a terrible tragedy. In 2011, in Washington,
DC, and various other Western capitals, the decision
was made to continue reshaping the geopolitics of
the Middle East and North Africa, a process that had
started with the criminal invasion of Iraq in 2003 by the
United States and the United Kingdom. They continued
to swing an axe in both Libya and Syria and did not
shrink from accepting support from terrorist groups.
The inevitable consequences - the disintegration
of both countries and the creation of millions of
refugees - were written off as an unforeseen nuisance.

The result is that hundreds of armed groups are
active in Syria, the country is being bombed by anyone
who feels like it and restoring peace has become
almost impossible. Months of work by Russian and
United States experts under the direction of Russia's
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Secretary of State
of the United States, along with the involvement of
the Presidents of both countries, resulted in a detailed
plan, set out in documents finalized on 9 September,
which if carried out in good faith could have enabled
us to calm the situation on the ground, significantly
improve the humanitarian situation and kick-start a
resumption of intra-Syrian negotiations under United
Nations auspices. Thanks to sabotage on the part of
an intractable opposition, the plan's implementation
was endlessly delayed. Our agreements had a lot of
opponents and, sadly, we have begun to feel that their
unconstructive position has outweighed the desire for
peace and common sense.

The United States has in fact admitted its inability to
exert any influence over the groups under its patronage,
and thus to genuinely fulfil our agreements, which
above all entail distinguishing the moderate groups
from the terrorists and truly effect such a separation on

the ground. That was written down in black and white
in all the documents. But nothing has been done. Even
the issue of defining terrorist groups has produced
nothing but wondering, suggesting that the main aim
continues to be protecting the military capacity of
the opponents of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, whoever they may be. Unscrupulous methods
and exceedingly dubious allies have been useful in
that regard.

New conditions and ultimatums that change with
dizzying speed are constantly being issued. Requests
for a ceasefire, sometimes for 48 hours, sometimes
for 72, are constant. We have always met them
halfway, or at least tried to, and reached agreement
with the Syrian Government. But in the end what has
happened is that the militants have regrouped, received
reinforcements and launched new offensives. After
that came the demand that a precondition was that the
Syrian Government should unilaterally halt its air-force
flights. First they said it would be for three days, and
we agreed to that. Then they said no, that the President
of the United States had changed his mind and it had
to be seven days, although it was not clear why. Such
tactical tricks cannot go on forever. We are not going to
agree to any unilateral steps any more.

The bombardment by the so-called coalition forces,
reported in this case to be British aircraft, of the Syrian
army positions defending the Syrian city of Deir ez-Zor
from the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, was a serious blow to the agreements. There
was a real danger that the terrorists would capture the
city, leading inevitably to the slaughter of civilians.
Fortunately, the Syrian armed forces, assisted by the
Russian air force, succeeding in averting that potential
tragedy. Needless to say, that also created a threat to the
ceasefire, but Damascus displayed enviable restraint in
that regard.

Since my colleagues - understandably - have
talked about the situation in which a humanitarian
convoy was shelled, I naturally have something to say
about it, too. There are two aspects to this.

First, I would like to note that here in New York
we first heard about it from the United States Secretary
of State, who said, in a private conversation, that they
had received intelligence that, for a few minutes, two
Russian aircraft had been somewhere not far from
the area where the humanitarian convoy had been
travelling and where it was attacked. But he said that
we should not worry and that they were not going to
make the information public, since it had to be further
investigated. As usual, however, there were leaks from
various Washington agencies a few minutes later, and
the following day the Secretary of State made the
tragedy a centrepiece of his dramatic statement in the
Security Council (see S/PV.7774). That is the kind of
way we have to work with our American colleagues.

Secondly, we said from the very beginning that
everything should be investigated. This was because at
first there were reports of artillery shelling, but after
that there was talk of helicopters and, later, aircraft. I
am not a military expert, but today I read somewhere
that the bombing allegedly lasted seven hours. But if
the Russian planes were somewhere in the area for a
few minutes, could bombs have been falling on the
convoy for seven hours? I do not think so. We should
therefore investigate that. By the way, our Western
counterparts promised to inform us two months ago
about their investigation of the bombardment of the
Syrian city of Manbij, in which it was reported that
more than 100 civilians had been killed, apparently by
French aircraft. But neither our French colleagues nor
the American coalition leaders have been in a hurry
to tell us about the conclusions of that investigation,
which they promised to conduct two months ago.

I now return to Aleppo. The humanitarian situation
there could have been normalized as long ago as
August. But we were prevented in this by the armed
groups, which, with the implicit sanction of their
outside sponsors, continued to dictate the operational
conditions and fire on the humanitarian corridors.
We were close to a breakthrough even in September.
The Government withdrew its forces to the agreed-
on distances and the authorities set up one of the
checkpoints stipulated in the 9 September agreement,
with the participation of Syrian Arab Red Crescent
personnel, and gave permission for the humanitarian
convoy to go through. And once again there ensued
militant provocations.

I would just like to explain the situation in eastern
Aleppo in a bit more detail. The area is under the
control of more than 20 armed groups totalling about
3,500 combatants. The main force consists of about
2,000 units of Jabhat Al-Nusra. They are armed with
tanks, armoured vehicles, field artillery and rocket
launcher systems, not to mention the homemade so-
called hell cannons used to shoot gas cylinders, as
well as dozens and dozens of other pieces of military
hardware, including heavy weaponry. Needless to say,
such hardware is anything but homemade; I believe it
continues to be supplied by generous Western patrons
with the connivance of the United States leadership of
the coalition. That reminds me of an episode to do with
Libya, when a question was posed at the congressional
hearings held at the end of 2013, at which the United
States Secretary of State was present, asking for
information about the fact that it was known that some
countries had supplied 20,000 tons of arms to Libya,
while the United States looked the other way. No doubt
the State Department was forced to give Congress that
information. We asked for it to be shared with us as
well, but we have received nothing, despite the fact that
the United States is obliged to do so in order to comply
with Security Council resolutions on Libya.

I suggest that the scope of military support to the
motley crew in Syria is significantly bigger than it
was in Libya. The Government forces' positions and
the city's residential areas are being shelled daily and
indiscriminately from the eastern districts of Aleppo,
with no adjustments or aiming and with a view to
inflicting maximum damage. Since 1 September, the
shelling from the eastern part of the city has resulted
in the deaths of more than 50 troops and 120 civilians.
Jabhat Al-Nusra specializes in situating weapon
positions in areas where there is significant social
infrastructure - pumping stations, power substations,
hospitals, schools, mosques - and in densely populated
urban areas, thereby turning civilians into human
shields for terrorists.

Jabhat Al-Nusra's primary attacks take place to the

north, across the Castello Road, and the south-west,
through the Ramousa district, with the aim of breaching
the Government's defences and creating a corridor for
the passage of reserves, weapons and ammunition,
often in the guise of humanitarian aid. By the way, our
American colleagues told us long ago that Al-Nusra was
not present in Aleppo but only somewhere in the South.
Eventually they admitted that it also had a presence in
the North, but that they were going to let us know what
the situation was there. Al-Nusra is in fact the main
military force there. According to the information we
have, more than 80 per cent of the population in the
city's eastern districts supports lifting the siege through
peaceful negotiations and is asking the terrorists to
leave the city. Some of the volunteer opposition militias
in Aleppo have been trying to find an opportunity to
negotiate with the Government, but Jabhat Al-Nusra
has been firmly suppressing such sentiments.

Since 1 September, seven mass executions have
been recorded of those who supported negotiations or
tried to leave the city. On 19 September, 26 men and
teenagers who had refused to take up arms in support
of Al-Nusra were shot dead in front of residents of
the Sheikh Hader neighbourhood. We have seen mass
exoduses along the seven humanitarian corridors
created by Russia and the Syrian Government, which
speak to the savage reprisals that have been made
against civilians. As they leave, the civilians receive
humanitarian aid. More than 4,000 civilians and about
300 fighters have left Aleppo's eastern districts along
the corridors since the operation began.

The armed groups have blocked humanitarian
access to the city. Since 12 September, Russia, Syria
and the United Nations have been trying to ensure
the passage of humanitarian convoys to the eastern
part of Aleppo using the Castello Road, and measures
have been taken to demilitarize it in order to achieve
that. The forces along it have been withdrawn twice,
on 14 and 16 September. On 17 September, Syrian Red
Crescent personnel installed a checkpoint on its western
side. The opposition has refused to take the same
measures on their side, as stipulated in the Russian-
American agreements of9 September. The illegal Fateh
Haleb armed group coalition, the local Aleppo council
and the provisional opposition Government have all
declared that they would not let aid into the city via the
Castello Road, and militants have threatened to attack
the convoys. As a result, the humanitarian operation in
Aleppo that Russia and the United Nations prepared
at the end of August has been wrecked. The militants
confiscate food, water and medicines from civilians
and force them to work on building defences.

There have been riots in the neighbourhoods of
Avvad, Al-Ansari and Sahur, and protests have been
brutally suppressed by terrorists using arms. Similarly,
more than 200,000 Aleppo residents have been taken
hostage by terrorists from Jabhat Al-Nusra and groups
affiliated with it, in attempts to use women and children
as human shields.

Government forces are protecting the Castello and
Ramousa Roads, and those surrounding them, which
are strategically important to the city as supply routes.
They fire only in response to terrorist attacks and at
known and verified targets. They are also combating
Al-Nusra's intense efforts to penetrate the city from the
south-west and north. In order to try to break through,
the terrorists have made active use of suicide bombers
in mined cars and armoured troop carriers. More than
40 such attacks have been recorded in Aleppo since
1 August.

Aircraft have been used against militant targets
and groups only with the use of air gunners and
target illumination. The main objective is to force the
terrorists out of the city with a minimum of civilian
casualties. The militants are being offered negotiations,
and a special northern corridor to the Castello Road has
been set up for those exiting with arms. The Russian-
American agreements of 9 September provide for a
mechanism guaranteeing safe exit for combatants
monitored by the United Nations. All those who want
amnesty are offered a simplified process for regulation
of their status. There are officials from the Russian
reconciliation centre in the humanitarian corridor areas
whose job it is to monitor the situation and prevent
inhumane treatment of militants. Civilians are offered
all possible means for leaving the city and getting away
from the armed groups, but the terrorists obstruct this.

We are seeing attempts to launch a media campaign
to discredit the measures the Government is taking to
force out terrorists, using faked or old video, some of
it made in western Aleppo. The scale of the operations
is exaggerated and the shelling is filmed in the city's
abandoned south-western districts, where hostilities
have been fierce for more than a month, and made out
to be indiscriminate strikes against peaceful parts of
eastern Aleppo.

I will now turn to the political process and address
myself to Mr. Staffan de Mistura as well as, obviously,
to Council members. The political process must be
resumed. Frankly, we do not understand why there has
been no decisive action in that regard since May. In
that regard, I would like to recall that paragraph 9 of
the first statement of the International Syria Support
Group provided that

"[t]he participants together with the
United Nations will explore modalities for, and
implementation of, a nationwide ceasefire to be
initiated on a date certain and in parallel with this
renewed political process."

What that means is that continuing the political
process is a fundamental condition that would have
helped to ensure that the ceasefire was established and
complied with.

I would like to ask Mr. De Mistura who it is who
has been refusing to engage in direct talks all this time?
We know the answer, but I would like to hear it from
his lips. Perhaps it is time to stop dancing around the
irresponsible politicians who pretend to represent the
interests of the Syrian people. If they do not want to
conduct negotiations, let them go back to the foreign
capitals where they have found a haven. We should bring
forward those representatives of the Syrian opposition
who really want to lead their country out of the crisis,
and we know they exist.

And of course there is the ceasefire. We would
like it to remain our goal, along with the resumption
of negotiations. I want to stress once again that we can
talk about restoring the ceasefire only on the basis of a
collective approach, one in which it is not we who have
to unilaterally prove anything to anyone but rather up to
others to convince us of their sincere desire to dissociate
the opposition cooperating with the American-led
coalition from Jabhat Al-Nusra. After that, Jabhat
Al-Nusra must be beaten and the opposition made part
of the political process. If they fail to convince us, that
will only increase our suspicions that all this was done
to take the heat off Jabhat Al-Nusra. The only way
out, therefore, is through honest, joint work to enable
every side to implement the ceasefire agreements rather
than pushing unilateral demands about whom to offer
gestures of goodwill in the hope of profiting from it
down the road.

