Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018), on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

Two weeks after its unanimous adoption by
members of the Security Council, resolution 2401
(2018), which had inspired a great deal of hope, has not
been implemented as planned, much to our regret. The
requirement of an immediate cessation of hostilities for
a period of at least 30 days, provided for by resolution
2401 (2018), to enable the safe and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian aid and services and medical evacuation
of the critically sick and wounded, in accordance with
applicable international humanitarian law, has not yet
gone into effect.

The humanitarian and security situation remains
worrisome because it is impossible for humanitarian
convoys that endure indiscriminate attacks and
bombings perpetrated by various hostile groups to
reach besieged areas. In addition, attacks are carried
out against medical and humanitarian personnel and
health-care infrastructure. According to the World
Health Organization, such attacks are on the rise.

The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
within Syria's borders due to increased fighting makes
for dangerous living conditions for thousands of
internally displaced persons and obliterates the hope of
restoring security and dignity to millions of refugees
in neighbouring countries living in extremely difficult
conditions. Given the dire situation, Cote d'Ivoire hopes
that the second international conference on supporting
the future of Syria and the region, to be held in Brussels
on 24 and 25 April at the initiative of the European
Union, will result in pledges of increased humanitarian
aid and development support.

In accordance with the provisions of resolution
2401 (2018), Cote d'Ivoire again calls for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to enable the safe,
sustained and unimpeded access of humanitarian
convoys delivering basic necessities to hundreds of
people in dire need in eastern Ghouta and other areas of
the country. My delegation welcomes reports that, for a
few days, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent was able once again to
enter the city of Douma in eastern Ghouta to deliver the
aid necessary, including food and non-food items. My
delegation encourages all Syrian stakeholders to create
conditions that would allow the United Nations to make
scheduled deliveries in eastern Ghouta, throughout the
entire country and on Syrian borders.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its belief that the
humanitarian situation will not improve without
significant progress on the political landscape because
the two issues are inextricably linked. Therefore, it
invites hostile groups and all stakeholders to engage in
political dialogue in order to achieve a peaceful solution
to the crisis in Syria. In that regard, it welcomes the
holding of a meeting in Geneva between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. De Mistura, and the three Astana guarantors - Iran,
the Russian Federation and Turkey - with a view to
relaunching the Syrian political process.

The delegation of cote d'Ivoire hopes that the
next meeting to be held in Astana, at the initiative
of the three guarantors of the Astana process, will
enable us to reach a lasting ceasefire in Syria and to
calmly resume the intra-Syrian peace talks pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015).

