Mr. Skraeic' (Croatia): Croatia would like to join
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his briefing
and insightful comments. Allow me from the outset to
take this opportunity to commend both Mr. Annabi and
the civil and military components of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
on the tremendous work they have undertaken in the
overall stabilization of Haiti.

I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti and thank him and
his Government for the hospitality provided to Council
members during our recent visit to Haiti, headed by
Ambassador Jorge Urbina of Costa Rica.

Croatia has aligned itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union.

Croatia believes that political stability in Haiti is
a prerequisite for any long-lasting solution in that
country. When we last met here to discuss this issue in
October 2008, we welcomed the formation of a new
Haitian Government under the strong leadership of
Prime Minister Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, who,
together with President Preval, was immediately set the
difficult task of trying to bridge the gap between the
executive and legislative branches. It was encouraging
that, during the Council's visit to Haiti last month,
many interlocutors in the Government and the
Parliament, as well as in civil society and the private
sector, expressed genuine willingness to overcome
existing divisions in order to work on issues of crucial
importance to the future of the country. We welcome
that encouraging sign of readiness to work together for
the common good, especially on those issues of
indisputable importance to Haiti, such as customs and
policing, the strengthening of the rule of law,
constitutional reform, education, socio-economic
development and investment.

The first real litmus test for the political
cohesiveness of Haiti will come in a few short days'
time with the 19 April elections for one third of the
country's Senate. Despite the short-term risk of further
political tension, it is our understanding that these
senatorial elections will be of crucial importance to any
planned discussions on constitutional reform and
needed improvements to Haiti's democratic
institutions, since without the elections of those
senators the Senate will continue to lack the numbers
required for successfully promulgating the required
reforms. The senatorial elections are also important if
the timetable for further senatorial and other elections
in the country, scheduled for 2009, is to be kept. We
welcome the readiness of the Government and the
Provisional Electoral Council to fulfil that goal, as well
as the Electoral Council's commitment to ensuring that
all elections are free, fair, inclusive and held on time.

Naturally, political stability goes hand in hand
with physical security. We are encouraged by the
steady recruitment and strengthening professionalism
of the Haitian National Police (HNP), whose numbers
have now increased to just over 9,000 officers,
constituting two thirds of the 14,000 officers foreseen
to be recruited by 2011. While these officers may not
yet be in a position by themselves to face the many
challenges to Haiti's stability, for which they have the
able and robust support of MINUSTAH, we do believe
that they are on the right track to achieving just that.
Strengthened public confidence in the HNP is also a
good sign. We hope that, with MINUSTAH's
assistance, the HNP will be better able to address such
burning issues as drug trafficking and organized crime,
including kidnappings, which are recognized threats to
Haiti's stability and development.

That also holds true for the work that needs to be
done on effectively managing and controlling Haiti's
borders in general, which seriously lack even the most
basic infrastructure and equipment. Regional partners
could contribute to greater stability in this area by
complementing the Mission's enhanced land and
maritime patrolling duties with more bilateral border
cooperation. More importantly, the next six months
will serve as an important test as to whether the Haitian
authorities have met prerequisite stabilization
benchmarks prior to the expiration of the Mission's
current mandate in October.

Judicial reform is another important step in
strengthening the rule of law in Haiti, which in turn is
a requirement for socio-economic development.
Croatia welcomes the inauguration of the School of
Magistrates on 12 March, which we had the honour to
witness. We look forward to the successful
implementation of the national plan for justice reform,
as well as the speedy establishment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary. Here, Croatia also believes
that the continuing support of MINUSTAH towards
strengthening administrative and Government
capacities to ensure further Government reform efforts
is vital to the long-term stability of Haiti.

One of the most important tasks remaining before
the Government of Haiti is socio-economic
development. The reduction of poverty, the promotion
of development and food security, the environment and
job creation are all national priorities. While there is
broad consensus among national stakeholders,
including in the private sector, that the Government
should take the lead in promoting these priorities, we
regret that the Government has yet to produce a
focused action plan outlining the country's priorities in
this regard.

Taking in the lessons from the devastating
hurricanes of 2008 and the fragile stability of Haiti,
where one third of the population is still dependant on
emergency aid, we sincerely hope that the Government
will take this into consideration so that the gains being
made towards consolidation on the security front will
not be jeopardized by lack of progress in socio-
economic development or by renewed natural disasters.

Finally, we hope that international assistance for
Haiti, including at the upcoming donor conference
planned in Washington, D.C., will make a difference
for Haiti's future by addressing possible shortfalls so
that the pitfalls of destabilization in the country can be
avoided. We welcome the recent visit by the Secretary-
General and former United States President Clinton in
order to throw the spotlight on Haiti's needs and to
demonstrate the international community's solidarity.

The role of the donor community is of particular
importance, given the extremely worrisome economic
and social statistics in Haiti, as personified by the
3 million people threatened with food insecurity. It is
our hope that the international response will lead to the
establishment of a genuine and coherent compact
geared towards developmental projects and
investments that will carefully balance the essence of
national ownership with an integrated stabilization
process.

The Haitian Government, for its part, needs to
seize on this opportunity by continuing to embrace a
collaborative and inclusive approach in steering its
country towards long-term economic security. The
Government needs to support international partners by
removing obstacles to private investment, including,
but not limited to, establishing an interministerial
committee on land management, drafting a new law on
co-ownership and identifying State-owned land for the
establishment of possible export zones.

