Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Executive Director Yury Fedotov, Ambassador Djani
of Indonesia and Ambassador Raz of Afghanistan, for
their informative briefings.

Today it is obvious that the prospects for stable
and sustainable development in Central Asia are
inextricably linked with the achievement of durable
peace in neighbouring Afghanistan. Therefore,
Uzbekistan has significantly expanded its bilateral
relations with Afghanistan over the past years and is
actively participating in the international community's
efforts to seek a peaceful solution to the Afghan
problem. In Uzbekistan, we consider Afghanistan to
be a close and fraternal nation, with which we have
been connected for centuries by the bonds of friendship
and common history, religion, customs and traditions.
Uzbekistan pursues with regard to Afghanistan a policy
based on the principles of mutual respect and equality
that takes into account shared interests, and supports a
Government elected by the people of Afghanistan.

It should be underlined that a holistic, deeply
thought-out and strategically substantiated vision of the
President of Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Shavkat
Mirziyoyev, regarding the situation in Afghanistan
served as a solid foundation for the development
by Tashkent of a completely new, practical and far-
sighted policy with regard to Afghanistan. In that
regard, Uzbekistan is firmly committed to continuing
to support all efforts conducive to making a practical
contribution to stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan
and returning that country to peaceful development.
The Tashkent Conference on Afghanistan, convened
in March 2018 at the initiative of the Presidents of
Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, became the political basis
to that end. The Tashkent declaration adopted at the end
of the Conference demonstrated a consolidated position
at the regional and global levels on the need for the early
start of direct negotiations between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban movement.

In order to further advance the peace process and
ensure its inclusiveness, Uzbekistan has held a number
of important negotiations with the Government in
Kabul and representatives of the leading political forces
in Afghanistan, including the Taliban movement. In
particular, the Uzbek side over the past year met with
representatives of the Qatar-based Taliban Political
Commission. The most recent meeting took place a
month ago in Tashkent, when the Taliban movement
welcomed Uzbekistan's efforts on Afghanistan. I
would like to emphasize that Uzbekistan closely
coordinates all of its contacts with the Taliban with the
Government of Afghanistan. In particular, we conduct
prior consultations with the Afghan authorities on our
upcoming meetings with the Taliban and brief them on
the outcomes.

Uzbekistan does not claim the right to be the main
negotiating platform on Afghanistan. Our ultimate
goal is to help launch peace talks and facilitate the
achievement of a general stabilization of the situation
in Afghanistan. From our perspective, the durability
of any peace agreement in Afghanistan will depend
upon, first and foremost, the involvement of all
domestic political forces. Therefore, the Government
of Afghanistan should be a party to any negotiation
process. This is the most important aspect without
which it will be impossible to achieve tangible progress
in launching peace talks.

We cannot postpone an intra-afghan political
process any longer: delaying it any longer will cost the
lives of many more innocent people. We also consider
it crucial to maintain the role of State institutions
in the negotiating process in such important areas
as law enforcement, fully functioning civil society
institutions and respect for the rights of women in
Afghanistan - in short, all the achievements made
over the past 18 years. In addition, we must also invest
in the future social stability of Afghanistan through
its younger generations. In that regard, Uzbekistan
is today providing comprehensive assistance to the
economic recovery of Afghanistan and its participation
in regional initiatives. We support such projects as the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline
and the Central Asia-South Asia power project, as well
as the practical implementation of initiatives vital to
Afghanistan in the areas of transportation, energy,
trade and education. Among those are the construction
by Uzbekistan of the Surkhan-Puli-Humri power line,
the opening of an educational centre in Termez city to
train Afghan citizens and the Termez-Cargo logistics
centre with a customs terminal, the development of
projects for the construction of railway lines from
Mazari-e-Sharif to Herat and Mazari-e-Sharif to Kabul
and Peshawar.

In addition, a ministerial meeting of the eighth
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan will be convened this year in Tashkent.
We expect the main result of that forum to be the
development of a strategy for further forging partnership
between the neighbouring countries of Afghanistan in
the name of the common goals of peace and prosperity.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that today
the future of peaceful development in Afghanistan
depends on consolidating the efforts of the international
community as a whole towards the soonest possible start
to direct negotiations among all parties to the conflict.
In that connection, I underscore once again that only
an Afghan-led and -owned political process can lead to
a durable peaceful settlement to the ongoing conflict.

