Mr. Pal (India): It is a particular pleasure, Sir, to
see you back in New York and to speak to the Council
under your presidency.

When the Secretary-General's report on conflict
prevention was presented last week, and when a quick
glance showed that much of it dealt with conflict
management, the Secretariat said that this was because
management prevented conflicts from escalating. In
that sense, though, peacekeeping prevents conflicts
from being resumed, and, as it shades over into post-
conflict peace-building, prevents conflicts from
recurring. Conflict prevention would therefore stretch
from early warning to post-bellum peace and
development.

But if everything is conflict prevention, nothing
is. It is much more sensible to see conflict as a disease
of the body politic, and to follow the medical
distinction among prophylaxis, cure and therapy.
Conflict management and peacekeeping are the
curative phase, post-conflict peace-building the
therapeutic. This discussion should be on prophylaxis:
on ways and means to prevent armed conflict from
breaking out within societies and between them.

There are paragraphs in the report described as
recommendations, some of them directed to the
Council. But when the report was introduced last week,
we were told that the Secretary-General was simply
throwing up issues for discussion among Member
States, not making recommendations. Today, of course,
the Deputy Secretary-General has told us that these are
indeed recommendations, but we would encourage the
Council to see this meeting as a debate on the sections
of the report that fall within its mandate, not as an
exercise to accept or reject recommendations. We will
speak in broad terms on principles that, followed by
Member States or by the Council, could stop conflicts
from breaking out.

Within societies, democracy is a must. Societies
in which citizens can openly air their grievances;
choose their governments in free, open elections; have
a say, through elected local bodies, in aspects of
governance that touch their daily lives the most; and
get redress when they need it from an independent
judiciary that upholds the rule of law, are far less likely
to erupt into domestic conflict than those under
totalitarian or military rule. The United Nations should
continue to encourage democracy as a norm of
governance that lessens the chances of conflict.

Between States, treaties must be honoured. Once
States have accepted treaties designed to prevent
conflict and to offer a route to the peaceful resolution
of disputes, they must abide by their provisions. The
League of Nations foundered when it looked the other
way as bilateral treaties that had kept the peace were
systematically subverted, and it was unable to prevent
a global slide into conflict. Again, it was the
experience of Europe in the inter-war years that
totalitarian regimes brushed aside treaties negotiated by
their democratic predecessors.

States must also accept and act on the norms of
international law and on the principles adopted by the
United Nations to guide relations between States. The
founding principle of the United Nations is that
disputes will be settled peacefully and patiently at the
negotiating table, not through armed conflict. States
must commit themselves wholeheartedly to this. Trying
to undermine those with whom they have tensions,
using covert force or terrorism, is not only cowardly; it
is self-defeating. The United Nations should reject the
specious argument that the knife in the back is the only
weapon of the weak. That is not a plea accepted in a
court of domestic law, and it should not be accepted
here.

The International Court of Justice has a role in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, defined by the
Charter and the terms under which each Member of the
United Nations has accepted its jurisdiction. But there
are other judicial bodies, such as the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, which quietly settle
disputes affecting vital economic and other interests
that, in other eras, would have boiled over into conflict.
While those bodies should be supported, the Council
might wish to consider if the ad hoc tribunals it has set
up, without any authority under the Charter, and which
now cost about 10 per cent of the regular budget of the
United Nations, have really helped to prevent conflict.

Conflicts are prevented if States are assured of
their security and do not feel that they are under threat.
Military alliances might give their members a sense of
greater security, but history has shown that these
alliances goad others into taking counter-measures,
provoke tensions, and eventually lead to conflict. Most
of the permanent members of the Council have, at one
time or the other, belonged to powerful military
alliances; some still do. They might wish to consider
whether these alliances prevent conflict, when, during
the cold war, they were the cause of tensions that
threatened constantly to brim over into conflict.

Conflicts are provoked by States that have been
encouraged into militarism. Conflicts are more likely if
States believe they can profit from them. Conflicts
have been encouraged by arms sold irresponsibly for
profit, and conflicts have been both set off and
sustained by arms races, often induced by military
alliances pursuing policies of balance of power. We
need a fundamental review of the security of States in
order to find genuine collective security at
progressively lower levels of arms; only this will truly
prevent conflict.

Nuclear war is clearly the conflict that must be
prevented at all costs: de-alerting, no first use, and
commitments not to use nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear-weapon States are all practical steps that must
be taken to reduce nuclear dangers. Nuclear
disarmament must have the highest priority. Only a
multilateral compact for the time-bound abolition of
nuclear weapons will give the world true security. No
theory or doctrine can justify the indefinite retention of
nuclear weapons by the permanent members of the
Council. If they cling to their weapons, others will
follow, even if against their will.

At the other end of the spectrum, small arms and
light weapons are what most conflicts are now fought
with. Because these weapons are now both so lethal
and so easily available, they have made terrorists and
warlords immensely more powerful and deepened the
vulnerability of Governments that have to counter them
through means available to democracies. We were
concerned, therefore, that the Firearms Protocol,
recently negotiated in Vienna and adopted by the
General Assembly, should have such wide exceptions
to its scope. We will see what the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects next month comes up
with, but Article 26 of the Charter also gives the
Council a role in the regulation of armaments. Using it
creatively, the Council could make it harder for
terrorists and violent non-State actors to get access to
weapons, and easier to take steps against their suppliers.

What the Council should not do, either under its
elastic definition of security, or because it is lost in the
emptiness of this report, is rush into areas where it has
no role to play. HIV/AIDS should be a horrible
example for the Council, which last year decided that it
was a security problem and Blue Helmets a risk factor.
The Council never explained how spreading this canard
either helped the fight against AIDS or kept the peace,
unless it was telling Governments that if they went to
war, it would send them pox-riddled Blue Helmets to
keep the peace afterwards, and felt this would be such
a terrible threat that no State would dare breach the
peace. Maybe this was what the Council did have in
mind, because, after it adopted its resolution with much
fanfare and an African State asked that peacekeepers
sent to it by the United Nations be screened for
HIV/AIDS, both Council and Secretariat, appalled that
they should have been taken at their word, have been
pressing it ever since not to insist.

With that, I hope, salutary reminder, I thank
members for their attention.

