Mr. Griffiths: I apologize for being late to this
important meeting and I thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing that, and Mark Lowcock for stepping forward.
I am in Riyadh at the moment. We were hoping to have
news by the time of this meeting on an agreement in
the south, which I will talk about during this brief
briefing, ifI may. I thank you once again, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council.

In recent months, I have warned darkly of the perils
facing Yemen, including the prospects for instability in
the south and the frightening risks of the country being
drawn into a regional conflict. I have seemed perhaps
at times to have abandoned the creed of the mediator,
which is to find and nurture any and all signs of hope.

Today, I want to claim that there are indeed signs of
hope for the people of Yemen, even in the middle of the
misery that Mark Lowcock described earlier with his
usual accuracy and deftness and that, to those involved,
must sometimes seem endless. Yes, there are signs of
hope, but they are fragile and in need of our diligent
care and attention.

In my briefing today, I will seek to point to those
signs ofhope - in the south, ofcourse, as I have already
mentioned, but also in the reduction in violence very
recently in the north, to which Mark Lowcock referred
earlier. They are also apparent in a growing generosity
of spirit within and among the parties, which often
seems lacking, in, for example, freeing some of those
detained and imprisoned and finding creative ways
to allow desperately needed oil ships, to which Mark
also made several references, to enter Al-Hudaydah
in a very impressive way over the past several days.
As Mark has been telling us, they are much needed.
Those are perhaps small signs in a frightening season
but something for us to nurture.

In the south, the situation remains volatile, but with
a tenuous calm in Aden it is worth noting that there
has been no large-scale fighting in the areas of dispute,
despite our deep concerns in the Council beginning in
August. I believe that this can be taken as a testimony
to the restraint shown by those on the ground and their
leaders. As I said at the outset, many of us, including
myself in Riyadh, had hoped that an agreement could
have been announced today. I understand that we are
not quite there yet, but it certainly does seem that very
significant progress was made during the Jeddah talks
under the leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Thanks to the Saudis' strenuous diplomatic
efforts, there are encouraging signs, as I said, that an
agreement aimed at resolving the issues between the
Government of Yemen under President Hadi Mansour
and the Southern Transitional Council may be well
within reach. I am sure that it is as important to the
members of the Council as it to me that this be done
swiftly, as the Government needs to return safely and
with full authority to Aden and State institutions must
be allowed to be fully functional again with all speed.
Law and order must be restored and services delivered
to the people of the south. The hiatus in Government
activities, particularly the disruption of basic service
delivery, threatens people's lives.

I would like to say that the leadership of Saudi
Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud is of key importance in that context, not just
in the mediation that we have seen in the Jeddah talks,
but also in the other contexts to which I will refer today,
in trying to create new opportunities for the parties to
engage with new confidence among them. I am grateful
to him for that.

I welcome, as I did publicly at the time it was
announced on 20 September, the initiative by Ansar
Allah, under the leadership of Abdul-Malik Al-Houthi,
to suspend all drone and ballistic missile attacks on
Saudi Arabia. I also welcome the reduction of violence
that followed that announcement. Mark is, of course,
quite right to remind us about the unconscionably
high level of civilian casualties in September and,
indeed, the degree of military activity on those fronts
that he was referring to. That is the objective truth.
It is also true, as he said, that since the beginning of
October - 10 days into that initiative - the number
of air strikes has fallen considerably across Yemen. I
am obviously encouraged by that. It is, however, a very
recent and obviously very fragile gain, but it is certainly
a step in the right direction.

My good friend and colleague Lieutenant General
Abhijit Guha has just assumed his duty as the Head of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) and Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. God bless him for carrying
out those tasks. I wish him success in his endeavour.
We met when he came to the region and are in daily
contact about the issues that are facing him. I am very
grateful to him for taking up this opportunity under the
leadership of the Secretary-General.

Confidence-building is the keystone to the full
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
I would like to emphasize that the presence and
work of UNMHA in Al-Hudaydah, and the ways
it has tailored - sometimes subtly and sometimes
radically - its operations to the needs on the ground
are indeed more groundbreaking than I think many
of us have realized. In that context, the leadership
shown by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, his staff
and now Lieutenant General Guha in prioritizing the
establishment of a joint operations centre, along with the
two parties, as agreed in the meeting of the Committee
on the boat in the Red Sea - on which we have already
reported - has already resulted in a tangible reduction
in ceasefire violations. We are confident that that
process will continue.

In addition, the redeployment of forces, which
is so central to the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, will
continue to be a primary focus. I think that those
two parts of the strategy on Al-Hudaydah under
UNMHA and its parties in the Committee will ensure
our steady progress towards the achievement of the
objectives of the Stockholm Agreement, which are
essentially humanitarian and crucial to the success
and sustainability of the humanitarian programme in
Yemen. In that connection, this month - as I referred
to at the beginning of my briefing - the parties have
shown their strong commitment to finding some
understanding on some measures that will alleviate the
suffering of the Yemeni people. I welcome the release
of 290 detainees by the authorities in Sana'a. It was
remarkable to see the joy - which we have wanted and
waited to see - of the many families welcoming back
their respective loved ones. I hope - and I am sure that
we all do - that that step will be the start of further
initiatives. We are engaged even today in talks with the
parties that will facilitate the release of all detainees.

I would like to use this statement to invite the
parties to meet with us and our partners, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross - whose
President, Mr. Peter Maurer, has been just this week
in Riyadh focusing on this issue - to resume at the
nearest opportunity the discussions on the further
releases set out, mandated, required and hoped for by
the Stockholm Agreement.

I am very grateful for the news Mark
delivered 4 and this is not the first time either of
us have referred to this issue - about President
Hadi Mansour's decision to allow those fuel ships
into Al-Hudaydah. That important decision has not
only humanitarian consequences - which Mark has
already outlined ~ but also consequences in terms of
confidence. That important decision will respond to
humanitarian needs. It is a good example of an issue of
great humanitarian importance that can also, as I have
said, potentially build vital confidence between the
parties to address their differences, which, of course, is
my focus. I therefore thank Mr. Hadi Mansour for that.

As we speak and as I was coming to this briefing,
thanks to the support of the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and the concerted, detailed, difficult and
ultimately positive efforts of the parties to the conflict,
humanitarian assistance is, as we speak, being delivered
to people in need in Ad Durayhimi. I cannot express to
the Council the full extent of my respect for Resident
Coordinator Lise Grande, as well as the World Food
Programme and its leader, Mr. David Beasley, whom
we have been so often privileged to hear speak in the
Chamber and whose staff have diligently pursued this
difficult, tricky, necessary and ultimately successful
task. I thank them all for making this happen. That may
just be part of the daily tasks of those humanitarians,
but I must say that for the people of Ad Durayhimi, this
is a day of real consequence.
In Taiz, we have heard reports of potential offers
from both parties to open humanitarian corridors. I
mention that because, of course, Taiz was one of the
issues agreed upon in Sweden, precisely in order to
seek such openings. I hope that those reports translate
into reality. God knows that Taiz deserves some good
news, so I hope an agreement comes on the heels of the
promises that are being made.

Finally, as I said at the outset, there are signs ofhope.
We can clearly see that there are opportunities here that
need to be grasped. At the same time, let us be under no
illusion about the challenges and the difficulties ahead.
Today we have some positive indications, and I hope
that by the time the Council meets again on this issue
we shall have more clarity, more certainty and more
reason to hope.

