The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
the recent attacks on UNPROFOR personnel in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in this
regard, has learnt with particular indignation that once
again a soldier of UNPROFOR, this time a soldier of
the French contingent, was deliberately targeted and
shot to death by an unidentified sniper in Sarajevo
today. The Council notes with similar concern that
several other soldiers of the United Nations have been
killed recently in similar circumstances.

"The Council condemns in the strongest terms
such acts directed at peace-keepers who are serving
the cause of peace in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Deliberate targeting of UNPROFOR
personnel reflects the overall deterioration of the
situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council wishes to state once again that this is
totally unacceptable. It reiterates that the cooperation
of all parties and others concerned is indispensable
for the missions of the Force to be carried out and
demands that they respect fully the status of United
Nations personnel.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to investigate the circumstances of these
acts and to report to the Security Council, taking
into consideration the views of troop-contributing
countries, on any measures which might be
necessary to prevent further similar attacks, which
should not remain unpunished."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/ 19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 2.25 pm.
