Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I too would like
to begin by welcoming the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Ameerah Haq, to her first meeting with
the Security Council in that capacity, to thank her for
her briefing today and also to reiterate our continuing
support for the efforts of the United Nations in
assisting the people of Timor-Leste. I would also like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres,
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, to the Council
today, and to thank him for his update, which
illustrated the determination and will of Mr. Guterres
himself, his Government and the people of Timor-Leste
to build an increasingly stable, prosperous and well
governed nation, playing its full role in the region and
more widely.

I fully align myself with the statement that will
be made later in the debate on behalf of the European
Union by the acting head of the European Union
delegation.

We are encouraged by the continuing stable
security situation in Timor-Leste, which has seen no
return to the large-scale unrest experienced in February
2008. Timor-Leste continues to make much progress,
as demonstrated in the successful suco elections held in
October last year, and the effective resumption of
policing responsibilities in four districts by the national
police, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL).
We look forward to the handover of additional districts
to the PNTL by the end of March. It is important that
this momentum be maintained throughout 2010 and
2011. The fact that there has been no increase in crime
or disorder following the transfer of responsibility is
very welcome. We fully support the efforts of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) to help strengthen national policing capacity,
and we hope that the mission, with the help of the
international community, as Ameerah Haq said in her
briefing, can focus its efforts more and more precisely
on providing the relevant training and advice.

But we do not underestimate the challenged that
remain, which Ameerah Haq has outlined. We would
echo the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/85) on the
need for clear delineation of the roles and
responsibilities of the national police and the military.
The ongoing uncertainty in this relationship could be
destabilizing. We welcome efforts by the Timorese
authorities to address this through enhanced
legislation.

As underlined in the Secretary-General's report,

the four medium-term benchmarks - security and
stability; rule of law, justice and human rights;
democratic governance and dialogue; and

socio-economic reform - remain critical to addressing
the overall challenges in Timor-Leste. In particular, we
continue to stress the importance of tackling impunity,
on which we welcome the remarks made just now by
the Deputy Prime Minister. It will be vital to continue
efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. We believe that
UNMIT's Serious Crimes Investigation Team has an
important role to play in this by concluding its
outstanding investigations. We fully support its efforts
to pursue this valuable work rigorously.

With regard to addressing corruption, the recent
appointment of Aderito de Jesus Soares as Timor-
Leste's first Anti-Corruption Commissioner is a
significant step in improving transparency and public
accountability in Timor-Leste. We hope the authorities
will build on that appointment by taking further
practical, concrete steps to tackle corruption.

We support the proposed extension of UNMIT's
mandate for a further 12 months, but it remains our aim
to see Timor-Leste rely less and less on international
support. The plan for a measured drawdown of
UNMIT's police component is a step in the right
direction. An early indication from UNMIT on its
longer-term drawdown strategy will be crucial, and we

look forward to this in due course. While there is
general agreement that UNMIT will remain until 2012,
preparing the future after 2012 will be key. We
encourage early consideration of what might follow
UNMIT, and of the shift to an increasingly civilian-
focused United Nations peacebuilding presence.

