Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, Madam
President, I would like to warmly welcome your
presence among us today. Your participation in the
Council underlines the importance of the matters
discussed, especially for Indonesia.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the two briefers, Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues
Martins Filho, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg, Director
of the Challenges Forum International Secretariat, for
their informative and valuable contributions.

I would like to touch upon three main topics: the
significance of the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations in the
area of training and capacity-building; the importance
of information-sharing as an enabler of better
performance; and the crucial role of well-crafted
predeployment training.

As one of the first Member States to endorse the
Declaration of Shared Commitments, Poland sees
it as a clear road map for all relevant stakeholders to
guide them in continuously enhancing United Nations
peacekeeping missions, including by providing
support for the preparation of the personnel and
capabilities required for effective performance and
mandate delivery.

Poland strongly believes in providing troop and
police units with customized predeployment training
and adequately adjusted equipment. We therefore
fully support collective action to improve United
Nations peacekeeping, including through triangular
partnerships and a light coordination mechanism.
In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the
Peacekeeping Ministerial held in March 2019, which
led to substantive progress on relevant commitments
and training-specific pledges by Member States. None
of this, however, should undermine or replace the
general principle that the predeployment training of
peacekeepers is the primary responsibility of troop-
contributing and police-contributing countries.

I would like to reiterate our strong support for the
requirement provided in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments that the participation of women at
all stages of the peace process should be full, equal
and meaningful. The same applies to the challenges
and opportunities of training and capacity-building.
Poland believes that it is only by ensuring the fair and
equal access of women peacekeepers to training and
development opportunities that we will achieve the
ambitious goals of the uniformed gender-parity strategy.

Effective and efficient performance culture
in peacekeeping missions requires, among other
things, information-sharing capabilities. We
recognize information and data-driven analysis as
key entry points to enhanced peacekeeping. Better
situational awareness, including country-specific
information provided by local communities, improves
planning and allows the identification of clear and
achievable benchmarks. Subsequently, realistic plans
precisely guide troop-contributing countries in their
predeployment training activities. This chain reaction
regarding information management leads us all to
the effective implementation of the mandate and is
indispensable to a mission's ultimate goal, which is to
protect civilians and United Nations personnel. Such
mission-specific preparations are possible only when
troop-contributing countries are provided with the
full operational, political, geographical and security
picture. We deem indispensable closer cooperation
between United Nations Headquarters and missions in
that regard.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
strong belief that insufficient and ineffective
training of peacekeepers directly affects mandate
implementation - the core and statutory objective
of the United Nations presence in the host countries.
There can be no proper response without the proper
preparation process. Peacekeepers' training cycles
should equip the Blue Helmets with a clear vision of a
given mission's priorities, with the overarching aim of
protecting the most vulnerable.

