Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): Allow me at
the outset, on behalf of the Governments of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, to thank the presidency
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for organizing this
important briefing. It is illustrative of the positive
disposition of the Netherlands, and indeed that of the
Security Council, towards resolving the myriad of
challenges confronting the Lake Chad region.

Our special appreciation goes to Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed for her remarks. We
thank Mr. Bila and Ms. Nagarajan for their briefings.
We also thank all the memebrs of the Council for
their statements.

The Boko Haram insurgency has negatively
impacted virtually every facet of human endeavour,
including the economy, the polity and the lives and
livelihoods of people across the Lake Chad region. The
insurgency has been met with resolve and resilience by
the Multinational Joint Task Force, among others, and
as a result we have continued to witness the emergence
of rescued survivors and victims who were hitherto
under the brutal oppression of Boko Haram. Indeed,
three days ago we celebrated the release of 105 out of
110 abducted Dapchi schoolgirls. Nigeria is committed
to rescuing the remaining victims, as well as those who
were abducted earlier.

May I seize this opportunity to reiterate the
commitment of our Governments to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, in recognition ofthe primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
national jurisdiction. This conviction underlies our
Governments' resolve to take all measures necessary to
protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group
Boko Haram and its ilk.

That progress notwithstanding, we are aware
of other challenges in the region, including climate,
ecological and environmental changes, particularly
the shrinking of Lake Chad. Averting the latter will
require dedicated international intervention to recharge
the lake. The lake is very dear to our hearts, as it is a
source of livelihood to over 45 million people living
in the region. It is one of the oldest lakes in Africa and
is shared by Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.

The people living in the region depend on Lake
Chad for agriculture, fisheries, livestock production
and, indeed, their economic well-being. Unfortunately,
today all that is history due to the drying up of the lake.
This has resulted in dire consequences for our peoples.
Fish varieties are long gone, leaving the fishermen
jobless; farmers and herdsmen struggle over the little
water that is left; herdsmen traverse long distances in
search of greener pastures, resulting in conflicts; and
our young people are joining terrorist groups because
of difficult economic conditions. The net effect of all
these has been instability in the subregion. We therefore
reiterate our call for rededicated international action,
increased global attention and active engagement with
the countries of the Lake Chad region to accelerate
recovery efforts and to address the root causes of
terrorism , in accordance with resolution 2349 (2017)
and the recent presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, adopted by the Security Council on 30 January.

This will require strong United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, in conflict prevention
and management. The United Nations should continue
to take primary leadership in the maintenance of
international peace and security by providing, in
a predictable and sustainable manner, adequate
funding and other enablers to regional initiatives and
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council. In this regard, we call for the expeditious
disbursement of the $458 million for humanitarian
purposes, announced at the 2017 Oslo conference.

On our part, the Governments of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, with the support of UNESCO, the
African Development Bank, the European Union, the
World Bank and the Governments of Germany, China,
Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, Hungary, France, Italy,
the United Kingdom and the United States of America
organized the International Conference on Saving the
Lake Chad in Abuja, from 26 to 28 February.

The Conference, held under the theme "Saving
the Lake Chad to revitalize the Basin's ecosystem for
sustainable livelihood, security and development",
sought, among other things, to create global awareness
on the socioeconomic and environmental challenges
arising from the shrinkage of the Lake Chad, threats
to livelihoods, including insecurity, and others. It also
discussed and developed consensus on the different
options for restoring the lake, including the interbasin
water transfer project from the Ubangi River in Central
Africa to Lake Chad.

We are pleased to inform the Council that the
Conference adopted a road map for the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference that
should lead to the restoration of the lake, fishing and
irrigated farming as a way of alleviating poverty,
strengthening climate resilience in the basin, creating
employment, leading to reduction of terrorist activities
and increasing the revenue of the population and that
of the Lake Chad basin countries. We look forward to
enjoying the support of the international community in
implementing this well thought-out road map.

We wish to also affirm our commitment to
addressing the complex and multifaceted challenges
facing the region by tackling the root causes of
the crises in a holistic manner. In that context, our
respective Governments have developed programmes,
such as the Buhari Plan of Nigeria; the Renaissance
Programme of the Niger; the Recovery Road Map and
the Special Youth Triennial Programme of Cameroon;
Vision 2030: the Chad We Want of Chad; and the Lake
Chad Development and Climate Resilience Action Plan
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
As has been stated by many others, the special
attention and support of the international community
are also required to alleviate the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons in the region, particularly
women and children.

As we continue on this journey towards our goal,
we wish to use this medium to solicit the Council's

continued collaboration and support. We must treat
the issues of Lake Chad with the urgency they deserve
and show the needed political commitment to reviving
the Lake. Together, let us share the mission of rescuing
Lake Chad with renewed vigour, determination and
international collaboration, as our inaction or delay
will continue to accelerate the deteriorating standard of
living of millions of our people, with dire consequences
for our continent.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our pledge to restore
Lake Chad to its former glory. Recognizing that our
efforts will be more productive with international
support, we call for the full implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2349 (2017), and for our
international partners - technical and financial - to
remain unwavering in their support.

