The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
positive developments in Guinea while remaining
concerned by the situation. It reiterates the
statement of its President (S/PRST/2009/27). It
looks forward to the timely restoration of the
normal constitutional order in a peaceful manner
through a civilian-led transition.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union. It commends President Blaise Compaore
of Burkina Faso for his mediation efforts and
welcomes the communiques of the International
Contact Group on Guinea dated 26 January 2010
and of the African Union Summit dated
3 February 2010.

"The Security Council welcomes the Joint
Declaration of Ouagadougou dated 15 January
2010, which, consistent with the proposals made
on 6 January by the interim President, General
Sekouba Konate', provides in particular for the
establishment of a National Unity Government
led by a civilian Prime Minister designated by the
opposition, the holding of elections within six
months, the commitment that the Head of State of
the transition, members of the Conseil national
pour la de'mocratie et le developpement, the
Prime Minister, members of the National Unity
Government and the defence and security forces
in active service will not stand in the forthcoming
presidential elections.

"The Security Council welcomes further the
appointment on 21 January 2010 of Mr. J ean-
Marie Dore as Prime Minister and the designation
of a unity Government on 15 February 2010. It
calls upon all Guinean stakeholders to implement
the Joint Declaration of Ouagadougou in full, and
to engage actively in the transition towards the
restoration of the normal constitutional order
through the holding of elections within six
months. It calls upon the international community
to lend its support to the Guinean authorities led
by interim President Sekouba Konate' and Prime
Minister Jean-Marie Dore, including with regard
to comprehensive security and justice sectors
reform, upon request from the Guinean
authorities.

"The Security Council recalls that it
strongly condemned the violence committed on
28 September 2009 and its aftermath. It urges the
national authorities to prevent any further
violence and uphold the rule of law, including
promotion, protection and respect for human
rights and due process, and stresses their
obligations towards the victims and witnesses. It
emphasizes the responsibility of States to comply
with their relevant obligations to end impunity.

"The Security Council commends the work
of the International Commission of Inquiry
established by the Secretary-General and
supported by ECOWAS and the African Union to
investigate the facts and circumstances of the
events of 28 September 2009 in Guinea
consistent with its mandate (S/2009/556). It takes
note positively of the submission by the
Commission of its report (S/2009/693).

"The Security Council takes note that the
International Contact Group invited relevant
international stakeholders, including ECOWAS,
the African Union and the Mediator, to consider
deploying, as soon as possible and in consultation
with the Guinean authorities, a possible joint
civil-military mission in Guinea with a view to
discussing modalities for defence and security
sector reform and contributing to security
conditions for the electoral process. It encourages
them to plan for such a possible mission.

"The Security Council reiterates the call it
made in its resolution 1888 (2009) to increase the
representation of women in mediation processes
and decision-making processes with regard to
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
10-2406]

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to remain seized of the situation and to
react as appropriate to any threat or action against
the transition. It requests the Secretary-General to
continue to update it as appropriate on the
situation on the ground, the potential implications
for the subregion, the fight against impunity, the
efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union, and
the actions of the Secretariat of the United
Nations."
10-24061
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
