I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and my country, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for her detailed briefing. We also thank Mr. Jacques Letang, President of the Haitian Bars Federation, for his briefing. Finally, we welcome the participation of the representative of Haiti in today's meeting. Today's briefings and the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/537) show that the situation in Haiti is extremely dire. The worrisome security, political, humanitarian and socioeconomic situation has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and risks being further aggravated by such external shocks as climate change. Against the backdrop of these daunting challenges, and mindful of those ahead, the A3+1 encourages the international community to continue supporting our Caribbean sister nation and reaffirm its support for the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). Accordingly, we wish to make the following points. First, the A3+1 remains deeply concerned about the lingering political challenges, in particular issues surrounding elections and the absence of an electoral calendar. We note with concern the failure to convene already overdue legislative elections, and we are cognizant that the constitutional deadline for the next presidential election is imminent. We urge the Haitian authorities to undertake the measures needed to ensure the successful organization of these elections in a timely manner. In this regard, we call on Haitian political leaders to forge ahead with forming a Government in order to attract more bilateral and multilateral support. The A3+1 also stresses that there can be no externally imposed solution to the political crisis, and call on all Haitian stakeholders to work constructively to find a long-term comprehensive and peaceful solution. In this regard, the A3+1 further urges all Haitian political leaders to convene a national dialogue and refrain from acts that may trigger additional violence and compromise the gains made by the country under the guidance of the United Nations. Secondly, we welcome the role being played by the National Commission on Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration and commend the Commission's efforts to draft a national community-violence reduction strategy to enhance efforts in combating gang violence. We also welcome the efforts of the Haitian National Police (HNP) to tackle the scourge of gang violence in the country. We are disturbed by the proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition that continue to enter the country illegally. Like many other small island States of the Caribbean, Haiti is a manufacturer of neither firearms nor ammunition. However, its geographic location between the suppliers and consumers of illegal narcotics in the South and to North makes it a transshipment point for illicit weapons. We note that the prevalence of illicit weapons has triggered an upsurge in crime, particularly among gangs, which continues to create insecurity. We are deeply disturbed by reports that a death squad has carried out violent attacks in several impoverished Port-au-Prince neighbourhoods. We call for a thorough investigation and for the perpetrators to be held accountable. The collaboration among BINUH, the Haitian national authorities and other relevant stakeholders in the drafting of arms control legislation consistent with international standards is encouraging in this regard. In addition, the A3+1 urges that institutions and capacity-building mechanisms be strengthened to address institutional shortcomings. We recognize the marginal advances that have been made in the Haitian National Police and in the justice and correction sectors. We regret, however, that the Haitian State had to reduce its contribution to the national budget for the HNP to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic. Together with the relevant judicial institutions, the HNP has a fundamental role to play in the State's meeting its obligations to protect its citizens and ensure that transparency and the rule of law prevail. Thirdly, the worsening humanitarian situation, particularly increasing food insecurity, overcrowded prisons and challenges for those people made most vulnerable, remains of grave concern. In the wake of the pandemic and the ensuing socioeconomic crisis, it is crucial that the international community redouble its efforts to assist the Haitian authorities in responding to the crisis. We laud the spirit of unity and solidarity shown by Haitians in their initial response to the pandemic. We also appreciate all efforts aimed at assisting the country in its national humanitarian response, including through the Caribbean Community, the Pan American Health Organization, the World Food Programme, the International Organization for Migration and the United Nations. We acknowledge the efforts of the Government of Haiti in meeting some of the benchmarks and encourage further progress in these important areas. Furthermore, we welcome reports that some international financial institutions will suspend Haiti's debt so that the country can respond adequately to the COVID-19 pandemic, and we call on Haiti's partners to consider providing debt forgiveness. Not only does Haiti need debt relief, but it also needs grants to face the already bleak economic situation forecasted by the International Monetary Fund, which includes reductions in remittances, textile exports and foreign direct investment. We welcome the continued engagement of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, which supports the country's long-term development strategy. At this critical moment, we urge greater collaboration between the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council to foster complementarities in the United Nations system's engagement with the country, in order to comprehensively address the root causes of Haiti's insecurity. Haiti remains a fundamental pillar to our African and Caribbean civilization, with a glorious yet complex history. Its seemingly never-ending battle to create security and stability for its people grieves us, especially given the nation's leadership role in paving the way for the abolition of slavery. As the first black nation to revolt against slavery and oppression in the western hemisphere, Haiti paid an exorbitant price for its freedom. We cannot abandon Haiti. We must stand in solidarity with our Haitian brothers and sisters. In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms that the sustainable development of Haiti will be a mere fleeting illusion to be pursued and never attained if the genesis of Haiti's underdevelopment is not addressed, and this must begin with adequate restitution.
