Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I thank you for convening this public
meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste. I also thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his excellent briefing on
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/669).

My delegation welcomes with renewed
satisfaction this very instructive report on the progress
made by Timor-Leste since the Council's last debate on
this subject, in May 2004 (see S/PV.4965). The
information in the report demonstrates once again, if
proof were needed, the political resolve and long-term
vision of Timorese leaders, who are committed to
building a stable and democratic nation. The report
also confirms that the young Timorese State is making
the most of the presence of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET); we hail the
Mission's remarkable effectiveness in assisting Timor-
Leste to attain self-sufficiency. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
action at the head of the mission.
As well, Benin welcomes Timor-Leste's
developing cooperation with the Governments of
Australia and Indonesia. We hope that the political will
shown by those three Governments will endure and that
the strengthening of good-neighbourly relations and
respect for one another's territorial integrity will be the
hallmark of their activities in all spheres.

We welcome the progress made in the
delimitation of the land and maritime borders of Timor-
Leste. The conclusion of that process is crucial for wise
exploitation of and equitable benefit from the area's
natural resources.

We welcome UNMISET's effective transfer on
20 May 2004 of all police and defence powers to the
Timorese Government. That was indeed an important,
even historic, step that marked the Timorese people's
full enjoyment of their sovereignty. We are pleased to
note that since then, calm has prevailed throughout
Timorese territory and that the Government is
continuing to set up various mechanisms to ensure an
environment conducive to achieving sustainable
economic and social development.

However, there is no doubt that Timor-Leste still
needs time to achieve the established objectives and to
meet the various expectations inspired by the country's
independence. Peace, justice and democracy are
preconditions for the creation of a stable and
prosperous State. The Timor-Leste authorities have
understood that very well; that is why they are tireless
in their efforts to establish viable institutions that
strengthen the rule of law. Proof of that is the
preparation and adoption of indispensable legislation.

While it is true that Timor-Leste continues to
have problems with the smooth functioning of State
institutions, it is equally true that what is important is
how those problems are tackled and solved. Therefore,
my delegation agrees with the Secretary-General's
assessment when he advocates the promotion by
Timorese leaders of a culture of political dialogue, both
among public institutions and with the population. We
also agree that much remains to be done, particularly in
the area of strengthening the capacities of the Timorese
national police, which must at all costs remain a
republican force at the service of all citizens and be
capable of ensuring the safety and security of all
Timorese in order to strengthen their confidence in
government.

An important phase in the building of the rule of
law is consolidating the judicial system, the first
objective of which should be combating all forms of
impunity. Therefore, it is essential for the justice
system of Timor-Leste to be given the effective means
necessary to bring all those who have committed
serious crimes to justice and ensure that the entire
population enjoys impartial justice on a daily basis.
This is why Benin believes that countries that shelter
the perpetrators of - and those responsible for - the
atrocities of 1999 must hand them over to the Timorese
State so that they may be tried in accordance with the
standards and norms of international justice. This is an
international obligation that States must fulfil so as to
ensure justice for the victims of these deplorable
events.

At the same time, Benin is convinced that the
efforts made by Timor-Leste require constant support
from the international community, which should remain
committed. We therefore welcome the extension of
UNMISET's mandate as established in resolution 1543
(2004), which makes it possible for the United Nations
presence to be maintained as a symbol of the culture of
peace. We fully share the view of the Secretary-
General concerning the need to sustain complementary
bilateral efforts, particularly in such sensitive areas as
public administration, the police and the armed forces.
In this regard, my country welcomes the holding of a
conference of Timor-Leste's development partners in
May 2004, in Dili. We associate ourselves with the
appeal issued by the Government of Timor-Leste for
continued budgetary support at the current level for a
period of two further years.

