Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement just made by the representative of the
European Union.

In our own national statement, I would like to start
with a quotation: "He who closes his eyes to the past will
be blind to the present." These words were spoken by the
recently deceased German President Von Weizsacker in
1985 at the fortieth anniversary commemoration of the
end of the Second World War. Today, 30 years later, his
words have not lost their relevance.

The Second World War - unleashed by Nazi
Germany - cost millions of lives and laid waste
to countries around the globe. While the world was
burning, visionary leaders set out to establish the
United Nations to free humankind from the scourge of
war and to replace the law of force with the force of
law. As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations this year, it is only right to pay tribute
to the founding mothers and fathers of the principles
they enshrined in the Charter. We therefore welcome
the initiative taken by the Chinese presidency to call for
today's open debate.

My country became an United Nations Member
State only in 1973. For us, it was far more than a mere
formal act; it was the culmination of our journey
towards rejoining the world community. The people of
Germany and its successive Governments had set out
on this road with a clear vision - that it was in our best
interests to be firmly anchored in collective security
systems; that in an increasingly interdependent world,
one can gain only by also giving; and that this approach
requires strong ties with our neighbours and partners
that transcend traditional sovereignty.

That is what lies at the core of the historic project of
European unification, and it is what inspires and drives
our foreign policy today, including our multilateral
diplomacy here in New York. Having learned the
lessons of the past, Germany today is willing to take on
more responsibility in the world, within a multilateral
framework and with a clear emphasis on diplomacy,
peaceful settlement of conflicts and civilian crisis
prevention.

The goals and principles of the United Nations
Charter remain as valid as they were in 1945. Peace,
human rights and development are no less important
now than they were 70 years ago. But the world has
changed since then and so have the ways and means
by which the international community is striving to
attain these goals. Over the past decades, the United
Nations system has demonstrated its ability to adapt
to new realities and meet emerging challenges. It has
expanded its toolkit to respond to the new nature of
armed conflict. There is also a growing understanding
that human rights should know no borders and that
those responsible for the most egregious violations
must be held accountable.

Lastly, the world has come to understand that global
sustainable development is a common responsibility.
In a world of finite natural resources, no country can
prosper at the expense of others. On all these issues, the
United Nations provides a proven framework to reach
global solutions. Its unique legitimacy and ability to
meet new challenges must therefore be safeguarded.

The foregoing also requires that the structures and
institutions of the United Nations are willing and able
to live up to their tasks. Reviews of the peacekeeping
architecture, the peacebuilding framework and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have been
initiated. We welcome and actively contribute to these
reviews and processes. Only when seen together in a
holistic and comprehensive understanding of peace,
security and development will these reviews make the
United Nations fit for its eighth decade.

Voices that call for a similar commitment to update
the United Nations peace and security architecture with
the Security Council at its core are growing louder. We
share the view that it is high time to consider whether
the Council's structure - largely unchanged since
1945 * allows it to effectively address the challenges
of today's world.

As much as has been achieved over the past
decades, serious challenges remain. One of the biggest
challenges to the international legal order remains the
blatant violation of the territorial integrity of Ukraine
through the illegal annexation of Crimea, which we
will not recognize. This is an attempt to redraw borders
through the use of force. We are deeply worried by
reports ofongoing violations ofthe agreed ceasefire. The
Security Council underlined the importance of the full
implementation of the Minsk Agreements in resolution

2202 (2015) last week, which we fully support. We call
on all sides to stop fighting and remove heavy weapons
as agreed. We think that deliberations in the Security
Council could benefit greatly from cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

On other matters, chlorine gas has been
systematically and repeatedly used as a weapon in Syria
by the Assad regime. Radical extremists - from West
Africa to Iraq, from Paris to Copenhagen - threaten
the values enshrined in the United Nations Charter
and pervert the teachings of Islam. As a result of the
proliferation of conflicts, the world is confronted with
the largest refugee crisis since the Second World War.
Climate change is threatening not only livelihoods,
prosperity and security in numerous Member States;
if unmitigated, it may threaten the very existence of
humankind.

The response to those threats and challenges
cannot be to revert to old patterns of statecraft based
on spheres of influence, to pursue national interests
in a zero-sum logic or to simply close our eyes - or
our borders. History has shown that humankind is best
served when cooperation trumps confrontation and
when the strength of the law prevails over the law of
the strongest. That recognition led to the creation ofthe
United Nations 70 years ago, and it is still valid today.
We need a strong United Nations at the centre of global
governance. Building a stronger United Nations is our
collective duty. We owe it to our citizens and to those
who 70 years ago said "Never again".

