Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Kalomoh for his briefing and the Secretary-
General for his report. In a short while Ireland will be
making a statement on behalf of the member States of
the European Union, and we completely support that
statement.

The Security Council mission to Central Africa
and the Great Lakes region last June, which I had the
honour of leading, was in the region at a decisive time
for the two peace processes. I think it can be said that
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as in
Burundi, in the space of eight months considerable
work has been accomplished. I will refer to both
situations, starting with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

At the time of our visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the problems in that country
were particularly grave. The transition agreement was
threatening to unravel, the eastern part of the country
was once again the scene of violence and armed
offensives, and peace was at risk. Thanks to the efforts
of all, major progress was accomplished. The
transitional Government of national unity was
established on 30 June 2003, in accordance with the
solemn commitment undertaken by President Kabila
before members of the Security Council. The question
of high military command was resolved and the
relations ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo with
Uganda and Rwanda considerably improved. That was
a point to which members of the Council had given
particular attention. Thanks to Operation Artemis and
to the strengthening ofthe United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), hostilities have, to a great extent, come to
an end in the east.

Nonetheless, insecurity does remain. Last week a
Kenyan MONUC observer was murdered in Ituri in the
exercise of his duties. I wish to reiterate France's
condolences to his family, to his loved ones and to the
Kenyan Government. Everything must be done so that
the perpetrators of this crime do not go unpunished.
MONUC, which now has a robust mandate, must make
the militias understand that such actions will no longer
be tolerated. Furthermore, in this context it is essential
to strengthen the monitoring of the arms embargo. An
end must be put to the trafficking thanks to which
armed groups keep the region in a state of instability.

However, this tragic event must not obscure the
results that have been obtained in recent months in
disarmament and in the repatriation of foreign
combatants. True, much of the road still remains ahead
of us. We must succeed in particular in the
reintegration of Congolese combatants, who in some
cases will rejoin civilian life, and in other cases, the
new armed forces and the police. In that regard, I pay
tribute to Belgium, which for several weeks now has
been conducting in Kisangani the training of the first
integrated brigade ofthe new Congolese army.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
entering a new and delicate period. The war is
officially over, but a great deal remains to be done to
complete national reconciliation. Elections must be
held in June 2005 as scheduled. It is at times such as
these that we must be careful that our attention does
not wane. The Congolese must continue their efforts,
and the international community must help them and
support the efforts of Mr. Swing, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who was with
the Council last week. We greatly appreciate his
efforts, and his briefing and the action he is taking.

The Council mission returned from Burundi with
high hopes. It seemed to us that all the parties to the
transition were filled with a sincere desire for peace,
reconciliation and reform. Despite the hardships that
hit the country hard during the summer, that desire
prevailed in the end. The agreement that the
international community urged was concluded with Mr.
Nkurunziza's Forces pour la defense de la de'mocratie,
which has now taken its place in the transitional
authorities. For their part, the Forces nationales de
liberation of Mr. Rwasa have begun to evince a
constructive attitude, and initial discussions took place
last month in the Netherlands. Of course, that progress
remains to be solidified, but it is encouraging. To
facilitate those talks, we are counting very much on the
efforts of the States of the facilitation and regional
peace initiative and, in particular, on the involvement
of South Africa.
We pay tribute to the remarkable mobilization
that Africa has demonstrated. The African Union
decided to deploy to Burundi its first peacekeeping
mission. That operation, which has support from the
European Union, will be crucial to consolidating the
ceasefire. In due course, we will have to study the
conditions under which a United Nations operation
could carry on from it.

I wish to refer briefly to the question of the
international conference. The crises in Central Africa
and in the Great Lakes region cannot be understood in
isolation. Borders have they stopped neither armed
rebel movements nor military interventions by States.
Nor have they stopped trafficking weapons or in
natural resources. We know that an effective and
lasting solution to the problem must be regional in
scope. That is also the objective of the international
conference now being prepared. As we have already
said, to be successful, this conference must be open to
the participation of all neighbours of the Congo and
Burundi, without exception. It must thus include, we
believe, Angola, the Central African Republic, the
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. It must also
focus on the fundamental issues of security and
regional economic cooperation. It is essential that the
first summit produce concrete results in the fields of
peace, security and good-neighbourliness; those results
will consolidate the peace and reconciliation processes.

I believe that the Council mission to Central
Africa, whose results we are assessing today, was
useful in a number of ways. It helped Council members
in their work by giving them concrete knowledge ofthe
processes under way. It encouraged the Council's unity
and strengthened the Council's message to the parties.
Mr. Kalomoh has told us that the mission was warmly
welcomed in the region. I believe it has also helped the
Council more effectively to support the work of the
Secretary-General and his special representatives. I pay
tribute to them and to all United Nations personnel
who, with them, are working for peace in the region.

