Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Thank you once again, Mr.
President, for scheduling this open meeting on the situation
in Afghanistan. My delegation was among the first to
support the idea when it was proposed by one of our
colleagues. We did so with the conviction that by coming
out into the open, by putting all the cards on the table, by
allowing everybody to speak out, together, through
concerted international effort, we should be in a position,
provided that the political will exists, to find a lasting
solution to the Afghan enigma. A solution to the Afghan
imbroglio has continued to elude the international
community for too long. This beleaguered country has had
a checkered history. Unfortunately, there is no end in sight
to the protracted conflict.

My delegation sincerely believes that the "six plus
two" process constitutes the most appropriate framework to
deal with this crisis. Unless and until all the parties
concerned are ready to get their acts together, the vicious
cycle of violence will prevail and the entire region will
remain in a quandary, trapped in the Afghan quagmire.

In this situation of near-paralysis, the Security Council
should demonstrate its ingenuity and chart a new course in
its approach to the Afghan crisis. We certainly do not
underestimate the complexity of the situation, but we are
of the View that the underlying political problems must
first be resolved.

Once that is done, it will create the enabling
environment to deal effectively with other issues such as
human rights abuses, terrorism and illicit drugs, to
mention only a few. This is why my delegation attaches
great importance to the "six plus two" process, and is
therefore appealing to all the parties to return to the
negotiating table without further delay. That is in the best
interest not only of all the people of Afghanistan, but of
all the other parties concerned also. A military solution
should not even be contemplated even though the reality
on the ground is something else.

The greatest challenge facing the Security Council
today is to persuade the parties to go back to the
negotiating table and when we have succeeded in
reasoning with them to do so, to persuade them to
negotiate in good faith. That can be done, if only we stop
sidelining, side-stepping or demonizing this faction or that
faction. It does not help the process any meaningful way.
It only sets the clock back, and the Lord knows that the
clock has already been set back many years.

