Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Togolese presidency, and in particular His Excellency
the President of the Togolese Republic, for organizing
and presiding over today's debate on the challenges
that terrorism poses to peace and security in Africa.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Abdullahi Shehu for their briefings.

There can be no doubt that, sadly and worryingly,
terrorism continues to grow in Africa. This reflects
the evolution of the terrorist threat we face, which is
ever more fragmented and geographically diverse. It
threatens the countries and the people of Africa as well
as the citizens and interests of countries far beyond
Africa's borders, so the international community must
work together with the countries of Africa to address
the threat. It is a shared challenge for all of us.

Effectively tackling the threat of terrorism
requires a comprehensive approach, including political,
economic and humanitarian efforts, as well as
operational interventions. The Sanctions Committees
must play a crucial role in this, and it is important that
all relevant components of the United Nations system
work together to counter terrorist challenges, while
avoiding duplication across its infrastructure. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
are key mechanisms to that end. The international
community should work collaboratively to reduce the
drivers of terrorism, counter the radicalization of the
vulnerable and support inclusive Government structures
that provide the people of Africa with both security and
prosperity. It can be done, but it will require a tough,
intelligent and patient approach.

Instability has long been a driver of terrorism.
Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups thrive where there
is political instability and weak political institutions,
and where there has been a failure to address
long-standing political or social grievances. The
international community must work collaboratively
with African nations, taking a comprehensive approach
to reducing poverty, developing effective governance
and delivering economic progress in order to promote

stability. Alongside those efforts, we should continue to
seek to understand better what motivates individuals to
engage in terrorism and to counter those grievances, be
they local, national, regional or international. Terrorism
must not be allowed to become an attractive option for
those disenfranchised by the status quo.

Ransom payments have contributed to the growth
of terrorism in Africa. Kidnapping for ransom both
supports terrorism and is a form of terrorism itself.
The international community must take collective
action to combat this problem. We endorse the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum's Algiers memorandum,
which provides practical suggestions on how to prevent
and resolve terrorist kidnappings, and we welcome the
recent experts' meeting in Bogota. We fully support
the work of the Financial Action Task Force to improve
anti-money-laundering and anti-terrorist-financing
frameworks worldwide. Furthermore, we must work
together to ensure that the scale of the current threat
from terrorism does not grow. As the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom noted in January,

"Four years ago, the principal threat from
Islamist extremism came from the Afghanistan
and Pakistan region. A huge amount has been
done to address and reduce the scale of that threat.
Whereas at one point three-quarters of the most
serious terrorist plots against the United Kingdom
had links to that region, today this has reduced
to less than half. But at the same time, Al-Qaida
franchises have grown in Yemen, Somalia and
parts of North Africa."

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg
noted, Somalia illustrates an important point. Just
last week, the United Kingdom hosted the Somalia
Conference, attended by representatives of 54 countries.
It is clear that fighting terrorism alone cannot on its own
address the root causes of the problems Somalia faces.
The scale of the challenge means that we must engage
all the tools at our disposal - diplomatic networks,
aid and trade, our political relations and security
cooperation. We must also support the building blocks of
democracy, such as the rule of law. There is no room for
complacency in Somalia. Al-Shabaab remains a deadly
threat. However, we believe that the gradual progress
being made in Somalia offers a frame of reference. It is
an approach that the international community can draw
on elsewhere to patiently help rebuild fragile States and
address the drivers of terrorism.

As the Secretary-General said in his opening
remarks, and as many speakers have echoed, the

struggle against terrorism must go forward on many
fronts and in a multidimensional way. We must tackle
terrorism in a variety of ways - militarily, of course,
but we must also address the narrative that terrorists
feed on. We must close down the ungoverned spaces in
which they thrive and deal with the grievances they use
to garner support. The United Kingdom is committed
to working with partners to defeat terrorism. We will
use our current chairmanship of the Group of Eight to
ensure that these issues remain at the very top of the
international agenda.

