Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his
informative briefing and the leadership that he has
shown in guiding the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We are
particularly grateful for the assistance provided by his
team, the Chair of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts to the new Council members to better
understand the functioning of the Committee.

Since the adoption of resolution 1737 (2006),
Guatemala has adopted practical measures to ensure
the full implementation of the resolution in our
country. We do not possess or intend to possess
weapons of mass destruction of any kind. As a party to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and a signatory to all main
international instruments and agreements on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
Guatemala reaffirms the importance of a balanced
implementation of the three fundamental pillars of the
NPT: non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Of course, we believe that that
last pillar includes the right of all States parties to the
NPT to develop, research, produce and use nuclear
energy as long as it has established that it is for
peaceful purposes. Allow me to underscore some
points of the report.

First, our primary focus in the Committee should
be the effective implementation of resolution 1737
(2006), adopted by the Council, which includes the
consideration of all its reports.

Second, it is of concern to note that the Islamic
Republic of Iran has ignored the provisions of
resolution 1737 (2006) and subsequent resolutions.
That is completely unacceptable and jeopardizes the
effectiveness of joint decisions of the Council.

Third, applying sanctions is a process that
requires the ongoing and resolute efforts of the
international community. Much has been done to
implement resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1929 (2010).
However, it is not enough and we must continue our
action.

We commend the outreach activities carried out
by the Panel of Experts through visits, inspections and
participation in seminars. Such activities have
facilitated understanding not only of the work of the
Committee, but also of the role of States in
implementing the relevant resolutions. We believe that
those activities should be continued. Further
strengthening of outreach activities in developing
countries is necessary to consolidate the improvements.

Fourth, Guatemala is grateful for the work of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) as summarized in the mid-term review
report published in 2011. It is important that the
Committee continue actively to provide its guidance
and leadership. The mandate of the Panel of Experts
has been clearly defined in paragraph 29 of the
resolution, and remains the sole reference for the
Committee to continue to follow up the various
activities of the group.

Fifth, viewed from a broader political
perspective, the issue of the Iranian nuclear situation is
not encouraging. As yet there has been no progress in
negotiations; on the contrary, the current
confrontational tendency is a source of great concern.
The lack of confidence combined with the recent
alarming events both within and outside the Islamic
Republic of Iran risk generating a dangerous situation,
which we must strenuously avoid. To ensure that the
situation does not deteriorate even further, we must
seek worthy and credible alternatives aimed at
establishing an environment conducive to dialogue and
genuine commitment. New endeavours are necessary to
strengthen the foundation of a negotiated solution.

Sixth, Iran's implementation of the provisions of
the relevant Council resolutions and its cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency must also
be considered a step in the right direction. The
suspension of all activities linked to enrichment and
processing is a legally binding requirement under
resolution 1737 (2006), and crucial to establishing
confidence.

Seventh, we note that during the reporting period
the Committee received notifications from Member
States through reports of alleged violations. We
commend the Committee, which, with the support of
the Group of Experts, has responded to those reports
while at the same time intensifying its public opinion
outreach activities aimed at avoiding future sanctions
violations.

Lastly, my country supports the work of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts and remains ready
to participate creatively and constructively in
considering outstanding issues, as agreed at the
Committee's recent meeting on 29 February. We shall
continue to follow the matter very closely.

