Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
I have the honour to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, of which my
country holds the presidency, on the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

First of all, Sir, I should like to extend to you my
sincere and fraternal congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
also pay tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for his commendable efforts last
month when exercising that function.

The tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina broke out at
the end of the cold war and with the emergence of the
beginnings of a new world order which we were all hoping
would be just, equitable and tranquil and in which all States
would be working finally towards progress and the
prosperity of their peoples in understanding and harmony.

This almost unprecedented tragedy in history has left
the country devastated and brutalized by four years of war,
in which 400,000 people have been killed, 2 million people
have lost their possessions, 100,000 women have been
raped, and hundreds of thousands of people have endured
inhuman suffering, torture, concentration camps - all
because they professed a different religion.

We express our deepest sympathy to all the victims
and their families. We want them to know that their
tragedy will forever be a blot on the history of mankind
because it constitutes an outrage to our collective
conscience.

We are recalling these grim facts because we want
to reaffirm the Islamic community's commitment to the
principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence in mutual
respect for cultural, moral and religious particularities.
The intrinsic value of the human being, whatever his
origin, prohibits us from taking the path of exclusivity or
indifference, and still less that of exclusion and rejection.

The Islamic community throughout the world has
followed the tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
compassion and solidarity - sometimes even with
repugnance - at the international community's
helplessness and powerlessness in the face of the
massacre and genocide of a people deprived of the means
of defending itself.

There are those who deemed the efforts of the
United Nations to restore peace to this region and its
humanitarian assistance to refugees as timorous gestures,
lacking the firm resolve to put an end to the suffering of
the Bosnian people and the impunity of the Serb
aggressors.

Because of our profound desire to see this conflict
peacefully resolved, we, like all other observers, were
hanging on every word of the news bulletins about the
negotiations at Dayton, which we followed with a mixture
of hope and concern. And so the announcement of the
initialling of the Dayton Agreement last Tuesday put our
fears to rest and strengthened our optimism, because this
Agreement undeniably constitutes a perceptible
breakthrough and a decisive step forward which gives us
grounds for hope that peace in this region is finally within
our grasp.

The Islamic community takes particular pleasure in
this Agreement because it is designed to bring about an
honourable peace which will guarantee to Bosnia and
Herzegovina its independence and its territorial integrity
and make Sarajevo its unified capital, while instituting the
necessary proceedings against the Serb war criminals and
ensuring their appearance before the International
Criminal Tribunal on the former Yugoslavia.

 

The tireless efforts of President Clinton and his
Administration to keep these negotiations moving at a
satisfactory pace are admirable. Without his persistence and
unshakeable determination, this Agreement, which the most
optimistic among us did not expect for months, would
never have been concluded. We must also emphasize the
contribution of France, the United Kingdom, Germany and
the Russian Federation and express our gratitude to them.

I ask all those who were the architects and who
crafted this peace, particularly the United States, to accept
this expression of our gratitude and thanks, as well as the
gratitude and thanks of all peace-loving men and women.

Indeed, the arrangements provided for in the
Agreement, notably the multinational implementation force,
the cantonment of the forces of the parties, the withdrawal
of heavy weapons and the freeing of prisoners of war, will,
I am sure, initiate a process of irreversible peace which, we
hope, will make it possible for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to live together again in tranquillity and
mutual respect.

We are convinced that all the conditions now exist for
thwarting the saboteurs who are still trying desperately to
challenge the application of the Peace Agreement. But we
must remain vigilant and firm if we are to prevent the
separatists from carrying out their aim of torpedoing the
process, as they have done in the past.

Forty-three months of pitiless and relentless war have
left the country morally traumatized and materially in
ruins - a country which we must all help to feel again the
pleasure of a peaceful life - pleasures which are just a
dim memory in minds still haunted by cruelty and
barbarism.

The international community must take the opportunity
of the peace conference to take place in Paris next
December to mobilize all its efforts and join forces to
consolidate this emerging peace and transform it into lasting
prosperity in order to stanch the bleeding wounds of our
Bosnian brothers and sisters.

Indeed, we must devise and put rapidly into effect an
ambitious plan for the rebuilding of infrastructures and the
restoration of public services, in order to restore confidence
to refugees, to displaced persons and to the other citizens
and, above all, to convince them that peace has truly come
to stay and is no longer a mere mirage in a desert of
despair.

Today, the Security Council was called upon to take
concrete measures to implement the Dayton Agreement,
measures relating to the economic sanctions against
Serbia and Montenegro and the Bosnian Serbs, and to the
arms embargo imposed on the Bosnians.

In this regard, we believe that the Council's action
must be placed within a framework of vigilance and
firmness, to deter those who are nostalgic for a certain
grandeur and to encourage those who want finally to live
in peace.

Hence, the Security Council must bring to bear all
its weight and all its authority to promote peace and
stability in that part of the world by supporting the
process which has just been so fortunately initiated in
Dayton.

In conclusion, I wish to pay a warm and sincere
tribute to the courage and farsightedness of all those who
have contributed to the conclusion of this historic
Agreement, which we welcome.

