Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres for their
briefings, and we also thank France for convening
today's debate. We are also grateful to all the Ministers
who have joined us this afternoon.

The large number of people displaced from
their homes and those who have taken refuge in
neighbouring countries serves to indicate how the
continued crisis in Syria is exacting a heavy toll on
the civilian population. We commend the efforts by the
neighbouring countries, including Turkey, Jordon, Iraq
and Lebanon, in providing humanitarian assistance and
shelter to the people displaced. Having been host to
millions ofAfghan refugees for decades, Pakistan is no
stranger to the magnitude of the responsibility that such
situations entail. The need for wholehearted support by
the international community is clear.

The initial joint needs assessment carried out by the
United Nations, the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation
and the Syrian Government kindled optimism that
things might start moving in the right direction.
However, subsequent developments have dashed all
such hopes. We urge all parties to the conflict to ensure
the availability of humanitarian relief, particularly to
those in urgent need.

The current humanitarian crisis in Syria cannot
be addressed in isolation. It needs to be considered in
a holistic manner. The resolution of disputes through
violence is against the very ideals that the United Nations
espouses. Political differences should be resolved
through inclusive dialogue with the participation of all
protagonists.

The Syrian people have suffered enough. The
bloodshed in Syria must come to an immediate end.
We strongly condemn the use of force by all sides
in Syria. The Syrian people need political space to
regain the societal equilibrium that is so essential for
peacebuilding.

The primary responsibility for ensuring the safety

and security of the Syrian people rests with the Syrian
Government. We call upon the Syrian Government to
make sure that the rights of all its citizens are protected
in conformity with its national and international
obligations. The Syrian opposition should also abjure
the use of force.

It is essential that the Syrian Government and other
forces create the conditions necessary for national
dialogue and reconciliation. It is only through inclusive
dialogue and a political process that Syria can chart out
a course towards a stable, secure and prosperous future.
The irresponsible and indiscriminate use of arms by
whoever must cease forthwith.

Regrettably, efforts by the international community
have thus far not borne fruit, as violence continues to
escalate. There is a need for creative thinking and a
departure from stated positions. We still feel that the
six-point plan presented by outgoing Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan offered the best possible solution
to end the fratricidal conflict in Syria. We reiterate
our call on the Council to send a united message to all
parties for a peaceful resolution ofthe conflict in Syria.

We welcome the appointment of Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi. He needs our full
support for a successful conclusion of his mission to
bring an amicable end to the killings and violence in
Syria. We urge all parties, in and outside Syria, to
cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy for the success
of his mission. An international community working
with unity and clarity of purpose is the only hope for
the people of Syria. Our ultimate objective remains a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution without
outside interference.

The ongoing crisis in Syria should not distract the
international community's attention from the unresolved
Palestinian issue, which remains at the heart of the
tension and conflict in the Middle East region. Pakistan
condemns illegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian
land and efforts to change the Arab character of the
holy land. Pakistan supports the Palestinian people's
inalienable right to self-determination and the creation
of an independent and viable Palestinian State on
Palestinian land, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

To conclude, let me reiterate that we remain
committed to a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Syria
and will continue to support the efforts of the Joint
Special Envoy in that regard. We feel that the revival
of efforts aimed at a political settlement is the need of
the hour. The six-point plan and the final communique
of the meeting of the Action Group on Syria provide a
sound basis to that end. The international community
should work to build upon them in a constructive spirit.

