Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, I would like to join the members of the
Security Council in extending profound condolences
following the loss of life of the two experts of the
United Nations, who paid the ultimate price in their
professions, while working in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We sincerely hope that there will be an
adequate investigation and that justice will be done for
the victims of such senseless killing.

As the current Chairperson of the Ministerial
Committee for the Southern African Development
Community Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation, I have the honour to deliver these remarks
on behalf of the 15 members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), which includes the
Democratic Republic of Congo, under consideration in
today's meeting of the Council. As troop contributors
of the Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), SADC members
have a keen interest in the renewal of the MONUSCO
mandate. We thank the Council for its unanimous
adoption of resolution 2348 (2017).

I thank the Ambassador of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland for giving me this
opportunity, during the final hours of the presidency
of the United Kingdom, to make some remarks on
the resolution for the renewal of the MONUSCO
mandate. I also thank and congratulate all 15 members
of the Council led by France - the penholder - for
negotiating in good faith and in a constructive manner
a difficult text, which has finally been agreed upon
and has been adopted. I pay particular tribute to the
three African non-permanent members of the Council,
namely Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal, as well as the
sponsors of the resolution, for their spirited engagement
in the negotiating process.

SADC wishes to reaffirm its solidarity and
partnership with the United Nations, the Security
Council and Secretary-General Mr. Antonio Guterres,
in particular, in seeking a lasting solution to the
protracted security and political challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has lasted for
over a decade. The creation of the Force Intervention
Brigade by the Council in partnership with SADC
four years ago was a unique innovation to the United
Nations doctrine of peacekeeping and peace support
in dealing with an extraordinary and complex security
and political situation that has evolved and existed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years.

Over the past four years, the Intervention Brigade has
demonstrated its usefulness in undertaking difficult
security operations in the process and has contributed
to enhancing the overall credibility of MONUSCO.

As an integral part embedded in MONUSCO, the
Intervention Brigade can be good and effective only
if the rest of the MONUSCO mission is equally good
and effective. For that reason, despite its temporary
configuration, the Intervention Brigade deserves to
be recognized and appreciated. SADC trusts that the
current renewed mandate by the Council has adequately
taken into account the symbiotic relationship of the two
dimensions of MONUSCO. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/206) has underscored, there are new
security threats in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that have emerged beyond the Kivus. New asymmetrical
strategies and tactics by the multitude of negative forces
have also emerged. The tactics, including terrorism,
low-intensity, guerrilla-type insurgency, fetish violence
and the ideology of genocide continue to rear their ugly
heads in the region. Such developments are changing
the nature of combat operations and require additional
assets to make MONUSCO more effective in dealing
with those negative forces.

Similarly, issues such as politically motivated
agendas, gross human rights violations and the
protection of civilians from community-based violence
are posing additional challenges to the rest of the
integrated MONUSCO mission, made up of soldiers,
police and civilians. We believe that has been factored
into MONUSCO's renewed mandate. We fully agree
with the views articulated by Council members
this afternoon about the fact that we need to make
MONUSCO more efficient and effective, not so much
in its numbers but in its performance.

Despite these new security and protection
challenges, the Security Council, SADC, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the countries of the International
Organization of la Francophonie should take advantage
of the current political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to find a lasting solution to its
problems. This time the Government and other political
actors in Kinshasa should not be allowed to use security
concerns to once again delay or renege on the political
commitment arrived at on 31 December. In that
regard, we believe that MONUSCO will have a special
responsibility for securing a political space that will
enable the holding of free, fair and peaceful elections.

The logistics of organizing elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are indeed daunting.
SADC is urging the international community to support
the Independent National Electoral Commission
in registering voters and organizing countrywide
elections. It is equally urgent to ensure that all of us
engaged in this partnership put pressure on all the
political actors in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
with a view to overcoming the current political impasse
in implementing the 31 December agreement brokered
by the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo.

To that end, in the next two weeks SADC will field
another ministerial mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to confer and consult with the political
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are not willing to see the agreement falter again, as
we have before. As the efforts to rekindle the political
process continue, collective action should be taken
together with the experts available in the United Nations
system to address issues related to disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement, which my colleague from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo referred to and which must
be dealt with if we are to see sustainable peace and
stability there.

Lastly, I believe that the current opportunities in
the security and political sectors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the innovations that have
been introduced into the MONUSCO mandate, may
finally pave the way for an exit strategy for the United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-support missions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, something that
has evaded us for more than two decades.

