Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): There is no doubt that what we are living
through at present is one of the most acute and
dramatic phases of developments on the Korean
peninsula. Without exaggeration, peace in the region
recently underwent a serious test, and the threat of
this confrontation moving into a hot phase was higher
as than ever, and it remains so today. The belligerent
rhetoric coupled with reckless muscle-flexing has led
to a situation where the whole world is now seriously
wondering whether there is going to be a war or not.
As is well known, under the conditions of such tension,
one ill-thought-out or misinterpreted step could lead to
the most terrible and lamentable consequences.

In Russia, we are watching the dangerous
development of the situation in the region with alarm,
as we ourselves are part of the region. Of course, we
are united in condemning the provocative nuclear-
missile activity by Pyongyang, which over the past 18
months, it has taken on a very dangerous dynamic. We
do understand very well the feelings of our neighbours
when another missile is launched from North Korean
territory without a notification, thereby subjecting the
lives of people and maritime and aviation transport
to disproportionate risks. We reject such activity by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which is
confirmed by our support of the sanctions resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, namely, resolutions
2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016).

We call upon the North Korean authorities to end their
proscribed programmes, return to the non-proliferation
regime and join once again the International Atomic
Energy Agency verification regime. At the same time,
it should be clear for everyone that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea will probably not give up its
nuclear weapons as long as it sense that the existence
of a direct threat to their security, which is exactly
how the North Koreans View the regular large-scale
manoeuvres and exercises by the United States and its
alliesin the region. That is how they view the dispatch
of the American naval armada to the region that we
have witnessed this month.

An additional destabilizing factor in the region is
the decision - taken by Washington and Seoul last
year in line with the wrong logic of creating a global
missile defence system 4 to place on the territory of the
Republic of Korea elements ofthe United States missile
defence system known as the Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense. We have said on many occasions that this
step woul not only, to put it mildly, not be viewed with
enthusiasm by Pyongyang, but it would also undermine
the existing military balance in the region, thereby
jeopardizes the security of neighbouring States. We
are not the only ones who view this in a negative way.
Once again, we call upon the United States and the
Republic of Korea to review the desirability of such
a step, and we call upon other members in the region
to resist the temptation to become involved in such
destabilizing efforts.

As for international sanctions against the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, we would
like once again to reaffirm our commitment to their
implementation. However, such measures should not
be a goal in themselves, but rather an instrument to
involve this country in constructive negotiations on
existing issues. Resolving the nuclear issue of the
Korean peninsula solely by imposing sanctions and
placing pressure on Pyongyang is impossible.

Sanctions should not be used either economically
to suffocate the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
nor to worsen the humanitarian situation. This applies
in particular to the illegitimate unilateral restrictions
targeting civilian areas not associated with the
country's nuclear missile programmes. Such sanctions
are the reason for the serious deterioration in the
living conditions of the North Korean people, which,
incidentally, was identified as a cause for alarm in the
most recent report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. They are justifiably very almed
about that. We must acknowledge that the humanitarian
exemptions provided for by the Security Council's
sanctions regime essentially do not work. Because of
the ban on correspondent relations with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, it is impossible to purchase
abroad the goods and food stuffs necessary for the
economy. Because of the way the financial and banking
system works, it is very difficult to obtain funding
for the United Nations humanitarian agencies that are
still working in the country. Since Pyongyang cannot
replenish its foreign currency reserves owing to the
existing restrictions, it could find itself in a situation
where it is impossible for it to give the United Nations
the funds that are to be channelled to it, as permitted by
the Committee.

A separate issue is the situation with regard to
foreign diplomatic missions in Pyongyang. We should
not allow a situation in which diplomatic missions
continue to experience difficulties in carrying out their
work because of the restrictions imposed on the country.
We have repeatedly raised this issue at meetings of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), but as a result of the
obstructionist position taken by its individual members,
the situation has not changed at all.

Undoubtedly, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is conducting itself inappropriately. It refuses to
abide by the laws of the international community, which
are established in relevant Security Council resolutions.
At the same time, the options for using force are
completely unacceptable and can lead to catastrophic
consequences for both the Korean peninsula and
the region of North-East Asia as a whole. We should
choose to use our diplomatic tools to the greatest extent
possible. Under the current conditions, all parties
involved should demonstrate calm and restraint and not
take steps that could increase the tension.

We need to View the settlement of the situation
in the context of the whole range of issues among
the parties and thereby create the conditions for the
denuclearization of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. This is impossible without normalizing the
overall military and political situation, putting an end
to the build-up of military infrastructure, scaling down
the manoeuvring and building trust among States in the
region. We are convinced that there is no alternative to
a political settlement of the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula, on the basis of the joint statement issued
on 19 September 2005 by the participants in the Six-
Party Talks.

The Chinese proposals are in the same vein when
they talk about suspension for suspension and parallel
moves. These ideas deserve serious attention, as they
could be a starting point for us to overcome the current
impasse and renew the negotiating process. We need to
seek channels of communication with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea authorities and lead them
to a substantive dialogue on nuclear and missile issues.

As recent events have shown, under no
circumstances can we allow the situation in the region
to develop on its own. As the saying goes, even bad
peace is better than a good quarrel. In that connection,
we are ready for closer interaction with all partners
in order to settle the nuclear and other issues on the
Korean peninsula as soon as possible through the only
means possible - namely, political and diplomatic
means - through mutually respectful dialogue and
mutual consideration of interests and concerns.

