Mrs. Furman (Israel): This debate comes at a
crucial time for the Middle East, as conflicts from Syria
and Yemen to Gaza and Lebanon continue to escalate.
The current trend is growing instability and cruelty.
When we consider the challenges of the Middle East,
we cannot ignore the one common denominator - Iran,
which plays a central role in destabilizing the region.
Its threat rests on three unholy pillars: nuclear military
ambitions, the promotion of regional instability
through proxy terrorist groups, and its ballistic missile
programme. Those dangers begin in our region, but
they do not end there. They are global and place all of
us at risk.

The Iranian nuclear and nuclear-related
activities - the firstpillar- remain the most dangerous
threat to international peace and security. We cannot
turn a blind eye to the combination of Iran's quest for
nuclear capabilities and its well-known intentions. As
Israel's Prime Minister revealed on 30 April, Iran has
sought to acquire a nuclear weapon for decades and has
continued its covert project to pursue a nuclear-weapon
capability. Even after signing the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) in 2015, Iran's ambitions did
not change. Iran preserved its enrichment capabilities
for future military use and never stopped developing
the means of delivery.

The JCPOA failed to indefinitely block all paths
to an Iranian nuclear weapon. In practice, by easing
sanctions, the JCPOA allowed for a malicious regime
to take advantage of the goodwill of the international
community and to exploit it for aggression in the region
and at home. Iran's behaviour has not improved. In
fact, it has continued to deteriorate. It is incumbent
upon us to act together to prevent Iran from acquiring a
nuclear weapon, including through economic pressure
and sanctions.

Iran is a violent and extremist regime with violent
and extremist intentions. No civilian, no community
and no country in the Middle East can be spared from
Iran's hegemonic ambitions to devour its neighbours,
its neighbourhood and beyond. Iran's regional ambition
is the second pillar. It comprises two main dimensions.
First is its radical ideology, reflected in the countless
statements of Iran's Supreme Leader Khamenei and
other senior regime officials with regard to Iran's
ultimate plan to export the revolution across the world.
Second is its strategy of direct and proxy terrorism
and spreading subversion from within. By operating
terrorist organizations from afar, as well as tens of
thousands of militia fighters under the command of
the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps, Iran tries to
avoid the spotlight of liability and seeks to increase its
economic and political influence and to consolidate its
grip over the countries upon which it preys.

If one looks at a map of the Middle East, Iran's plan
is clear. It has strategically deployed proxies throughout
the region with the aim of forming a land bridge that
links Tehran to the Mediterranean Sea through Iraq,
Syria and Lebanon. Iran has increased its control over
the strategic Bab al-Mandab strait, which is invaluable
to commercial trade between Asia and Europe, and over
the Strait of Hormuz, through which 20 per cent of the
world's oil supply passes. No one that values economic
growth, prosperity and freedom of navigation would
be willing to trade the invisible hand of Adam Smith
for the fingers of Ayatollah Khamenei. We witnessed
that danger when the Houthis, Iran's proxy in Yemen,
attacked ships in the Red Sea.

Iran trains, funds, directs and supplies State-grade
weaponry to non-State terrorist actors. It proliferates
its knowledge to those terrorist groups, allowing them
to establish independent capabilities. Take Syria,
for example. Iran has solidified a long-term military
presence across the country, maintaining at least 1,500
Quds Force fighters that command the Shiite militias.
The Iranian Revolutionary Guard also directs tens of
thousands of foreign fighters stationed in Syria and tens
of thousands of Syrian militias. Iran is taking control
of Syrian natural resources and infrastructure and is
building military bases across the country to solidify
its long-term presence in Syria.

In Yemen, Iran has accelerated its efforts to
smuggle sophisticated weapons and technological
know-how to the Houthis. According to the most recent
report by the United Nations panel of experts, Iran
is not in compliance with resolution 2216 (2015). In
addition, the latest United Nations report (S/2018/602)
on the implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015) has also
reached the same conclusion, which is that the Houthis
are using Iranian missiles. And in Iraq the situation is
no different. Iran funds, arms and trains its associated
militias stationed there.

There is no better example of Middle Eastern

conflicts beginning and ending with Iran than Hizbullah
in Lebanon. Aside from accumulating tens of thousands
of rockets and missiles, largely in the area of operations
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and
among civilians, as well as increasing Hizbullah's grip
on the Lebanese political system, Iran's latest ploy
is to turn Lebanon into a factory of precision-guided
missiles. Israel will not allow Hizbullah to acquire those
capabilities. Iran has also made its presence known in
southern Israel. Yahya Sinwar, the head of Hamas in
Gaza, confirmed again on 18 May that Iran provided
the Al-Qassam Brigades and other terrorist groups in
Gaza with money, military equipment and expertise.

Iran spends approximately $7 billion each year
funding its proxies and terrorist organizations, all at
the expense of its own citizens. Allow me to break that
down for the Council. In Iran, a doctor working in a
Government hospital with five or six years of experience
is paid $600 per month, but an Iranian proxy terrorist
earns $800 per month and a Hizbullah terrorist can
make as much as $1,800 per month. A nation's spending
offers clear insights into its priorities. Iran's financial
priorities are death and destruction rather than the well-
being of its own people. Only the twisted minds of the
ayatollahs can invest in heavy-water reactors instead of
fresh, clean water for the Iranian people.

The third pillar of Iran's regional and global
threat is its vast missile programme, including short-,
medium- and long-range missiles capable of carrying
nuclear warheads. Iran's ballistic capabilities and
their proliferation throughout the region are well-
documented in numerous United Nations reports. Since
the initial implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
Iran has conducted dozens of ballistic-missile tests.
It is ironic that Iran claims the need for self-defence
when it is the rest of the world that is threatened by
Iran's ballistic missiles. For example, as the Deputy
Commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps,
Hossein Salami, has said,

"Today over 100,000 rockets are ready to be
launched towards Israel and additional tens of
thousands of long-range missiles are ready in
various places around the Muslim world to wipe
Israel once and for all off the geopolitical map."

The international community must prevent Iran from
acquiring, developing, testing and stockpiling ballistic
capabilities and spreading them around the world.

The world is facing a regime that cannot be trusted.
Iran remains the foremost State sponsor of terrorism in
the world. The Iranianregime is oppressive-preforming
hundreds of executions every year, jailing journalists,
suppressing ethnic minorities, destroying the prayer
sanctuaries of religious minorities and discriminating
on the basis of ethnicity, sexuality and gender. At
times, it seems that the ayatollahs have taken it upon
themselves to create the ultimate combination of Tolstoy
and Dostoevsky's worst nightmare. Iran's Government
is indeed an association of men who do violence to the
rest of us, and they should be judged by the people they
jail and hang, among others.

When it comes to Israel, Iran's end goal is
undeniable. The Supreme Leader of Iran himself set a
timetable of 25 years for the destruction of Israel. Not
only does Iran call for Israel's annihilation, it is taking
decisive action towards that end. Iran funds, supports
and arms Hizbullah and Hamas. It has carried out
terror attacks against Israeli targets worldwide. In the
past few months alone, Iran sent an unmanned aerial
vehicle armed with explosives and launched a barrage
of missiles from Syria into Israeli territory. Iran's
actions place our citizens directly in harm's way. We
must not tolerate its continued hostility and aggression
any longer. It is not too late to stop Iran from pursuing
its malicious policies throughout the region. Israel will
always know how to protect itself, but the international
community has an obligation to stand up and face
this radical and dangerous regime. Doing so now will
pave the way for a better future for our region and for
the world.

