Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): President
Milosevic has been engaged in repression of the Kosovo
Albanians since he revoked Kosovo's extensive autonomy
almost 10 years ago. During all this time he has declined
seriously to pursue a political solution to the problem of
Kosovo, a problem that everyone knew would lead to
increased tension and that he, as leader of his nation, held
the responsibility for remedying. Instead, he has chosen to
use brute aggression against a peaceful population. Where
is the outrage at that?

Since March last year, Serb violence against the
population of Kosovo has increased massively. Over last
summer and autumn, Serbian internal security forces and
the Yugoslav army embarked on a series of offensives in
western and central Kosovo, which were increasingly
characterized by wanton destruction of homes, crops and
livestock. Over 2,000 people have been killed in Kosovo
since March 1998, and Serb scorched-earth tactics have
forced over 300,000 people to flee their homes.

Today, President Milosevic is once again repeating the
tactics of the summer, forcing people out of their homes
and burning entire villages. In the past month alone he has
created more than 65,000 new displaced people. While the
Kosovo Albanians were signing the Rambouillet accords in
Paris last week, Belgrade substantially reinforced its
security-force presence in Kosovo and began a new
offensive.

The international community - the Security
Council, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Contact Group and the United Nations and
its agencies - have sought over the past year to persuade
Belgrade to end the suffering it has caused and to agree
a political settlement with the Kosovo Albanians
providing for a substantial degree of self-government but
also respecting the territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

In a series of resolutions, most recently resolutions
1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998), the Security Council has
called on Belgrade to end actions against the civilian
population and withdraw security forces responsible for
repression, to cooperate with organizations engaged in
humanitarian relief and to pursue a negotiated settlement.
But Belgrade has rejected all of the Security Council's
demands, and continues to act in defiance of the
expressed will of the Council. In these circumstances,
when diplomacy has failed, do we react just with further
words?

In October, Ambassador Holbrooke negotiated a
package with President Milosevic setting up an unarmed
OSCE verification mission and a NATO-led air
verification mission. President Milosevic also accepted a
commitment to reduce his force levels in Kosovo. But
President Milosevic tried to expel the head of the OSCE
mission. His forces continued to repress, particularly in
those areas where the mission was not present. The
massacre at Racak showed his contempt for the mission
and for the international community as a whole. And his
force levels were, and remain, well above the agreed
levels.

In recent months the Contact Group and
Ambassadors Hill, Mayorsky and Petritsch, on behalf of
the United States, the Russian Federation and the
European Union, have taken the lead in seeking a
negotiated settlement. Several months of painstaking
shuttle diplomacy led to the talks in February and March
at Rambouillet and at Paris on an interim settlement for
Kosovo, underpinned by a NATO-led force: a truly
exhaustive process. But President Milosevic refused to
engage seriously in negotiations on an agreement. His
intransigence led instead to the breakdown of the
Rambouillet process. Since the ending of the talks, a

 

further 25 ,000 people have been forced to flee their homes
in the face of pre-planned military action by the Yugoslav
army.

In defiance of the international community, President
Milosevic has refused to accept the interim political
settlement negotiated at Rambouillet, to observe the limits
on security-force levels agreed on 25 October, and to end
the excessive and disproportionate use of force in Kosovo.
Because of his failure to meet these demands, we face a
humanitarian catastrophe. NATO has been forced to take
military action because all other means of preventing a
humanitarian catastrophe have been frustrated by Serb
behaviour.

We have taken this action with regret, in order to save
lives. It will be directed towards disrupting the violent
attacks being perpetrated by the Serb security forces and
towards weakening their ability to create a humanitarian
catastrophe. In the longer term, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, whose mandate
extends to Kosovo, will hold those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law accountable for
their actions.

The action being taken is legal. It is justified as an
exceptional measure to prevent an overwhelming
humanitarian catastrophe. Under present circumstances in
Kosovo, there is convincing evidence that such a
catastrophe is imminent. Renewed acts of repression by the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would
cause further loss of civilian life and would lead to
displacement of the civilian population on a large scale and
in hostile conditions.

Every means short of force has been tried to avert this
situation. In these circumstances, and as an exceptional
measure on grounds of overwhelming humanitarian
necessity, military intervention is legally justifiable. The
force now proposed is directed exclusively to averting a
humanitarian catastrophe, and is the minimum judged
necessary for that purpose.

The focus of our discussion today is the crisis in
Kosovo itself. But Belgrade should be under no illusion that
we have taken our eye off the ball elsewhere in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We are watching Serb behaviour
closely in relation to Montenegro. We have also noted with
dismay that the Federal Telecommunications Ministry,
backed by police officers, raided Radio B92 on 24 March,
closed the station down and detained its editor-in-chief. We
condemn this action aimed at further reducing the right of
free speech in Serbia.

Allow me to close with the following appeals to the
two sides in the dispute. To the Kosovo Albanians our
appeal is that they should remain on the path of peace
which they chose by signing the Rambouillet accords in
their entirety on 18 March. The United Kingdom urges
them to show the utmost restraint in the next crucial days.
And to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia our appeal is
that it is not too late to show at any time that they are
ready to meet the demands of the international
community. I strongly urge them to do so.

