The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Turkey in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Chief of Protocol to Escort His
Excellency Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Adnan Terzic.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, to
whom I give the floor.


