Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are confident that you will
steer its deliberations to the desired success. I should
also like to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Said Ben Mustapha,
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, for his personal
efforts and for wisely and successfully guiding our
deliberations last month.

I should also like to extend our deep thanks to
you, Mr. President, and to the members of the Security
Council for affording us the opportunity to discuss one
of the oldest issues on the agenda of the United
Nations, an issue that has lasted more than half a
century, namely, the Palestinian question, which still
awaits a just solution.
The current Israeli practices against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories are senseless, illogical and unbelievably
harsh, cruel and gory. They have had catastrophic
economic, social and human repercussions on the lives
of civilians.

Of late, Israel has been dissecting Palestinian
villages and cities, isolating Palestinian territories and
cutting them off from each other and from the outside
world. It has tightened its economic blockade against
civilians and has refused to pay tax revenues due the
Palestinian Authority. At the same time, settlements are
being established, Palestinian homes are being
destroyed and Palestinian families are being displaced.
Excessive force is being used by regular army forces
and trained security forces against children who are
guilty only of refusing the continuing occupation of
their land.

These are revealing indications of indiscriminate
Israeli practices. They require the Council to shoulder
its international responsibilities and take the necessary
steps to urge Israel to respect the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian peoples, in accordance with adopted
international resolutions and with the principle of land
for peace. In this context, we would ask that the
Council accept the following points.

First, and most urgently, the Council should help
put an end to violence against children and defenseless
civilians. Secondly, the economic blockade should be
lifted, barricades should be dismantled and the free
movement of civilians should be guaranteed. Thirdly,
the Palestinian Authority should be paid the tax
revenues due it. These measures are desperately
needed, which is why we ask the Council to exert
pressure on Israel to implement them. They involve the
lives of innocent civilians, whose suffering we witness
daily and whose lives and property are fraught with
danger, displacement and isolation.

On a different level, we request that the Council
also take the following steps. The Council should agree
to establish and deploy, in the occupied territories and
under the aegis of the United Nations, an international
force to protect the Palestinian people. Secondly, the
Council should establish and deploy a fact-finding
mission to look into Israeli practices against civilians
in the occupied Palestinian territories. Palestinians
need the presence of the United Nations; they need to
have someone to report on what is happening in the
occupied territories. This can only be achieved by
dispatching a fact-finding mission to the region.
We in Yemen support the peace process in the
Middle East. We believe it is an inescapable strategic
choice. It is for that reason that we are calling for the
resumption of negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli parties from the point where they left off.

