Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the presence of the Chiefs of Defence who
are representing Member States. We all look forward
to tomorrow's discussion and the outcomes of the
Chiefs of Defence Conference. The Security Council
counts on their knowledge and experience. Let me also
thank all the briefers for their very informative and
valuable contributions.

The importance and wide scope of triangular
cooperation is well recognized and acknowledged.
In my statement today I would like to highlight three
aspects that my country considers important in this
matter: first, the need for open and frank discussion
among all relevant stakeholders; secondly, the formats
in which the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) and the Security Council
can exchange their views, and last, but not least, the
potential role that the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations can play in this process.

Let me start with the widely expressed desire for
in depth consultations among TCCs and PCCs, the
Secretariat and the Security Council. That idea cannot
be questioned. There is, however, one particularly
important element that is indispensable to make
the conversation effective, namely, unhindered
information-sharing. An honest exchange of Views
and meaningful discussion are possible only when all
partners sit at the table with the same understanding
of the subject. Consequently, up-to-date, relevant
information from the mission should be well established.

As an elected member of the Council, I would also
like to bring up the need for penholders to give Council
members extended time to work on draft resolutions.
In return, such time flexibility would also allow all
capitals to consolidate their inputs.

We are of the opinion that, while the informal
Security Council TCCs/PCCs meetings are already well-
established and utilized, the pre-meetings organized by
penholders also serve the purpose of sharing concerns
and perspectives. It is yet another format that allows all
stakeholders to actively engage in a genuine and frank
exchange of views ahead of the mandate renewals. It
would be worth considering extending such discussions
as preparatory meetings to all mandate renewals of
peacekeeping missions.

Lastly, the third point I would like to make today
is on the role of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. There is potential in considering the
Group's incorporation in triangular cooperation.
We see the value of the Working Group in its ability
to adjust its discussions to the current needs. Each
aspect of a mission could be discussed separately and
thoroughly, as required. Findings, recommendations or
proposals could then be utilized in further deliberations
of the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance and value of triangular cooperation for the
work of the Security Council and for the missions in
the field. As an elected member and incoming TCC,
we attach great importance to constant dialogue among
the Council, and in particular penholders, TCCs/
PCCs and the Secretariat. Expressing each other's
needs, expectations and even demands in an open
and frank format is the only way to achieve effective
mandate implementation.

