Mr. Yacoubou (Niger) (spoke in French): First
and foremost, here in New York, in the United States
of America, I would like to pay tribute to the four
American soldiers who died at the hands of terrorists
in the Niger in the line of duty, weapons in hand,
alongside our soldiers in the village of Tongo Tongo.
On behalf of the President of the Republic of Niger, I
would like to say that we share the immense grief of
their families and of the American people. The Niger
and its people will never forget this sacrifice. We would
like to convey the same thoughts and undying gratitude
to all the Nigeriens and all of our allies who have fallen
on the front of a war that has been forced on us. The
Niger is also grateful to all the friendly countries and
to the European Union for their active partnership for
security and peace in our region.

The speakers before me all agree that the security
problems facing the Sahel today are direct and potent
threats to the peace and security of the whole world.
We must all be fully aware of them and act accordingly.

We have recognized the fact that this war brought
on us by narcoterrorists is an asymmetrical one. I am
also afraid that our own reactions - of us, the States
and the international community - are asymmetrical.
For while the narcoterrorist groups are massively
expanding their arsenals and strengthening their
dominion over local populations, we do a lot of meeting
but not much acting. It is true that the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is making
progress, but not as fast or as robustly as we could wish.

During this time, the numerous attacks on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and our countries show that we are
losing ground in terms of our balance of forces with the
enemy, as well as with the local populations, who, with
no strong or effective forces ready to defend them, are
pledging allegiance to the foe.

As we said before the General Assembly and wish
to reiterate here, it is the Niger's profound conviction
that in order to guarantee peace, security and stability
in Mali and the Sahel region, we must stamp out
narcoterrorist groups, ensure the presence and authority
of the Malian State over the entirety of its territory,
and implement the relevant political agreements.
We cannot and will not attain our goal of peace and
stability unless the narcoterrorists and their financial
sources are neutralized. Those who believe or imagine
for one moment that we can learn to live with the
presence of terrorists and traffickers do not understand
the gravity of the situation. Those who believe that they
are insulated from the situation in the Sahel are wrong.
We are all affected by what is happening.

Those who believe or imagine that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) will fulfil its mandate
without waging war on the narcoterrorists are deceiving
themselves. The death toll of a peacekeeping operation
that has already become the most deadly operation of
its kind will continue to swell. It is already deploying
12,000 soldiers at the cost of almost $1 billion a year.
Despite these figures and resources, and because we
have given it a faulty mandate, the Mission spends
most of its time protecting itself from the increasingly
audacious terrorists. That is why an offensive force to
complement MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane is
essential and needed urgently. Such a force, we believe,
is the Joint Force of the G5-Sahel.

We must speak the truth. Today, terrorists have
their own territory in northern Mali. They rule territory
from which they have killed 149 MINUSMA personnel

and brought death to the Malian army and Barkhane,
and from which they regularly attack and kill in the
Niger and Burkina Faso. They rule territory from
which they conceived and planned the attack on Grand-
Bassam in Cote D'Ivoire, and where they will no doubt
continue to thrive on the traffic in drugs, weapons
and migrants that allows them to pursue their attacks
against the countries of the Sahel and the rest of the
world. I therefore call for an immediate jumpstart and
acceptance of the reality. Each day that we squander is
a day won by the terrorists. I must tell it as I see it - we
are tired of counting our dead and our wounded.

Our numerous meetings must not fool us into
believing that we are taking action. The only true
and beneficial action is to contribute immediately
and concretely to the operationalization of the Joint
Force of the G5-Sahel. To that end, we need a new
resolution with a robust and clear mandate, and above
all a guarantee of predictable, sustainable and adequate
multilateral financing. Security Council member
States have the power and ability to make this a reality.
I hope that they have understood the need and urgency
of doing so.

The five States members of the G-5 Sahel rank
among the poorest in the world, but we are among
the most determined and the most attentive to our
responsibilities to making the Sahel secure. Today, we
have no choice but to carry the battle to the enemy in its
heartland in northern Mali and to destroy the terrorist
groups in their lairs. Otherwise, they will destroy our
States. That is an absolute certainty, as it has already
happened elsewhere on our continent.

Every attack and every victory of terrorist groups
over MINUSMA, Barkhane or a country of the G-5
Sahel helps to attract new recruits. Hundreds more
young people will join the ranks of terrorist groups so
long as they sense that the opportunity to earn money
or glory outweighs the risk of dying in an attack on
Government or United Nations forces. The more of
our people they kill and the more of our resources they
steal, the numbers joining terrorist groups in Mali will
grow ever larger. That is how Boko Haram developed
in Nigeria and how many narcoterrorist groups are
beginning to emerge in Mali.

We all know that, when compared with certain other
operations and measured against the stakes that we face,
the resources requested for the Joint Force of G-5 Sahel
appear realistic and within our grasp. They represent
the costs of a mere few days of operation in certain
other conflicts. Since we be1ieve that al1 atrocities are
equivalent and that addressing these threats calls for
the same commitment and sense of responsibility, we
hope that indifference will give way to the engagement
of a11, particularly the most powerful countries.

It is in appealing to these common responsibilities
that we say that today is the time to act. Otherwise it

will too late, too costly or simply too complicated. We,
the States of the G»5 Sahel, wil1 remain firm in our
determination to wage war against terrorism. It is up to
other States to play their traditional roles in time for the

next international donor conference in Brussels.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
