Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting today.

We have noted that one of the priorities in the
work of the Council this month is the question of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This morning,
Ambassador Morjane gave us a very important
briefing. This afternoon, we are having this formal
meeting. This is the beginning of a series of meetings
on the question of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the Council. We hope that all this input will
advance the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

China warmly welcomes President Joseph Kabila
to the Security Council for this useful dialogue and
interaction with the members of the Council. We also
welcome the important statement made by President
Kabila just now. A few days after his assumption of the
presidency, he has come to the Council to have this
dialogue with us. This demonstrates his Government's
sincere determination to advance the peace process in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

I would also like to take this opportunity to once
again convey the sincere condolences of the Chinese
Government and people to him for the loss of his
father, the late President Kabila.

China is of the view that the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is now at a critical
juncture and a potential turning point. At present, it is
imperative to seize the opportunity to move the peace
process forward so that progress can be made. China is
happy to note that President Kabila has repeatedly
emphasized his intention to implement the Lusaka
Agreement and his commitment to the inter-Congolese
dialogue so as to achieve national reconciliation. We
highly appreciate this commitment by President Kabila.
We are of the View that the inter-Congolese dialogue is
of great significance.

The solution to the question of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is ultimately up to the people of
that country. It is our hope that all the Congolese
people will answer the call of President Kabila and will
seize this opportunity to come back to the negotiating
table to resolve their issues peacefully, free from
outside interference.

China also is convinced that the United Nations
and the Security Council have a positive role to play in
a solution to the question of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and supports their playing that role.
China hopes that we can make the most of this
momentum and make timely political decisions.

China believes that the role of the United
Nations, and that of the Security Council in particular,
should be reflected in the support given to the
sovereign Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in its efforts to restore peace there.
Experience shows that we cannot afford to
underestimate the difficulties that may occur along the
road ahead. China is convinced that, in order to
overcome those difficulties and constantly to push
forward the peace process, the relentless efforts of all
the parties, including the United Nations and the
Security Council, are required. However, the political
will of the parties to the conflict cannot be replaced by
any other factors.

We look forward to all of the parties seizing the
opportunity, to their taking a courageous step and
building up mutual trust and confidence so as to create
conditions for breaking the impasse and for the United
Nations to play a role in this process. We hope that the
Security Council will, in light of the changing
situation, take specific steps for the deployment of the
second phase of MONUC. This deployment should be
based on considerations regarding the prevention ofthe
outbreak of internal conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It should also be based on the
effective guarantee of security along the borders
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours. China supports regional organizations in
their continued efforts. However, we hope that all of
these efforts will be coordinated.

Before concluding, my delegation would like to
reiterate that the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be fully respected and safeguarded.
This is the prerequisite for a solution to the conflict in
that country. It is also a principle with which all
Member States of the United Nations should comply.

