Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to continued discussion in the Security
Council of the question of the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The statements made on 14
March at the meetings of the Security Council by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Mr. Shimon
Peres, and by the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations, Ambassador Al-Kidwa, provided
an opportunity for the members of the Security Council
to hear about the approaches of the Israelis and of the
Palestinians to ways of overcoming violence on the
West Bank and in Gaza and to the search for a way out
of the deadlock in the peace dialogue.

The Russian Federation has been following with
great concern the situation of tension that has prevailed
for more than half a year now in the Palestinian
territories, as well as the continued acts of violence that
have led to the deaths of several hundred people,
mostly Palestinians. Since the very beginning of the
crisis, the leadership of Russia has been undertaking
maximum efforts towards a settlement of the situation
and a resumption of the peaceful dialogue between the
parties. To this end, the President of Russia, Vladimir
Putin, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Igor
Ivanov, have remained in constant contact with the
Palestinian and Israeli leaderships and with the leaders
of other interested States, as well as the Secretary-
General of the United Nations.

Unfortunately, the tensions are not easing. The
situation is being exacerbated by the actions of the
Israeli side, aimed at the isolation of the West Bank
and Gaza, with the use of heavy military equipment.
There is a virtual economic blockade of the territory of
the Palestinian National Authority. We take note of the
clarifications that were made in the statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Shimon Peres, at
yesterday's Security Council meeting, and which were
also reiterated today by the Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United Nations. We are convinced,
however, that the economic blockade must be
immediately lifted.

It should be clear also that no terrorist acts - and
Russia condemns all such acts - can serve as a
justification for such harsh measures as those that are
now being taken against the Palestinians. On the
contrary, we are convinced that such steps can only
play into the hands of those who want the violence to
continue and who are against a resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiating process.

We believe that at this stage, a priority task must
be the speedy overcoming of violence in the West Bank
and in Gaza. On that basis, we call upon the
Palestinians and the Israelis to demonstrate maximum
restraint and prudence in order to avoid any further
escalation of the conflict.

We are convinced that, now as never before,
compromise is important, and that both sides must
meet each other halfway, demonstrate flexibility and
realism and ensure the continuity of the peace process,
on the basis, first and foremost, of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and of the
Madrid principles. To this end, there must be a speedy
establishment of direct Palestinian-Israeli contacts,
inter alia, at a high level. Only in that way will it be
possible to eliminate the obstacles to a normalization
of the situation and to the resumption of the peaceful
negotiations.

In that context, we note the exchange of messages
that took place between the leader of the Palestinian
National Authority, Yasser Arafat, and the Prime
Minister of Israel, Ariel Sharon. We note also that that
exchange was carried out in a rather constructive spirit.
The most important thing is that both leaders have
reaffirmed their aspiration to achieve peace. In
Moscow, hope is being expressed that these positive
signals will be further developed in the very near
future.
For its part, the Russian Federation is continuing
to make every effort to promote the elaboration of a
strategy to resolve the current crisis that would be
acceptable to the parties directly involved in the
conflict and that would promote a speedy settlement of
the situation in the region. It is precisely those
approaches that will be guiding us in the Security
Council in the consideration of the question of a
possible international presence in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We are counting on the fact that
the Security Council will be able to achieve consensus
on this question.

