Mr. D'Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our thanks for the presentation of
the biannual reports of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and to Presidents Fausto Pocar and Erik Mose. We
would also like to thank Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte
and Hassan Bubacar J allow for their reports.

With regard to the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, we are pleased to note that the work done
in the past six months has brought about progress in
the completion strategy, both in the Trial Chamber,
which is working to the fullest capacity, and in the
Appeals Chamber, which is preparing cases for trial.
We also note with interest that the trials of multiple
accused will begin in July and August this year, and
that there has been a reduction in the number of cases
awaiting trial.

We believe that, despite the publicly known
events that have taken place in the framework of the
Tribunal, it has nevertheless been possible to affirm the
responsibility of the perpetrators of genocide violations
of international human rights, as well as to create the
conditions necessary for the restoration of justice.

We affirm our belief in the importance of the
measures that have been adopted and the proposals that
have been made by the working group on speeding up
trials to implement the completion strategy. We would
especially like to underscore the more active role being
played by pretrial judges in preparing cases, which
should bring about greater cooperation and speed up
trials. We also believe that all the measures referred to
in paragraphs 20 and 27 (S/2006/353, annex 1) are
useful, in particular those that will speed up the
engagement of the defence. Proposals to limit the
duration of pleadings by the defence and prosecutors
should always be balanced against the requirements of
due process.

We support efforts to develop the requisite
capacity in national jurisdictions to try intermediate
and lower-ranking accused. We hope that the necessary
funds will be forthcoming.

Finally, we would like to point to my country's
ongoing judicial cooperation with the Tribunal and
with the Security Council. That cooperation manifested
itself in the speedy extradition and transfer to The
Hague of Mr. Milan Lukic, in February 2006. We hope
that the most intensive efforts will be made to track
and extradite the six high-level fugitives, in particular
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. As is clearly
stated in the report, this is an indispensable step in the
peace, reconciliation and development process in the
region.

As regards the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, my delegation welcomes the start of trial
proceedings for 27 persons, and we support the
proposal to transfer some of the 15 detainees to
national jurisdictions. We also take note of the fact that
the cases of 54 persons have either been completed or
are under way.

We would like to urge that the Prosecutor
continue to make intensive efforts to apprehend those
still at large. Over the next few months, we will have to
consider ways and means of increasing resources and,
probably, the number of judges in the Appeals
Chamber of the ICTY, which also hears Rwanda's
appeals. We are convinced of the importance of
finalizing the completion strategy by 2010, as set out in
resolution 1503 (2003), in keeping with the norms and
principles of due process.

