Ms. Citaku: It is an honour for me to present some
of the latest developments in the Republic of Kosovo.

On 17 February, Kosovo marked its eighth
anniversary as a free, independent and sovereign
State. The journey that the people of Kosovo have gone
through to obtain freedom was long and painful, and
the price we had to pay in order to exist as a free nation
under the sun was very steep.

When we were living through the terror of war,
accompanied by violence and ethnic cleansing deployed
by Serbia, only in 1998 did Kosovo start to make
headlines in the world. Not many people still remember
that we had lived through repression decades before,
harshly discriminated against and with our fundamental
rights violated; without schools in our language; and
with our parents thrown out of their rightful jobs, just
because of our being Albanian.

This happened only a few decades, ago in the heart
of Europe, in silence. I am not going to even mention
the 1960s and 1970s, when violations of human rights
in Kosovo were not known and people were afraid to
speak of them, even among ourselves.

I am remembering this because sometimes we have
to step back and see where we have come from in order to
see the whole picture and understand what is happening
now, at a time when we all are confronted with new
challenges, when no one is afraid of losing friends or
loved ones, when we all condemn atrocities together, in
alliance, and we want to see the perpetrators punished.

In Kosovo, we are still waiting for justice to be
served. Although we in Kosovo were the victims,
and although our just cause has been addressed by
international justice, be it at the International Tribunal
in The Hague or in the various international missions
that operated in Kosovo, including the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Kosovo
institutions have established a Special Court, which
will try the crimes allegedly committed in 1999.

The sitting President ofKosovo, Ms. Atifete Jahj aga,
ratified the agreement signed by the Government of
Kosovo and the Netherlands. With this, Kosovo has
concluded all of its international obligations towards
the establishment of the Special Court. We will always
cooperate with international justice, as we have done in
the past, because we have nothing to hide. War was not
our choice.

We all know who generated the violence and
atrocities in the former Yugoslavia. History cannot
be rewritten, and roles cannot be shifted. Precisely
because we are fully conscious of our past, our record
of cooperation with international justice has always
been impeccable. Every single Kosovar Albanian
who has been indicted for war crimes in Kosovo since
1999, be it by international or local justice, has always
surrendered voluntarily to the Tribunal. Unlike our
northern neighbour, which provided shelter for those
who were indicted and later used their arrest for leverage
and benefits, we in Kosovo believe that cooperation
with internationaljustice is not a subject for negotiation
but rather a duty - a duty and obligation not only to
our past but, first and foremost, to our children and to
future generations. We need to clear the fog and remove
any suspicion so that they can live in their Republic, not
in the midst of doubts but proud of their past.

Unfortunately, in Serbia many serious human
rights violations have not been investigated and have
gone unpunished. Somehow indictments for war crimes
seem not to be taken seriously. Furthermore, in Serbia,
when one former paramilitary official was arrested
for war crimes and given a minimum sentence, there
was a massive and institutional condemnation of the
justice institutions. General Vladimir Lazarevie, on
the other hand, was sentenced by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war
crimes committed in Kosovo. Upon his return to Serbia
last December, after serving two thirds of his 14-year
sentence, he received a hero's welcome. The Minister
of Justice and Minister of Defence of Serbia and a long
row of State officials lined up to welcome the infamous
General, who was responsible for the loss of thousands
of lives. This is what I call impunity.

This is not only my opinion, as all respectable
institutions, including the ICTY, have documented this.
Thousands of victims have been denied their right to
justice. I want to bring to the attention of the Council
one particular group: women and girls who suffered the
war crime of sexual violence. While Serbia is governed
by a climate ofimpunity, time is passing, witnesses are
dying, memories are fading and the perpetrators of rape
must urgently be brought to justice in order to ensure
justice for the victims before it is too late.

Survivors of sexual violence in Kosovo, and there
are 20,000 ofthem, still bear the scars, both physical and
psychological, of this form of torture. Many were raped
in front of their families as Serbian forces came to kick
us out as part of their ethnic cleansing campaign. With
the systematic rape campaign unleashed in Kosovo
during the war, the Serbian security forces intended to
continue the war long after it ended by aiming to leave
us fragile.

Yet there has been no trial for the perpetrators
of rape, not at The Hague, not even in Kosovo, even
though Kosovo was administered by the United
Nations. Even today, the survivors of war rape in
Kosovo are not included in United Nations resolutions
or reports. On behalf of them, I seek justice. We need
to see the perpetrators behind bars, and we need to
collectively and globally do more, so that the victims
of sexual violence in conflict throughout the world feel
supported and not alone.

The elderly make up another very vulnerable group
that is still suffering the consequences of the war.
There were 88,900 Kosovar Albanians who were left
without their rightful access to their contributions on
their pension fund. All their hard work, savings and
contributions made in the most honest way were taken
away from them and never returned. The European
Court of Human Rights handed down a decision stating
that Serbia violated local and international law by the
violent interruption of pension paymentss to Kosovo-
Albanian citizens, which should be not only returned
retroactively, but also with damages suffered during
the years. This is an issue that needs to be addressed,
and we believe the dialogue in Brussels is the platform
for it.

Every time we come to debate in this Chamber,
Serbia tries to portray a very dark picture regarding the
living conditions of the Serbian community in Kosovo.
I can only reassure the Council that minorities in
Kosovo cherish a wide range of extensive rights, which
are enshrined in our Constitution. Unfortunately, the
same cannot be said for Serbia itself, where even the
Council ofEurope called on it to step up the efforts with
regard to the effective and consistent implementation
of legislation on the protection of minorities and the
non-discriminatory treatment of national minorities
throughout Serbia, especially with regard to education
and the use of native languages. The Albanian
community in Presevo, Medveda and Bujanoc are a
testimony to the problems that exist.

Minorities in Kosovo are fully represented, and we
are doing our best to support them. We have in place
the Development Fund for Northern Kosovo, which
derives its revenues from taxes collected at the Jarinje
and Tabavije border crossing points. The revenues
collected so far amount to €8.3 million and are used to
support the socioeconomic development of the northern
municipalities. The board ofthe Fund is managed by our
Minister of Finance and a Serbian representative and is
chaired by the European Union Special Representative.
In the current month alone, €l.9 million was awarded to
Kosovo's northern municipalities. So far, €6.6 million
has been awarded from the Development Fund to
the four northern Kosovo municipalities. For the
full integration of all municipalities in the justice
system, 39 agreements, totalling €1 million, were
signed for capital investments from our Ministry of
Local Government and four municipalities. Another
89 agreements for capital investments, amounting to
€l4.5 million, were signed between different ministries
of the Government and the northern municipalities.

With regard to the returnees, 121 houses were
rebuilt in 2015 under just one programme, co-funded
by the European Union and the Government of Kosovo.
Our Government has also continued to provide financial
support to initiatives for return and reintegration. The
construction of houses is a clear example of the ongoing
efforts of our Government to accommodate returnees
and their reintegration. One hundred and thirty-four
returnee families benefit from support in different
regions. Every citizen of Kosovo is free to return, but the
figures put forward often project an unrealistic starting
point. It is true that more Serbs lived in Kosovo before
1999, but we also need to remember that many of them
were part of the military and police establishment that
came from Serbia as part of the repressive apparatus in
Kosovo. Obviously, they will not come back.

The picture is very different from the one Serbia
insists on painting here every three months by reading
from police reports and by trying to give a political
and ethnic dimension to every single stone thrown
in Kosovo. Let me be honest: while progress has
been made and the normalization of relations in the
region has gained new momentum, especially with
the inter-State dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
reconciliation among people will be possible only after
there is recognition by Serbia for the crimes committed
and after a sincere and official apology is made.
Serbian human rights champions Sonja Biserko and
Natasa Kandic' have continuously raised their voices
and advocated for that. We need that acknowledgement
from Serbia, because everyone in the region needs to
move forward and address the challenging issues of
the present.

The Constitutional Court in Kosovo gave very clear
guidelines as to how the association of the Serbian
municipalities should be established. Legitimate
concerns were raised about it, but now the Government
has a clear road map in its hands on how to establish
the association, without hurting the functionality of
our State. We will not allow the reproduction of the
dangerous models we have witnessed in the region,
where one entity hinders the progress and road forward
for the entire community and countries.

We in Kosovo believe that dialogue is important,
but good faith and the implementation of agreements,
in earnest and without ambiguity, is everything.
Engaging in dialogue with the cynical objective of
obtaining favours and compliments from Brussels is
counterproductive, if we all do not talk in earnest with
our public about what dialogue is about. The dialogue
is not about reinstating Serbia in Kosovo. The dialogue
is not about rewriting history. Kosovo is a free,
independent and sovereign State. That will not change.

What must change is Serbia's attitude towards us.
The dialogue in Brussels is a good first step. Dialogue
is about making sure that history does not repeat
itself. Dialogue is about building trust and bridges of
cooperation for the common good and common benefits.
Dialogue is about making sure that what we leave behind
for future generations is not characterized by tension,
ambiguity and mistrust. Dialogue is about making sure
that we treat each other with dignity and as equals, as
two States that are, and will be, neighbours - and,
hopefully, members of the European Union. That is the
dialogue Kosovo wants. That is the dialogue we want
to engage in.

The political climate in Kosovo is fierce and often
tense. We are still a very young democracy, and we
are still learning. The Parliament of Kosovo elected a
new President, Mr. Hashim Thaci, with 71 votes. There
were protests and there were celebrations. While our
political leaders have their obvious disagreements, let
no one have any doubt as to our collective aspiration to
Euro-Atlantic integration and values. The 21 January
ratification of our Stabilization and Association
Agreement by the European Parliament cemented that
path. Another milestone for Kosovo was its selection
by the Millennium Challenge Corporation as a country
eligible for assistance. Kosovo had to work hard to
improve its performance in many indicators, and much
more remains to be done.

On behalf of the Government of Kosovo, I want
to state the following. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is now
only a reporting mission, based on the report of the
Secretary-General that was approved by the Security
Council in 2008 (S/2008/692). The United Nations may
decide to keep an expensive mission in Kosovo that is
costing the Organization a quarter of a billion dollars
a year, at a time when those resources could be used
elsewhere, but there is no doubt that the wheel of history
cannot be turned back. While we are thankful for the
role played by UNMIK in the immediate aftermath of
the war, this is 2016 - not 1999.

As we look ahead, there is no doubt that many
challenges remain, and that a lot more needs to be
done to fulfil the rightful expectations of all Kosovar
citizens. They have the absolute right to demand more
from our Government and institutions, as they give
us reasons to be proud every day. Just last night, two
Kosovar teenage boys walked the red carpet in Los
Angeles as the entire nation stayed awake and united
to celebrate our first Oscar nomination. Although we
did not win the Oscar this time, the movie won millions
of hearts, telling the story of Kosovo better than any
Ambassador ever could, and reminding us of the steep
price we had to pay for our freedom. We were reminded
that no dream is too big and no hope too high. While we
prepare for our first appearance in the Olympic Games
in Rio de Janeiro, where our flag will be raised for the
first time, our nation is uniting again to support our
golden champion, Majlinda Kelmendi.

These are the new heroes of Kosovo f artists
and athletes who inspire the nation. It is a generation
that is fighting isolation by providing examples for all
of us through their hard work and dedication. While
Majlinda and our athletes prepare for the Olympics,
we should be working even harder to enable Kosovo's
participation and membership in all international
organizations. Our young people cannot and should not
remain hostage. Kosovo is here to stay - forever. And
we will do our outmost to have our flag and our voice
raised in all international organizations, including the
United Nations.

