Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank the
delegation of Brazil for organizing this important
debate, the first of its kind in the Security Council.
Today represents a valuable opportunity to discuss the

question of interdependence between security and
development. Therefore, allow me to thank Their
Excellencies the Ministers from Germany, Colombia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Portugal, India and Gabon for
joining us, and as well to thank Ambassador Gasana
and Ms. Cliffe for their valuable contributions.

The United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions, the African Union, the European Union
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference have
all acknowledged that in an increasingly
interconnected world, there is no security without
development and no development without security.

Despite that broad conceptual acknowledgment,
the political debate continues, first, on the nature of the
security-development nexus; secondly, on the types of
policies that should be pursued to achieve durable
peace, security and sustainable development, including
to address the root causes and drivers of conflicts; and
thirdly, on the way forward for the Security Council to
prevent the eruption or protraction of, or relapse into,
violence, given the changing nature of conflicts and the
security-development nexus, as well expressed in the
concept note prepared by the Mission of Brazil
(S/2011/50, annex).

Since the end of the cold war, conflicts have been
affecting more civilians, as they have become
increasingly entangled with the collapse of State
structures, ethnic rivalries, human rights violations and
acts of terrorism. Therefore, since 1990 the Council
has authorized the deployment of 49 peacekeeping
missions, compared with only 18 between 1945 and
1989.

These missions have faced many challenges on
the ground, including the severe developmental
consequences of armed conflict, particularly among
vulnerable populations, whereby societies experiencing
civil war and large-scale, violent crime generally
achieve lower development outcomes, as expressed in
the Concept Note for the World Development Report
2011. The Note also sheds light on some of the root
causes of conflict, many of which have developmental
dimensions. Indeed, environments with high risks of
violence are typically characterized by corruption,
inequalities, conflict over natural resources, poverty,
high unemployment, weak socio-economic institutions
and governance, and vulnerability to shocks.
Furthermore, climate change and its environmental
consequences are likely to increase the risk of war and

conflict, due to the stress they exert on already scarce
resources.

Given the interdependence between security and
development, peacebuilding has emerged as an
important tool for bridging the gap between them. In
this context, the Security Council noted as early as
2001 "the need for enhancing peace-building activities
by formulating a strategy based on the interdependence
between sustainable peace, security and development
in all its dimensions" (S/PRST/2001/5, seventh para).

For example, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, peacekeeping mandates have increasingly
incorporated peacebuilding tasks. The seminar on
United Nations peacekeeping held in Rio de J aneiro in
June 2010 recognized that peacebuilding and
peacekeeping efforts should be implemented in parallel
and that peacebuilding should include socio-economic
activities, such as youth employment generation, the
development of infrastructure and the provision of
basic services, which can reduce the risk of relapse into
conflict and help maintain stability.

For all the reasons mentioned thus far, one cannot
deny the need to promote sustainable development to
achieve sustainable peace. Development is a key
component in conflict prevention, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding. Peace cannot be sustained
without job creation, equitable ownership of assets,
empowerment of women and adequate allocation of
resources. Moreover, peace cannot be sustained without
enabling a country's leadership, through appropriate
resources, technical capacity and the support of the
international community, to unlock those dividends. In
that context, we note the example of Burundi. As the
Secretary-General clearly stated in his latest report,
"Peace, justice and the rule of law cannot be sustained
without development." (S/20lO/608, para. 71)

Let me also mention that the Taif Accord of
1989 - which helped put an end to 15 years of war
and violence in my country, Lebanon - illustrates how
development can play an important role in post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding. Indeed, one of the
foundations of that Accord is the principle of balanced
development. Furthermore, key agreed-upon reforms
included the need to draw a comprehensive and
balanced development plan to foster socio-economic
development. The Accord also provided for the
creation of a socio-economic council for development
to enable greater participation of the various socio-

economic actors. Another key reform is the
commitment to provide education for all, including
mandatory primary education and restructuring of the
public education system to meet the country's
developmental needs and foster social cohesion.

Experience in Haiti and with other peacekeeping
missions has led some troop-contributing countries to
the conclusion that mandates need to be adjusted to
better reflect the development mission. Once more, the
seminar held in Rio supported that conclusion and
acknowledged that peacekeepers ought to be involved
in socio-economic development activities. Therefore,
when socio-economic issues are identified as drivers of
conflicts, or as threats to the consolidation of peace, it
becomes of the utmost importance for the Council to
address those issues. That will indeed require greater
cooperation with other United Nations bodies and
organs, the international financial institutions and
regional and subregional organizations, based on the
principle of comparative advantage.

