Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): I would first
like to thank the Indonesian presidency for convening
this important open debate.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Malaysia reaffirms the importance it attaches
to general principles on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Secretary-General's latest report
on the subject (S/2019/373) reflects the grim reality that
the state ofthe protection of civilians today is tragically
similar to that of 20 years ago. We are troubled that
civilians continue to account for the vast majority of
casualties in situations of armed conflict.

Malaysia remains deeply concerned about the
fact that deliberate and indiscriminate attacks on
civilians are common in armed conflicts. Innocent
civilians should never be made victims or victims
for ransom, and any actions detrimental to civilians'
well-being are by definition acts of cowardice and
should never be condoned. In that context, Malaysia
reaffirms its support for prioritizing protection-of-
civilians mandates in peacekeeping missions. There
is no question that modern peacekeeping missions
are multidimensional, with tasks that address the full
spectrum of peacebuilding activities, from providing
secure environments to monitoring human rights and
rebuilding the capacity of the State. Increasingly, such
mandates also instruct peacekeeping missions to stress
the physical protection of civilians. The link between
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping mandates
is central. The safety and security of civilians is critical
to the legitimacy and credibility of peacekeeping
missions. While missions work to manage high
expectations, they must also address the security of
civilians in order to carry out their mandated tasks in
assisting local reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts.
The protection of civilians is also a critical component
of sustainable peace.

The credibility of United Nations peacekeepers
depends largely on their willingness to act when civilians
are at risk to threats. Any failure of peacekeepers to act
or follow orders should be brought to the attention of the
Council. In addition, the Council must be prepared to
provide political and operational support when threats
to civilians exist. Malaysia therefore welcomes the
Secretary-General's efforts to improve the performance
of peacekeepers through his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We share the View that military and police
personnel should receive predeployment training
on the protection of civilians, child protection and
the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence in
accordance with United Nations standards. For its part,
Malaysia, through the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre,
has successfully organized courses for peacekeeping
personnel on the protection of civilians.

Malaysia has consistently expressed concern about
the humanitarian situation of communities affected by
armed conflict and the need to alleviate their suffering.
As the protection-of-civilians agenda has been a focus
of the Council over the last two decades, it is important
to ensure that the Council continues to advance
the discourse. It should send a clear message that
impunity must end and that all parties, including State
and non-State actors, should be held accountable for
violations of international humanitarian law. Malaysia
therefore urges all permanent Security Council
members to refrain from invoking their veto power in
situations where the lives and well-being of civilians in
armed conflict are at stake.

