Mr. Galouzeau de Villepin (France) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to begin by saying
how pleased France is that the Security Council is
being presided over on this decisive day by Guinea, an
African country.

I would like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for the presentation they have just made. Their reports
testify to the regular progress in the disarmament of
Iraq.

What have the inspectors told us? They have told
us that Iraq has been actively cooperating with them
for a month; that, with the progressive destruction of
Al Samoud 2 missiles and their equipment, substantial
progress has been made in the area of ballistics; and
that new prospects are opening up with the recent
questioning of several scientists. Significant evidence
of real disarmament has now been observed. That,
indeed, is the key to resolution 1441 (2002).

I would solemnly like to ask a question in this
body, the same question being asked by the people of
the world: Why should we today engage in a war with
Iraq?

I would like also to ask: Why smash instruments
that have just proved their effectiveness? Why choose
division, when our unity and our resolve are leading
Iraq to rid itself of its weapons of mass destruction?
Why should we wish to proceed by force, at any cost,
when we can succeed peacefully?

War is always an acknowledgement of failure. Let
us not resign ourselves to the irreparable.

Before making our choice, let us weigh the
consequences; let us consider the effects of our
decisions.

Indeed, it is clear to all that in Iraq, we are
resolutely moving towards the complete elimination of
weapons of mass destruction programmes.

The method that we have chosen works. The
information supplied by Baghdad has been verified by
the inspectors and is leading to the elimination of
banned ballistic equipment.

We must proceed the same way with all the other
programmes - with information, verification,
destruction. We already have useful information in the
biological and chemical domains. In response to the
inspectors' questions, Iraq must give us further
information in a timely fashion, so that we may obtain
the most precise knowledge possible about any existing
inventories or programmes. On the basis of that
information, we will destroy all the components that
are discovered, as we are doing for the missiles, and we
will determine the truth of the matter.

With regard to nuclear weapons, Mr. ElBaradei's
statements confirm that we are approaching the time
when the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
will be able to certify the dismantlement of the Iraq
programme.

What conclusions can we draw? That Iraq,
according to the very terms used by the inspectors,
represents less of a danger to the world than it did in
1991, and that we can achieve the objective of
effectively disarming that country.

Let us keep the pressure on Baghdad. The
adoption of resolution 1441 (2002); the assumption of
converging positions by the vast majority of the
world's nations; diplomatic actions by the African
Union, the League of Arab States, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned
Movement - all of these common efforts are bearing
fruit.

The American and British military presence in the
region lends support to our collective resolve. We all
recognize the effectiveness of the pressure that is being
exerted by the international community. We must use it
to achieve our objective of disarmament through
inspections. As the European Union noted, these
inspections cannot continue indefinitely. The pace must
therefore be stepped up.

That is why France wishes today to make three
proposals.

First, let us ask the inspectors to establish a
hierarchy of disarmament tasks and, on that basis, to
present us, as quickly as possible, with the work
programme provided for by resolution 1284 (1999). We
need to know immediately which priority issues could
constitute the key disarmament tasks to be carried out
by Iraq.

Secondly, we propose that the inspectors submit a
progress report every three weeks. That will make the
Iraqi authorities understand that under no
circumstances may they interrupt their efforts.

Finally, let us establish a schedule for assessing
the implementation of the work programme. Resolution
1284 (2002) provides for a time frame of 120 days. We
are willing to shorten it, if the inspectors consider it
feasible.

The military agenda must not dictate the calendar
of inspections. We agree to accelerated timetables, but
we cannot accept an ultimatum as long as the
inspectors are reporting progress in terms of
cooperation. That would mean war. That would lead to
the Security Council's being stripped of its
responsibilities. By imposing a deadline of a few days,
would we merely be seeking a pretext for war?
I will say it again: as a permanent member of the
Security Council, France will not allow a resolution to
be adopted that authorizes the automatic use of force.

Let us consider the anguish and the expectations
of people all over the world, in all our countries, from
Cairo to Rio, from Algiers to Pretoria, from Rome to
Jakarta. Indeed, the stakes go beyond the fate of Iraq
alone.

Let us be clear-sighted. We are defining a method
for resolving crises. We are choosing how to define the
world we want our children to live in.

This is true in the case of North Korea, and in the
case of south Asia, where we have not yet found the
path towards a lasting resolution of disputes. It is true
in the case of the Middle East. Can we continue to wait
while acts of violence multiply?

These crises have many roots - political,
religious and economic. Their origins lie deep in the
turmoil of history. There may be some who believe that
these problems can be resolved by force, thereby
creating a new order. But this is not what France
believes. On the contrary, we believe that the use of
force can give rise to resentment and to hatred, and fuel
a clash of identities and of civilizations - something
that our generation has a prime responsibility to avert.

To those who believe that war would be the
quickest way to disarm Iraq, I can reply that it would
create divisions and cause wounds that will be long in
healing. How many victims will there be? How many
grieving families?

We do not subscribe to what may be the other
objectives of a war. Is it a question of regime change in
Baghdad? No one underestimates the cruelty of that
dictatorship or the need to do everything possible to
promote human rights. But that is not the objective of
resolution 1441 (2002), and force is certainly not the
best way of bringing about democracy. In this case and
in others, it would encourage a dangerous instability.

Is it a question of fighting terrorism? War would
only increase it, and we could then be faced with a new
wave of violence. Let us beware of playing into the
hands of those who want a clash of civilizations or a
clash of religions.

Finally, is it a question of reshaping the political
landscape of the Middle East? In that case, we run the
risk of exacerbating tensions in a region already
characterized by great instability. Furthermore, the
large number of communities and religions in Iraq
itself increases the danger of a potential break-up.

We all have the same demands. We want more
security and more democracy. But there is another
logic besides that of force. There is another path; there
are other solutions.

We understand the profound sense of insecurity
with which the American people have been living since
the tragedy of 11 September 2001. The entire world
shared the sorrow of New York and of America, struck
at the heart. I say this in the name of our friendship for

the American people and in the name of our common
values: freedom, justice, tolerance.

But there is nothing today to indicate a link
between the Iraqi regime and Al Qaeda. Will the world
be a safer place after a military intervention in Iraq?
Let me state my country's conviction: it will not.

Four months ago, we unanimously adopted a
system of inspections to eliminate the threat of
potential weapons of mass destruction and guarantee
our security. Today we cannot accept, without
contradicting ourselves, a conflict that might well
weaken it.

Yes, we, too, want more democracy in the world.
But we can achieve this objective only within the
framework of a true global democracy based on
respect, sharing, and the awareness of genuinely
common values and a common destiny. Its core is the
United Nations.

Let us make no mistake. In the face of multiple
and complex threats, there is no single response, but
there is a single requirement: we must remain united.

Today we must together invent a new future for
the Middle East. Let us not forget the immense hope
created by the efforts of the Madrid Conference and the
Oslo Agreement. Let us not forget that the Middle East
crisis represents our greatest challenge in terms of
security and justice. For us, the Middle East, like Iraq,
represents a priority commitment.

This calls for even greater ambition and even
greater boldness. We should envision a region
transformed through peace, and civilizations that,
through the courageous act of reaching out to each
other, can rediscover their self-confidence and an
international prestige that is equal to their long history
and their aspirations.

In a few days, we shall solemnly fulfil our
responsibility through a vote. We will be facing an
essential choice: disarming Iraq through war or through
peace. This crucial choice includes others. It includes
the international community's ability to resolve the
many current or future crises. It carries with it a vision
of the world, a concept of the role of the United
Nations.

France therefore believes that to make this
choice, to make it in good conscience in this forum of
international democracy, before their peoples and
before the world, heads of State or Government must
meet again here, in New York, in the Security Council.

This is in everyone's interest. We must rediscover
the fundamental vocation of the United Nations: to
allow each of its Members to assume its
responsibilities in the face of the Iraqi crisis, but also to
seize together the destiny of a world in crisis and thus
recreate the conditions for our future unity.

