Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I am honoured to report
to the Council on the activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor in furtherance of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Council adopted resolution 1970 (2011)
unanimously on 26 February, referring the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
stressing the need to hold to account those responsible
for attacks, including by forces under their control, on
civilians.

My report, submitted for the Council's
consideration in advance of this meeting, describes in
detail the factual and legal analysis conducted by the
Office in order to implement that resolution. Based on
that analysis, we decided to open an investigation on
3 March. In carrying out the mandate given it by the
Council under resolution 1970 (2011), the Office must
apply the norms established by the Rome Statute. It
must establish the truth about crimes alleged to have
been committed in Libya through an independent and
impartial investigation. This is what we are doing.

To investigate the crimes committed in Libya, the
Office has conducted more than 15 missions to 10
different States. As of 26 April, 45 interviews of
individuals with direct knowledge of the crimes
committed had been initiated or completed. More than
569 documents, including videos and pictures, had
been collected and reviewed. The Office has taken no
statement inside Libya in order to fulfil its duty to
protect witnesses.

The cooperation received from States and
regional and other international organizations, in
accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011),
was a critical component of the fast progress of the
Libyan investigation.
The Commission of Inquiry created by the
Human Rights Council has also been cooperating with
the Office since its creation, and has indicated its
willingness to continue to do so. The Commission of
Inquiry is in the process of preparing its report to the
Human Rights Council, which is to be completed by
the end of May. We are looking forward to its report
and to having access to the data compiled by the
Commission, which will be very useful to the
Prosecution for future action. We have discussed with
the Commission Chair the difficulties involved in
unveiling the truth while an armed conflict is ongoing,
and the importance of the Commission's field
activities.

The evidence collected has confirmed the fears
and concerns expressed in resolution 1970 (2011). Two
months ago, the Security Council expressed grave
concern at the situation in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
condemning the violence and use of force against
civilians, and deplored the gross and systematic
violation of human rights, including the repression of
peaceful demonstrators and the deaths of civilians.
Resolution 1970 (2011) rejected unequivocally the
incitement to hostility and violence against the civilian
population made from the highest level of the Libyan
Government, and considered that the widespread and
systematic attacks currently taking place in the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya against the civilian population could
amount to crimes against humanity.

The evidence collected by the Office of the
Prosecutor confirms that assessment. It establishes
reasonable grounds to believe that widespread and
systematic attacks against the civilian population,
including murder and persecution as crimes against
humanity, have been and continue to be committed in
Libya. In additionally, since the end of February there
has been an armed conflict in Libya. In this context,
there is also relevant information on the alleged
commission of war crimes. The work of the
Commission of Inquiry will be crucial to fully
understanding the crimes committed during the armed
conflict.

Let me start by describing the incidents of crimes
against humanity that the Office investigated. The
evidence shows that security forces have been
systematically shooting at peaceful protesters,
following the same modus operandi in multiple
locations. The evidence shows that events in
neighbouring Egypt and Tunisia prompted Libyan
11-32142
security forces to begin preparations for the possibility
of demonstrations in Libya. As early as January,
mercenaries were being hired and brought into Libya.

The incidents started on 15 and 16 February.
Security forces arrested two lawyers who were
requesting justice for the 1,400 victims of the 1996
Abu Salim prison massacres. On 17 February,
thousands of peaceful demonstrators protesting these
arrests congregated in the square around the High
Court of Benghazi. Security forces entered the square
and reportedly fired live ammunition into the crowd,
killing numerous demonstrators. This was the
beginning of a series of similar incidents in different
cities across Libya.

The efforts to cover up the crimes have made it
difficult to ascertain the precise number of victims, but
there is credible information suggesting that, merely as
the result of such shootings, 500 to 700 persons died in
February alone. It is difficult to estimate the total
numbers because dead bodies were removed from
streets and hospitals. Doctors were not allowed to
document the number of dead and injured admitted to
hospitals after the violent clashes began. Security
forces were allegedly stationed in the hospitals and
arrested injured individuals who sought medical
treatment. Being injured became evidence of opposing
the regime, and challenging the authority of the regime
is a crime under Libyan law. To avoid punishment and
risk of death, many protestors sought medical attention
in private homes and did not bring injured or dead
persons to the hospitals.

In addition to such incidents, information
collected by the Office shows that civilians in Tripoli
and other areas under the control of the regime are
reportedly subject to different forms of persecution.
Systematic arrests, torture, killings and enforced
disappearances have been reported in Tripoli, Zawiyah,
Zintan and the area of the Nafusa Mountains. The
victims are civilians who have participated in
demonstrations, are considered to be disloyal to the
regime, or have talked to international media, activists
or journalists. In addition, citizens of Egypt and
Tunisia were arrested and expelled en masse because of
their perceived association with the popular uprising.
The mosques where they prayed were destroyed.

There is also relevant information concerning the
alleged commission of rape. Victims of rape have
reportedly been arrested and subject to harassment. In
11-32142

one high-profile case, a woman gave a report to the
international media of how she had been raped by
security forces because of her suspected association
with the rebels. The Office is investigating these
allegations.

Several sources have also reported the unlawful
arrest, mistreatment and killing of sub-Saharan African
civilians wrongly perceived to be mercenaries.
Reportedly, angry mobs of protesters assaulted sub-
Saharan Africans in Benghazi and other cities and
killed dozens of them. The new authorities in Benghazi
allegedly arrested a number of sub-Saharan Africans,
and it is unclear whether they were innocent immigrant
workers or combatants, become prisoners of war.

In addition, specific allegations of war crimes
committed include the use of imprecise weaponry such
as cluster munitions, multiple rocket launchers and
mortars, and other forms of heavy weaponry, in
crowded urban areas, in particular Misrata. There are
also reports of forces blocking humanitarian supplies.
Some sources have also reported the use of civilians as
human shields and the torture of prisoners of war or
civilians in the context of the armed conflict.

The total number of persons who have died since
the beginning of the conflict is in the thousands. The
number of those displaced, according to the United
Nations, includes approximately 535,000 migrant
workers, refugees and asylum seekers, and 327,342
internally displaced Libyans.

Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
and Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
have all spoken clearly about alleged crimes.

Let me conclude by referring to the next steps. In
accordance with the Court's Statute, my duty is to
focus investigations and prosecutions on those who
bear the greatest responsibility for the most serious
crimes, based on the evidence that emerges in the
course of the investigation. That includes those who
ordered, incited, financed or otherwise planned the
commission of the alleged crimes.

On that basis, in the coming weeks, in
implementing the mandate established by resolution
1970 (2011), as Prosecutor I will present a case before
3
the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal
Court. I will request the judges to issue arrest warrants
against three individuals who appear to bear the
greatest criminal responsibility for crimes against
humanity committed in the territory of Libya since
15 February.

In all the incidents to be presented to the judges,
the victims who were shot at by security forces were
unarmed civilians and there is no evidence of any
attack against security forces. To prove the case, my
Office has collected different types of evidence. There
are least two eyewitnesses for each incident,
documents and, in many cases, corroboration of details
by pictures or videos. Further cases will be opened as
necessary, taking into account the full scope of
criminality, including war crimes allegedly committed
by different individuals in the context of the Libya
situation. Before proceeding, I will inform the Council
in advance.

Following my request, the Pre-Trial Chamber
may decide to accept the application, to reject it or to
ask my Office for additional information. Should the
judges decide to issue arrest warrants, the primary
responsibility to execute them will lie with the
territorial authorities.

My Office still awaits any response on the
question of arrests from representatives of the regime
in Tripoli.

The Interim National Council has committed
itself to implement any arrest warrants and has
requested the cooperation of the international
community.

Arresting those who ordered the commission of
crimes will contribute to the protection of civilians in
Libya. If those who ordered crimes are not stopped and
arrested, crimes will continue unabated. Judicial
activity will deter crimes by removing those who
ordered the crimes and by sending a clear message to
other potential perpetrators, in Libya and elsewhere,
that the international community will not condone such
crimes.

Arrests cannot be successfully conducted without
serious planning and preparation, which takes time.
The international community should take steps now to
assist with such practical planning.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated in
Kampala,

"Now we have the International Criminal
Court - permanent, increasingly powerful,
casting a long shadow. There is no going back. In
this new age of accountability, those who commit
the worst of human crimes will be held
responsible."

