Mr. Gillerman (Israel): The Security Council has
yet again proved today that it is not a rubber stamp for
incessant and hypocritical Palestinian and Syrian
whims.

The Palestinian Observer has spent a lot of time
blaming others today. He has blamed Israel; he has
blamed the Council, and he has blamed a permanent
member of the Council that has done more to support
the cause of peace than any other State. The Palestinian
Observer is indignant that the Council would not
swallow whole his distorted portrayal of this conflict.
The Palestinian Observer is also indignant that the
nakedly one-sided, biased resolution that failed to draw
attention to the Palestinian terrorism that is at the heart
of the problem and that has been the very cause of
Israeli defensive measures could not garner the support
of the Council, which was acting in full consistency
with its own rules of procedure and with the United
Nations Charter. And he is indignant, despite the fact
that he continues to consider it unacceptable for a
resolution to condemn the murder of innocent civilians
by Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Al Aqsa Martyrs
Brigade and call for their dismantlement, as required
by the road map.

Perhaps for once the Palestinian Observer should
stop looking for someone else to blame, for once stop
this charade in the United Nations, where high-minded
rhetoric is matched with resolutions designed to malign
and distort, when all the while the Palestinian side
refuses to do the one thing it is required to do - fight
terrorism.

The Palestinian Observer has already indicated
that he will now pursue the ritual emergency special
session of the General Assembly, in violation of each
and every condition for such a procedure. That way, we
can all spend more time listening and considering how
everyone but the Palestinian side is responsible for the
present predicament.

Is it not time that we stopped these games?
Instead of looking to Israel, to the Council, to the
General Assembly, to the international community, to
the Quartet for someone to blame, is it not time that the
Palestinian side looked in the mirror, however
unpleasant that image may be?

