I thank you, Mr President, Assistant-Secretary-General Keita, Secretary- General Mushikiwabo and Minister Mnatsakanyan for their informative briefings. The United Kingdom welcomes the strong relationship and cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie. The equality, complementarity and solidarity among the Francophonie's 88 member States is a powerful force for good in the world. The Francophonie undoubtedly has a role to play alongside the United Nations and other organizations in the fields of conflict prevention, mediation and the exercise of good offices, including in settings such as Cameroon. The United Kingdom encourages the Francophonie, along with the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States and the Commonwealth, to continue to support efforts to end violence and restore peace in Cameroon's North- West and South-West regions. The Francophonie can also make valuable contributions to United Nations efforts to assist countries emerging from conflict to hold successful elections and strengthen the role of democratic governance - for example, in the Central African Republic, where elections due this December will constitute a critical milestone in the implementation of the peace agreement. It is vital that all of the Central African Republic's partners work together to ensure that those elections are free, fair, inclusive, transparent and credible, and conducted in a climate of peace. The United Kingdom, also hopes to see the Francophonie join the United Nations in encouraging the consolidation of democratic governance and in upholding the importance of human rights. This will be vital in Burundi, where the peaceful transfer of power earlier this year has created a window of opportunity for strengthening governance, accountability and human rights. But it is also critical in countries where we see signs of rising instability as elections approach. As we made clear in the Security Council in July, we have been alarmed by the violence in Guinea in recent months and, more recently, troubled by the violent clashes breaking out in Cete d'Ivoire. The United Nations, the Francophonie and all international partners should work with stakeholders in both countries in the coming months to encourage them to uphold the democratic values and human rights that underpin peace, stability and prosperity. And in Mali, the international community must do all it can to encourage a timely transition to a civilian, democratically elected Government that can meet the needs of the Malian people and strengthen the social contract between citizens and the State. Finally, I would like to turn to peacekeeping and the importance of ensuring that all relevant Member States deploy peacekeepers who are fully trained, equipped and prepared to deliver their mandates. Language skills are essential in this respect. They facilitate engagement with the local population, lead to better situational awareness and help peacekeepers deliver on mandated responsibilities, such as the protection of civilians, while ensuring their own safety and security. The United Kingdom will ensure that we have the right language capabilities among our peacekeepers deploying to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali later this year, and we urge all our fellow troop- and police-contributing countries to do likewise.
