Mr. Roet (Israel): As we sit here today, Israel is
facing an onslaught of terrorism; men, women and
children are being stabbed to death on the streets on a
daily basis. Yet for them there has been no demand for
an emergency session of the Security Council; no call
for the Palestinian leadership to stop their incitement;
and not even a whisper of condemnation of these acts
could be heard from the Council.

Eitam and Na'ama Henkin were shot to death while
driving in their car. Their four children were in the
vehicle and watched their parents killed- executed- in
front of their eyes.

Chaim Chaviv was shot and killed on a city bus in
Jerusalem on his way home from a visit to his doctor.
Two terrorists boarded the bus, locked the doors so that
no one could escape, and started to shoot and stab the
passenger. Chaim Chaviv was 78 years old. These are
just a few of the silent victims of Palestinian terror.

Over the course of the last month, 24 terror attacks
have claimed the lives of 8 Israelis and injured 70,
including an official from the International Labour
Organization. Fifteen of them are still hospitalized.
This tide of terror has washed over the entire nation
and it spares no one; young and old are being targeted
every day. Israelis do not feel safe walking down the
street, they avoid taking the bus to work and they fear
for the lives of their children every time they walk out
of the door.

We face an enemy who is willing to die in order to
kill. These people, who kill innocent civilians in cold
blood, abide by no rule and have abandoned even the
most basic morality. Israel is taking every necessary
means to defend its citizens and is responding
proportionately to these attacks. I have no doubt that
if, on a daily basis the citizens of member States were
being stabbed in the streets with butcher knives or shot
on buses, their security forces would have reacted in
the same way.

We heard in the Secretariat briefing today the
so-called reason for this campaign of terror. The
real root cause of this wave of terror is clear. It was
inflammatory rhetoric and lies that lit the fuse and it is
incitement that keeps feeding the flames. The violence
that Israel now faces began with lies about the Temple
Mount. President Abbas has continually accused Israel
of trying to change the status quo. Just two days ago he
claimed that "Israel intends to make Al-Aqsa Jewish".
This is a deliberate and malicious lie. Knowing full well
the consequences of their words, Palestinian leaders

have repeated this outlandish conspiracy theory over
and over again and it is utterly baseless.

Prime Minister Netanyahu, as we heard today,
has stated time and time again, including from the
rostrum in the General Assembly, that Israel is firmly
committed to the status quo. We continue to protect the
right of Muslims to pray in the mosque, as well as the
freedom of all people - Muslims, Christians, Jews and
others - to visit the Temple Mount. The facts speak
for themselves. For decades Israel has maintained the
status quo and will keep on doing so. Let me be crystal
clear - Israel will not agree to any international
presence on the Temple Mount. Such a presence would
be a change in the status quo.

Since 1967, Israel has been doing everything in its
power to preserve the sanctity of this site. We do this
out of a deep and abiding respect for the principle of
freedom of religion and the historic connection of the
three monotheistic faiths to the Temple Mount. Yet, it is
clear that this respect is not mutual. Palestinian leaders
are determined to erase Jewish history and deny any
historic connection between the Jewish people and our
holiest site. In a proposal that the Palestinians asked
to submit yesterday to UNESCO, they tried do exactly
that. This proposal calls on UNESCO to include the
Western Wall, HaKotel HaMa'aravi, the site of Jewish
prayer for millennia, as an integral part of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.

When the Palestinian leadership has so little
respect for places that have been sacred to the Jewish
people throughout their history, it is no surprise that
the Palestinian people treat the Jewish holy site with
such disdain and disregard. Just last night, a mob of
Palestinians set fire to the Tomb of Joseph in Nablus,
a site of prayer and pilgrimage for Jews through the
generations. This is a desecration and a blatant violation
of the freedom of worship. The heinous attack on a
biblical holy site can be explained only by incitement
and a lack of respect for the religion and heritage of
others.

The disrespect for the sanctity of holy sites is also
evident in the actions of Palestinians on the Temple
Mount. Militant Islamist agitators have used the
Al-Aqsa Mosque as a staging ground for a calculated,
violent provocation. On the eve of the Jewish New
Year, Rosh Hashana, radical Islamists stockpiled
rocks, planks, wooden sheets and fireworks, as well as
Molotov firebombs and explosive devices, to prevent
Jews, as well as Christians, from visiting the Temple
Mount.

The Palestinians and the representatives of the
Arab countries speak of the sanctity of their holy sites,
but when Islamist militants desecrated Al-Aqsa, by
using it as a weapons depot, they stood mute. Instead,
President Abbas defended these rioters and lit the spark
that set our region ablaze. He declared,

"We welcome every drop of blood spilled in
Jerusalem With the help of Allah, every shaheed
will be in heaven, and every wounded will get his
reward Al-Aqsa is ours, and the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre is ours. Everything is ours, all
ours. They have no right to desecrate them with
their filthy feet."

I repeat, Jews have no right to desecrate it with
their filthy feet. Can anyone imagine what the reaction
would have been if an Israeli leader or any other leader,
for that matter, had uttered such a hateful sentiment?
The Security Council would have quite rightly wasted
no time in convening to condemn it. Yet, when the
President of the Palestinian Authority makes such a
blatantly prejudiced statement, the Council reacts with
complete silence.

Even now, as the violence continues and lives are
lost every day, instead of calming tensions Palestinian
leaders continue to lie and use inflammatory rhetoric.
They are stoking the flames by portraying terrorists
as innocent victims. Just two days ago, in a televised
broadcast to the Palestinian people, President Abbas
accused Israel of killing an innocent 13-year old
Palestinian boy. There are two facts that President
Abbas did not share with his public. First, the boy is
not dead. He is fully conscious and is being treated in
an Israeli hospital. Secondly, he is not innocent. This
13-year old Palestinian brutally attacked a 13-year old
Israeli boy who was riding his bicycle, stabbing him
no fewer than 15 times. No one needs to take my word
for it; there is a video of this on social media. When
a young child is incited to pick up a knife instead of
being encouraged to pick up a basketball or a book,
something is deeply wrong.

As Dr. Yitzhak Kadman, Executive Director of the
Israeli National Council for the Child, wrote, it is very
easy to use children for the needs of adults. It is so easy
to incite children and to drag them into war games. It
is so tempting to turn children into symbols. It is so
easy and, yet, so wrong, so simple and so dangerous.
Tragically, this is exactly what the Palestinian
leadership is doing. Such acts of terror do not occur in
a vacuum. They are the product of a deliberate policy
of incitement aimed at filling the minds of Palestinian
children with hatred.

From an early age, Palestinian children are subjected
to propaganda that promotes hatred and incites them
to violence. Young children watch television shows
with friendly hosts that encourage them to kill all Jews
and become martyrs. Schoolchildren in the West Bank
study using official Palestinian Authority textbooks
that legitimize indiscriminate violence against
Israelis. Palestinian teenagers follow Facebook posts
and Twitter feeds that call on them to stab Jews and
that applaud violent acts like the murder of Eitam and
Na'ama Henkin, of blessed memory.

The situation is indeed dire, but there is a way
forward. Just yesterday, Prime Minister Netanyahu
expressed his willingness to meet with the Palestinian
leadership and with President Abbas in order to bring
calm to the region. Two weeks ago, Prime Minister
Netanyahu stood here in the United Nations and
declared that he is ready for direct negotiations with the
Palestinians, without any preconditions. If the Council
is serious about promoting peace, it must join in Prime
Minister Netanyahu's call and insist that President
Abbas come to the negotiating table. Israel's historic
agreements with Egypt and with Jordan prove that only
direct negotiations can lead to a real and lasting peace.
Only such negotiations can create a new reality for all
the people of the region.

