The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.

The Mexican delegation is gratified that the
Security Council has adopted resolution 1871 (2009) to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). We
are particularly gratified that the resolution was
adopted with 15 votes in favour, as this demonstrates
the unanimous support of the Council for the work of
MINURSO in the field and the initiatives taken by the
new Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Christopher Ross.

We therefore support the Personal Envoy's
suggestion to organize small, preparatory informal
meetings before convening a fifth round of
negotiations in Manhasset. We believe this will be
indispensable to achieving substantial progress in the
negotiations. We trust that the parties will attend these
negotiations in good faith without prior conditions and
will demonstrate the political will to set in motion
6

substantive deliberations that will bring about tangible
progress in the negotiations, leading towards a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable solution that will
guarantee the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara.

Mexico attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of human rights, which is a
priority in our foreign policy. My delegation feels that
the Security Council must not fail to consider this topic
as it addresses the situation in Western Sahara. That is
why we welcome the fact that this year's resolution
contains an improvement in this respect, in the eighth
preambular paragraph, when it refers to the
humanitarian dimension of the conflict as a means to
promote transparency and mutual confidence through
constructive dialogue, as suggested by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2009/200).

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

As this may be the last meeting held under the
Mexican presidency of the Council, I would like to
take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to
all my colleagues on the Council, who have provided
such valuable support to my delegation. I would also
like to thank the Secretariat team for their continuing
support throughout the month and to thank all the other
staff of the Secretariat, including the interpreters, who
have worked behind the scenes in support of the work
of the presidency. I would like to thank you all.

The meeting rose at 5.10 pm.
09-31958
