Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the fact that under the presidency
of Kazakhstan, the Council has accomplished its work
for the month of January. We congratulate Ambassador
Umarov and his team on their outstanding performance.

With regard to the Council's work this month, I
would like to reaffirm our positions on the following
three issues.

The first issue concerns the situation in Afghanistan.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan are in the interest
of the long-term well-being of the Afghan people
and impact their regional stability and security. The
situation in Central Asia has been stable on the whole
and the region has great potential for development.
On 13 and 14 January, a Council delegation travelled
to Afghanistan and visited Kabul. On 19 January, the
Council held an open meeting at the ministerial-level
on peace and security in Afghanistan and Central Asia
(see S/PV.8162) and adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/2. All that has helped Council members
understand the Afghan issue through first-hand
experience, facilitated efforts by the international
community to explore ways to solve the Afghan issues
from a regional perspective, and promoted lasting peace
and development in Afghanistan and Central Asia.

The second issue is the situation in Middle East.
In January, the Council held an open meeting on Libya
(see S/PV.8159) and an open debate on the question
of Palestine (see S/PV.8167). More than 50 countries
and organizations stated their views on the situation
between Palestine and Israel and the status ofJerusalem.
That has enhanced the understanding of the parties
concerned about the urgency of resolving the relevant
issues and sent a strong message from the international
community urging the early resumption of peace talks
between Palestine and Israel.

The third issue is the situation in Africa. In
January, the Council discussed the situations in West
Africa, the Sahel region, the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Somalia, Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and adopted relevant outcome
documents. The Council has continued to focus its
attention on agenda items on Africa and expresses its
support to regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union's good offices, and has supported
regional countries with a View to making progress in
addressing challenges. That is conducive to achieving
lasting peace and stability on the African continent at
an early date.

In conclusion, I wish Kuwait all the best in
assuming the presidency in the month of February.
China will actively support its work.

