The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France.

The world is at a crossroads today. Crises have
global dimensions. In this context, the Security
Council, the highest body representing the will of the
international community, has a special responsibility.
That is why France has taken the initiative of
convening this meeting. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the many colleagues who
accepted my invitation.

I would not want to speak on the subject of
terrorism here in New York without mentioning, with
sorrow, the victims of the attacks of 11 September.
Their memory must inspire us to fight terrorism with
the utmost determination.

New attacks, of which France itself has been a
victim, have taken place in recent months. They have
confirmed that the terrorists are more than ever
resolved to shatter lives and sow destruction. They
have also confirmed that terrorism threatens all
countries and all peoples. It cannot therefore be fought
in isolation. In the face of terrorism we have a duty -
collective mobilization - and a goal: results.

Much has already been done. I am thinking of the
United Nations, with the vital role played by the
Security Council; the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001); the sanctions imposed on Al Qaeda; and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose activity I would
like to commend. I am also thinking of the G8, its work
on non-proliferation and its action against terrorist
financing.

Much remains to be done, however. Terrorism is
constantly changing face. It is able to adapt its methods
and networks and to assert its global character. It is
imperative for us to do more and better. How can we do
so?

We can start by strengthening the mobilization of
the international community as a whole. The United
Nations can and must play a major role in this new
drive. Because it is a world body, it must be at the
centre of our efforts, focusing our attention in a
pragmatic way on the areas in which the United
Nations is better able than others to make a
contribution. It is thus already playing a decisive role
in drafting international legal instruments against
terrorism. We must do still more in this area, both to
conclude the negotiations on such basic texts as the
comprehensive convention against terrorism and the
convention against nuclear terrorism, and to permit the
application of texts already signed. Let us give new
stimulus to the United Nations institutions responsible
for this task.

The United Nations, because it is a world body,
can also do more to help countries -especially
countries of the South-to strengthen their counter-
terrorism mechanisms at the national level. In that
connection, I propose that we consider establishing a
cooperation and assistance fund within the United
Nations that would have its own resources and would
work closely with the international financial
institutions.

But we must also pursue efforts undertaken in
other forums. We will be ineffective against terrorist
financing unless we mobilize all of the instruments
available to us -in the Group of Eight (G-8), in the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering and
in other forums-and unless we fully involve the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. In
its capacity as President of the G-8, France intends to
give strong impetus to the Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction, adopted at the Kananaskis Summit.

It is time to take action against the link between
international terrorism and other threats: the spread of
weapons of mass destruction, arms trafficking, illegal
financing. France intends to prevent terrorist groups
from using radioactive sources scattered around the
world to make "dirty bombs". We shall make concrete
proposals in that regard, particularly with a view to
formulating an international convention strengthening
controls over the use and transfer of such radioactive
sources.

Let us look at things clearly. Terrorism feeds on
injustice. An equitable development model is therefore
necessary to eradicate terrorism once and for all. That
is why we must work ceaselessly to resolve crises: in
Iraq, in Korea and particularly in the Middle East, the
crux of the crises in the region and in the world. We
must once again put development at the centre of our
concerns, mobilizing more resources and more
imagination. Finally, we must foster dialogue among
cultures, looking beyond differences. In this area, the
United Nations has an irreplaceable role.

We see clearly that there is urgency. Each of these
points requires action. Our fate is in our hands. Let us
begin this process without delay and let us set
timetables for concluding it. I suggest that we plan to
meet at the next session of the General Assembly -
perhaps even in the context of a special session of the
Assembly -to adopt new measures aimed at giving
tangible effect to the new impetus that we intend to
bring to our mobilization.

The fight against terrorism is a universal cause
because terrorism is a universal evil. The only way to
conquer terrorism is through unity, imagination and
action.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution (S/2003/60) before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

The President (spoke in French): There were 15 The Security Council has thus concluded its
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted business for this meeting.

unanimously as resolution 1456 (2003). The meeting rose at 12 551) m

I thank all participants for the part that they have
played in the work of this meeting. In particular. I
thank all the Ministers for Foreign Affairs. the
representatives of Chile and the Syrian Arab Republic.
and the Secretary-General.

