Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by expressing my appreciation for the
excellent and valuable briefing presented by Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, which the Council is debating
today in order to provide the international impetus
necessary to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, based on ending Israel's illegal
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories since 1967 and the establishment of an
independent and viable Palestinian State.

This debate takes place at a critical juncture when
we are plagued by uncertainty about the future of peace
on the Palestinian track and the prospects for realizing
the two-State solution, which the Security Council has

often called for and firmly established through
successive resolutions, most recently resolution 1850
(2008), and at a time when the occupying Power
persists in its practices, particularly the unlawful
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the continuing siege of the Gaza Strip, and
the deprivation of its civilian population of the means
of living a decent human life.

The situation in the entire occupied Palestinian
territory remains extremely volatile, and the inability
of the international community to intervene to protect
the Palestinians under occupation exacerbates the
gravity of the situation. The Palestinian civilian
population of the Gaza Strip is struggling to cope with
the humanitarian disaster inflicted upon it by Israeli
military aggression and the 20-month siege, while the
Palestinian population in the West Bank also continues
to suffer as a result of Israel's other grave violations of
international law and international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention. The
occupying Power continues to disregard its Road Map
obligations to freeze settlement activities and insists on
defying the international community's repeated calls to
cease its illegal construction and expansion of
settlements and its construction of the illegitimate
separation wall throughout the West Bank, particularly
in and around East Jerusalem. The construction of this
wall seeks to alter the city's legal status, political
character and demographic composition before the
beginning of final status negotiations.

The danger of such colonization is not limited to
mere violations of international law, United Nations
resolutions and Israeli commitments under the Road
Map; it also threatens to inflame tension and violence,
particularly in view of the proximity of the confiscated
Palestinian land in the Arab Sheikh Jarrah and
Al-Bustan neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem to the
Islamic holy places near there, in addition to the
documented danger of the violence of settlers who
have targeted the unarmed Palestinian population under
the protection of occupation forces.
Also in this connection, the occupying Power
uses military force to deny the Palestinian population
of East Jerusalem their legitimate right to celebrate
their city as the 2009 Capital of Arab Culture, and
continues to pursue illegal excavations inside and
around the city, threatening the sanctity of the holy
Islamic and Christian sites and violating their status as
universal heritage sites. The edifice of Al-Aqsa mosque
is endangered as a result of the illegitimate excavations
taking place in Bab al-Maghariba, Salwan and Ma'man
Allah, the historic Islamic cemetery, with a view to
Judaizing the holy city and damaging the unity of the
West Bank territories by dissecting it into isolated
cantons, thereby undermining the prospects for
achieving the two-State solution and fundamentally
threatening regional peace and security.

The ongoing severe humanitarian crisis resulting
from the Israeli military operations in the Gaza Strip,
the lack of a lasting ceasefire and the failure to
maintain a calm and sustained opening of the crossing
points on the basis of the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access, as reiterated in resolution 1860
(2009), increases the gravity of the situation. Egypt
seeks the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) and resolution ES-10/18 adopted at the resumed
tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly, and has intensified its efforts and contacts to
establish calm, achieve a durable ceasefire and open
the Gaza crossing points, together with reaching an
agreement for the release of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees.

Egypt is also redoubling its efforts to achieve
Palestinian national reconciliation in order to form a
new Palestinian unity government under the leadership
of President Mahmoud Abbas, based on the Palestine
Liberation Organization commitments in favour of the
peace process, and to open the way for the immediate
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip, which, as resolution
1860 (2009) stressed, is an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied in 1967 and on which the
future Palestinian State should be established.

In this connection, Egypt, which hosted the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian
Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza early this
month, renews its call for Israel to ensure the
immediate, unconditional and sustained reopening of
its crossing points with the Gaza Strip in order to allow
for the movement of people, goods and reconstruction
materials into Gaza, put an end to the continuously
escalating humanitarian crisis, and rebuild what was
destroyed.

Undoubtedly, if justice is to be achieved, the
results of inquiries into the violations committed by
Israel during the recent military operations against the
Gaza Strip must be handled competently. In this
context, we look forward to the results of the

investigation by the Board of Inquiry that was
dispatched by the Secretary-General to the Gaza Strip
to probe incidents of death or injury among United
Nations personnel or of damage to United Nations
premises during the Israeli aggression. We also look
forward to the results of the investigations of these
incidents by the committee established by the Human
Rights Council for that purpose as well as that of the
international fact-finding mission set up by the League
of Arab States. There is no doubt that these
investigations will bring the full truth to light and
clarify the events that occurred in violation of
international law and international humanitarian law.
As a result, the need to effectively address these
incidents will be imposed upon the international
community, and the Security Council in particular.

In the framework of addressing the conflict in the
Middle East, we cannot ignore or overlook the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) concerning
Lebanon. Egypt is gravely concerned about the failure
to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) as a result of
Israel's continuing occupation of the Lebanese part of
the village of Ghajar, its non-cooperation with the
Secretary-General's attempts to settle the situation in
the area of Shaba'a farms, and its persistent violations
of Lebanese airspace and territorial waters. This
behaviour has raised tensions that the Security Council
has to address as part of its efforts to achieve stability
in the Middle East.

The international community has clear
obligations regarding the maintenance of peace and
security in the Middle East. The obligation to respect
and to ensure respect for international law and
international humanitarian law in all circumstances
cannot be shirked. The situation in the occupied Arab
territories must not be an exception. Egypt believes
that the Security Council must intensify its efforts to
address the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory in all its aspects so as to compel the
occupying Power to end its violations and to respect its
commitments under international law and the
resolutions adopted by the Council, as this is the only
true way to achieve an environment conducive to real
peace.

Egypt also appreciates the effective way in which
the United States, under its new Administration, is
addressing the questions of peace in the Middle East
and a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue based
on the two-State solution, the principle of land for

peace, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008) and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which constitute a
comprehensive framework for a definitive solution.
That would allow a return to the path of peace and lead
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and an end to
the Israeli occupation of Syrian and Lebanese
territories. We look forward to the success of those
efforts towards a comprehensive settlement.

