Ms. McKenna (Canada) (spoke in French): First of
all, I want to thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation
to discuss the impact of climate change on the security
of our planet. This is an urgent and essential discussion.
I thank the Dominican Republic for taking up this
important leadership.

(spoke in English)

Climate change is the defining issue of our time.
It is an environmental issue, an economic issue and
quite clearly one of the greatest security challenges
of the twenty-first century, threatening lives and
livelihoods of citizens around the world. Like many
here today, Canada is working hard to both mitigate the
risks of climate change and adapt to its impacts. For
Canadians, climate-related natural disasters, wildfires,
extreme heat, droughts, rising sea levels, melting ice
and thawing permafrost in Canada's north represent not
just inconveniences but existential threats, in particular
to some of our most vulnerable, including indigenous
peoples living in the Arctic and in rural and remote
communities. Canada's top military commander
recently said that one of the greatest security threats to
Canada is not military, but that of natural disasters, in
Canada and around the world.

Countries around the world, especially least
developed countries and small island developing
States, are feeling great impacts that threaten their very
survival. Whether the issue is desertification in parts of
Africa, forced migration of vulnerable people creating
climate refugees, conflict over water scarcity, or rising
sea levels and tropical storms for small island States,
the security aspects of climate change are a near and
present danger.
As Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
emphasized, climate change should be Viewed as one
issue in a web of factors that can lead to conflict. As
many have emphasized, for the third year in a row, the
World Economic Forum, in its Global Risks Report,
found that world leaders rank climate change and
climate-change-related risks as the top risks in the
world, higher than large-scale cyberattacks or terrorism.

It is important to emphasize that viewing climate
change through a peace-and-security lens does not
undermine the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the commitment of countries around the world
to take ambitious action domestically to reduce their
greenhouse-gas emissions. It complements it by
expanding the frame to recognize that climate change
is not simply an environmental problem.

For those reasons, Canada is of the firm view that
the issue of climate and security must have a clear
place in the Council's deliberations. We recognize the
Council's leadership through resolutions passed in
recent years recognizing the adverse effects of climate
change on the stability and security of regions, such as
the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel.

To ensure that the Security Council is equipped
to continue to play this leadership role, and as
recommended by the youth representative this
morning, Canada supports the establishment of a new
special representative of the Secretary-General on
climate and security, as well as the establishment of a
hub for the topic within the United Nations system. It
is critical that the Security Council better understand
climate-related security risks and report on climate
risks when analysing a conflict or region.

Complex problems require collective solutions.
In climate change we have perhaps one of our most
complex problems. We must act together. I want to take
this opportunity to emphasize that Canada, as a country
seeking a non-permanent seat on the Security Council
for the 2021-2022 term, will continue to advocate for
results-based solutions in the nexus between climate
and peace and security, and as a voice for those
countries most affected by climate change, including
our hemispheric partners in the Caribbean, and all
small island developing States.

