Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the outset, let me express our deep
gratitude to you for the manner in which you have
guided our work. You have demonstrated talent and
exceptional mastery under very trying circumstances.
As you now prepare to leave New York, Sir, I would
like to express to you our admiration and our gratitude
and personally convey to you the expression of my
friendship. I hope that, as we say in French, the winds
will be favourable to you and that life will be beautiful
for you, Ambassador Ilkin.

The Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic will soon make a statement on behalf of the
European Union. France endorses that statement. I
would like to provide several additional comments,
after also having thanked Ambassador Tanin for his
presentation.

First, I would like to commend the tireless efforts
of Mr. Kai Eide to ensure better consistency in the
international efforts in Afghanistan under the auspices
of the United Nations. He has greatly contributed
personally to the momentum and the increased
mobilization of the international community, which has
allowed the United Nations to engage itself,
particularly since the Paris Conference, as a key player
in coordination of international efforts.

The 20 August elections should be an opportunity
for Afghans to freely and democratically express their
choice with regard to the direction they want to give
their country. In order to ensure the full legitimacy and
universal acceptance of the candidates elected to lead
the country, the electoral process must be transparent,
fair and credible. To that end, every candidate should,
in particular, be able to campaign while enjoying the
same access to the media and the country. I know that
is one of the Special Representative's concerns. As
Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner emphasized in
Kabul in May during his meetings with the main
candidates, they must also feel individually responsible
for the proper conduct of the elections.

The responsibility for the holding of the elections
belongs first and foremost to the Afghans themselves.
But the United Nations has an important role to play in
assisting them. We trust that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General will continue down the path
he has embarked upon and provide his vigilant
assistance to the electoral process.

Continuing the work to rebuild the country will
depend upon the success of the elections. As the
Special Representative has pointed out, significant
progress was made in a number of areas in the course
of the past year. That progress must now be
consolidated. In particular, I should like to refer to the
increased strength of the Afghan National Army. The
progressive handover to Afghan forces of
responsibility for security in the Kabul region, which
began in August 2008 and in which the French
contingent was especially involved, has led to an
improvement of the security situation in that region.
That is proof that "Afghanization" works and is
continuing.

A new element has been the renewed effort to
reform and strengthen the police. In that connection,
President Sarkozy has taken the decision to involve the
French Gendarmerie in tasks in Afghanistan related to
training and mentoring the Afghan National Police.
That effort is part of the future deployment of the
European Union's gendarmerie force, which will be
particularly suited to provide operational training to the
Afghan police to prepare it to take over military
activities on the ground.

We have taken note of the progress referred to by
the Secretary-General in the area of coordinating
international assistance, even though there is still much
to do. In that regard, we look forward with interest to
the outcome of the work being done by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to develop benchmarks and criteria to measure results.
Those indicators will be a useful tool in encouraging
international partners and the Afghan Government to
fully commit themselves to the effective
implementation of the commitments undertaken in
Paris and Bucharest, and later reaffirmed at The Hague.

We have also been interested to learn of the wish
of the Secretary-General that new resources be
allocated to UNAMA. We understand his desire to be
able to count on the necessary capacities as soon as
possible, especially with regard to the coordination of
assistance. We shall therefore keep an open mind in
considering the requests to be made by the Secretariat.

Developments in the area of human rights
continue to be a source of great concern. Afghan
authorities should, with the support of the international
community, increase their efforts in that regard. I know
that is a concern of the Special Representative as well.
The issue of women's rights in particular should
continue to be a priority of the Afghan Governments.

I should also like to reiterate our ongoing concern
about the issue of civilian casualties, primarily caused
by deliberate attacks by the Taliban and other extremist
groups. However, France continues to be aware that
there is still a need to intensify efforts by both
Government and international forces in that regard.

The momentum in strengthening regional
cooperation was once again in evidence at the recent
Trieste meeting on Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
should collectively ensure the implementation of the
commitments made in recent months in the areas
referred to by the Special Representative at Trieste, in
particular with regard to railway infrastructure and
energy.

Despite the individual characteristics of both
countries, there is also a need to develop a coordinated
approach to Afghanistan and Pakistan that addresses
the many common challenges that exist. Allow me to
take this opportunity to commend the determination of
Pakistani officials in the fight under way in the Swat
Valley. The Government of Pakistan can count on
France's solidarity in that fight, which should focus on
all armed extremist groups active on Pakistani territory
and which we know must be part of a long-term
comprehensive strategy.

The stabilization of Afghanistan and the region as
a whole is a priority for us all. It is for that reason that,
for two years now, France has worked to substantially
strengthen its military commitment in Afghanistan. We
are aware of the need to for a comprehensive approach,
and we want to help to put one in place by committing
as fully as possible. We have also significantly
strengthened our political and civilian commitment by
massively increasing our 2009 reconstruction
assistance, which will amount to €45 million.
Afghanistan can rely on France's tireless commitment
alongside the United Nations.

