Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I also thank the delegation of your friendly country for
holding this important meeting. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, as well
as the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi
Brou, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
for their comprehensive and valuable briefings on
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a focus on
the relationship between the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is more important than ever.
The Secretary-General has stressed on more than one
occasion that such cooperation is a need, not a choice.
Our world today faces numerous extremely complex
challenges that require us to make concerted efforts
and achieve a united stance.

The challenges posed by the protracted conflicts
and disputes on the African continent have highlighted
the role of the United Nations as a key player. In 1960,
the first peacekeeping operation in Africa was deployed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to assist
the Government in maintaining law and order. Since
then, thousands of peacekeepers have been deployed
in approximately 31 peacekeeping operations in many
African States. Today, the African continent hosts
seven of 14 United Nations peacekeeping operations, in
addition to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

The African continent is vast, with diverse
geographic, ethnic, cultural, social and historical
limitations. Those limitations give rise to subregional
realities with political and economic dimensions
under the umbrella of the AU, realities that have
created a new form of cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU communities because
each conflict is of a different nature and has different
characteristics. Security Council resolution 2033
(2012), which calls for continued consultation with
the AU and economic regional communities on peace
and security challenges, encourages the enhancement
and promotion of cooperation between the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, on the one hand,
and, on the other, the AU subregional organizations,
including ECOWAS, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the East African Community, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of Central African States.

With respect to developing and improving
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations,
particularly with regard to peacekeeping operations, we
must stress that predictable and sustainable financing is
the greatest challenge facing all United Nations funds.
We would underline the remarks made by the Secretary-
General's during the Security Council meeting held
yesterday on funding African peacekeeping operations
and the importance of supporting them, if possible,
through assessed contributions (see S/PV.8413).
Hence, Kuwait looks forward to a consensus in the
Council on a draft resolution to guarantee financing for
peacekeeping operations. The draft is being submitted
by Ethiopia, Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea, and
is currently subject to consultations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU is an explicit example of the application of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
That cooperation in the fields of peace and security is
manifested in two Arab-African countries - Somalia
and the Sudan - through the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and UNAMID, respectively.
Those missions are two different successful models
of regional partnerships. The Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, in addressing the issue of partnerships,
renews host Governments' commitment regarding
peacekeeping operations to do their utmost in the area
of peacebuilding and maintaining peace.

All States that sponsored the Declaration are
committed to supporting peacekeeping operations,
which would provide the United Nations, the AU
and subregional organizations in Africa a clear path
for cooperation. In that regard, we underscore the
importance of launching effective initiatives to reform
and develop cooperation in peacekeeping operations
and enhance United Nations efforts to support the
capacities of the AU and subregional organizations
in preventive diplomacy, including mediation, early
warning, reconstruction and post-conflict development.
That was reflected in the 2010 initiative of the forum
of mediators and peace envoys in Africa. The forum
is considered to have been the first gathering of the
Heads of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions of the United Nations with their peers in the
AU to coordinate peacemaking, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping policies at the United Nations and at the
continental level. We look forward to the AU achieving
its desired goals through the Silencing the Guns on the
African continent by 2020 initiative.

In conclusion, given the conflicts in the Arab region,
the State of Kuwait looks forward to consolidating
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States in the areas of early warning,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution through
peaceful means, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the Charter of the League of
Arab States.

