Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. Let me also extend our warm appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of India and his
delegation for the wonderful work they did last month.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Ne'stor
Osorio for his succinct briefing and commend his
excellent leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We appreciate the
work done by the Committee in the past three months
in furtherance of its mandate. We congratulate the
members of the Panel of Experts on their
reappointment and plan to continue to work with them
and the Committee in promoting a more secure world.

It is encouraging that Member States have
continued to report incidents of non-compliance to the
1737 Committee in addition to extending the necessary
support to the Panel of Experts in its investigations.
Many of the subsequent investigations by the Panel,
including the January visit to Nigeria, concern Iran's
transfer of conventional arms and related materiel
prohibited under resolution 1747 (2007). This
development is worrisome given the devastating effect
of small arms on the security, stability and
development of countries and regions.

Nigeria and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) have consistently voiced
their concerns about the growing trend in arms
trafficking in the subregion, which infringes on the
provisions of the ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Materials. We therefore urge Member States to
maintain a high level of vigilance in monitoring and
curtailing these movements pursuant to resolution 1747
(2007) and to uphold the obligations under the various
negotiated instruments on small arms.

They should also report alleged sanctions
violations to the Committee and cooperate with the
Panel of Experts in its investigation of incidents of
non-compliance. It is essential that States be provided
with the resources, facilities and expertise necessary to
enhance their ability to fulfil their obligations under
these resolutions. We further encourage the Panel of
Experts to continue to examine these activities to
determine if there are any patterns of sanctions
violations and circumventions.

Nigeria has the utmost respect for the multilateral
accountability and transparency mechanisms for arms
transfers, including United Nations treaties and
protocols dedicated to covering illicit transfers of
conventional arms. We have further demonstrated our
commitment to this noble goal by signing the
ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We believe that complementary action at the
regional and international levels on the marking and
tracing of arms will be helpful in underpinning the
achievements recorded thus far in the West African
subregion.

The recent report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicates
that Iran has not fully met its obligations, nor has it
established international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. We call on
Iran to extend full cooperation to the IAEA and respect
its obligations under the resolutions of the Security
Council. We therefore urge Iran to engage in
constructive dialogue as an expression of its
commitment to a peaceful nuclear programme.

