Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like at the outset, Sir, to express my great pleasure
at seeing you preside over the Council this month. We are
fully confident that your well-known diplomatic skills and
experience will be a great asset to the Council in its
work.

I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude for all the kind words addressed to
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, President of the Council for
June.

I should also like to welcome His Excellency, the
Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola, who takes a
keen interest in participating in the public meetings of the
Council devoted to the situation in his country.

The Council's consideration of the situation in
Angola takes place today in a climate that differs greatly
from that which prevailed at the time of our last meeting
on the subject two months ago. The steps taken by the
Government of Angola and UNITA during the last two
months are, in our view, extremely positive developments.
The existence of some negative aspects does not detract
from their positive nature. These negative aspects are
attributed to the suspicion and mistrust that are the result
of more than two decades of devastating civil war.

The delegation of Egypt has read the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Angola. We should
like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, and to the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for their
efforts, particularly in view of the fact that they are
carrying out their tasks under very trying circumstances.

 

The report of the Secretary-General makes it clear that
the challenges currently facing the peace process in Angola
can be summed up in two main factors. First is the need for
UNITA to complete the quartering of all its combatants and
to hand over all its weapons and military equipment and
ammunition to the United Nations in a manner that would
allow movement towards the subsequent stages of the peace
process. The second factor is the need for the reintegration
of the demobilized military personnel of UNITA and the
Angolan Armed Forces into civilian life. This is an
extremely difficult task, particularly since such personnel
number nearly 90,000.

We believe that facing these challenges constitutes an
important basis for the achievement of national peace in
Angola. If those challenges are not faced, the political
solution will remain fragile. We also believe that failure to
implement the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol within the
agreed time-frame will erode the credibility of the whole
peace process and will not help create a political climate
favourable to beginning a new stage for the Angolan
people, to bring them closer to national reconciliation, and
to achieving rehabilitation, reconstruction and sustainable
social, economic and human development.

The Angolan Government has recently taken
praiseworthy steps, foremost among them beginning the
disarmament of the civilian population, completing the
quartering of the rapid reaction police, and the partial
withdrawal of UNITA troops to the quartering areas, in
addition to the beginning of the induction and
reincorporation of some UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces. All these are positive steps that
reinforce mutual trust, and they deserve reciprocal positive
steps from UNITA.

The eyes of the world are today on UNITA and its
leader, Mr. Savimbi. He is being urged to take bold steps
and initiatives in the right direction. We are confident that
he will give the supreme interests of his people precedence
over any other consideration. The people of Angola have
the right to live in peace and harmony. They have the right
to start the real battle to achieve human, social and
economic development. The negative ramifications of the
civil war are no secret. The unemployment rate in Angola,
which has climbed higher than 50 per cent, and the
country's severe financial deficit and external debt burden
are all clear proof of the deterioration of the economic
situation in this sisterly African country.

We hope that the August meeting between President
dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will lead to definitive solutions
to all outstanding political matters, foremost among which
are, first, the question of the post of Vice-President,
which is to be occupied by UNIT A; secondly, the
assumption by some UNITA leaders of ministerial posts
in the new Government; and, thirdly, the occupation by
UNITA of seats reserved for it in the Parliament and in
the civilian administration at the local, provincial and
national levels. This, naturally, would mean that UNITA
would be transformed into a political party acting within
the framework of Angolan legitimacy.
We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
Angola today needs the support and assistance of the
international community more than ever. The war has
destroyed the basic facilities of the State, including the
educational and health systems. According to United
Nations statistics, the mortality rate of children under five
has reached 320 per 1,000. The rate of registration of
children in primary schools is 45 per cent of the target.
These figures speak for themselves; they do not need any
explanation.

On another level, one result of the war is 10 million
land-mines - the highest rate in the world. Every citizen
in Angola has a land-mine waiting for him or her. In
addition to the presence of 1.25 million displaced persons
within the boundaries of Angola, there are almost 300,000
refugees in neighbouring countries. This, in brief, is the
situation for the coming stage, which makes it incumbent
on the international community and the relevant United
Nations organs to extend all possible support and
assistance to realize the Angolan people's legitimate hope
for and aspiration to a better life. Egypt, for its part, will
hold back no possible support or assistance to the
brotherly Angolan people.

The Egyptian delegation supports the extension of
the mandate of UNAVEM. III for a further three months,
until 11 October. My delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council. It is our hope that we
will periodically receive from the Secretary-General
reports and information on developments in that sisterly
country.

