Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Let me join previous
speakers in welcoming Ambassador Staffan de Mistura
on the occasion of his first appearance at the Security
Council as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan. 1 would also like to thank him
for his briefing and his comprehensive overview of the
situation in the country. Italy looks forward to working
with him and wishes him success in his challenging
mission.

Let me also take this opportunity to express my
sincerest condolences for yesterday's killing in Kabul
of a United Nation's staff member, an Afghan national.
I also Wish to express my appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Tanin, for his important remarks.

I would like to underline that Italy fully supports
the statement to be delivered by the head of the
delegation of the European Union. I would like to add
just a few remarks drawing on our national experience
and our significant civil and military commitment to
Afghanistan.

The Kabul Conference, which will be co-chaired
by the United Nations, will open in less than three
weeks. It will not be a pledging event; rather it will be
an opportunity for the Government of Afghanistan to
renew its commitment to its people. At the same time,
President Karzai is expected to follow up on the
commitments made at the London Conference, namely,
assuming greater responsibility in the areas of security,
governance and development.

The international community, for its part, must
continue to encourage the Afghan authorities to make
further efforts to speed up the transition process, the
fundamental pillars of which will be formally
determined at the Kabul Conference. As emphasized
previously by Special Representative de Mistura,
donors are also expected to commit to the
harmonization and alignment of aid, ensuring that
Afghan institutions achieve the highest degree of
ownership. Italy fully shares that goal and is already
channeling most of its funds through the Afghan
budget.
We share the View that the military presence in
Afghanistan is still necessary to guarantee a stable
security framework. Strengthening international
cooperation and enhancing training and mentoring
programmes for the Afghan National Security Forces
and Police are mainstays of that effort.

The number of Italian trainers in the framework
of the NATO training mission should reach a total of
almost 600 by the end of this year. In that regard,
approximately 400 training and mentoring operatives
have already been deployed in the field, namely in
Herat province. The number will be brought to
approximately 520 by the end of this summer. We are
currently planning the deployment of a support team of
40 specialists who will train Afghan helicopter pilots at
the airbase of Shindand. We are also planning the
deployment of a group of 30 carabinieri to train Afghan
border police. In addition, the specialization training
centre of the Guardia di Finanza - the Italian financial
police - has just completed a three-week training
course for 20 officers of the Afghan customs and
border police. The initiative aims to strengthen the
border control capacity of the Afghan authorities.

The military presence, however, cannot be open-
ended. It has to be accompanied, and then replaced, by
increased civilian cooperation. Afghanistan is not just a
security challenge; it can also be a source of economic
opportunity. For example, the western region of the
country, including Herat, whose provincial
reconstruction team is led by Italy, provides an
example of best practices at work, with the positive
cooperation in the marble and agro-industrial sectors
becoming a model of private sector development.
Boosting investment and trade in Afghanistan could, no
doubt, break the vicious cycle of poverty and
instability.

That approach must go hand in hand with
increased efforts to strengthen governance both at
national and local levels and to support anti-corruption
strategies and capacity-building programmes in the
public sector. The key to success in Afghanistan lies in
building strong and reliable institutions and in
consolidating trust between institutions and the people.
In that context, I would like to mention the support
provided by the Italian Government to the Independent
National Legal Training Centre. Thanks to this and
other similar initiatives, over 2,500 judges, prosecutors
and Afghan officials have been trained so far. Another
Italian initiative - a training course for Afghan
diplomats - is already being prepared.

Provincial reconstruction teams should also play
an important role in the transition process. We
therefore support expanding the scope of teams'
intervention and giving it more of a civilian focus. At
the same time, Afghan authorities must play a more
extensive and independent role in the management of
security, governance and development.

Italy is now more convinced than ever that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) should remain at the helm of the civilian
sector, ensuring coherence in international assistance.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment, as outlined in his latest report
(S/2101/318), to a continued long-term presence in
Afghanistan.

We also welcome UNAMA's continued support
for the electoral process and appreciate Special
Representative de Mistura's efforts, which have led to
renewed consensus following last year's strained
presidential elections. We also commend the concrete
approach of the United Nations Development
Programme's project on enhancing legal and electoral
capacity for tomorrow. In terms of its engagement,
content and expected goals, it seems to create the right
conditions for long-term reform of the electoral
system. We hope that the lessons learned from the 2009
elections will be taken into account so as to improve
the electoral process beyond this fall's parliamentary
elections and build a lasting and truly democratic
electoral system.

Italy welcomes the Peace Jirga, which took place
at the beginning of this month and focused on the new
strategy for reintegrating insurgents. Italy favours that
process, provided that it is adequately balanced,
Afghan-led, inclusive and endorsed by the international
community. Italy is willing to contribute to the
financial instruments that will be set up in this context,
provided they allow for full control over the use of
resources.

Finally, with regard to regional cooperation,
which remains an indispensable part of the overall
strategy of stabilization and economic development in
Afghanistan, Italy strongly supports initiatives based
on a consensus platform open to the participation of all
the countries of the region and the international
community. We therefore look forward to the
development of the Kabul Silk Road initiative recently
launched by Special Representative de Mistura.

The importance of a regional approach,
particularly in countering illicit trafficking, as
reaffirmed at the meeting of foreign ministers of the
Group of Eight held in Trieste in June 2009, as well as
in London last January, is widely recognized. Regional
programmes such as the one developed by United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in line with the
deliverables of the Paris Pact initiative and the
Rainbow Strategy indeed support participating Member
States in their response to the threat of drug trafficking
and related crimes, such as money-laundering,
smuggling in precursor chemicals and organized crime.
Our involvement must continue, and possibly increase.

