Ms. Shalev (Israel): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for your stewardship of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.

At the outset, I wish to express the deepest
sympathy of the people and the Government of Israel
regarding the recent tragedy in which the Polish
President and the members of his delegation lost their
lives in a plane crash. May the nation of Poland know
no more bereavement.

This debate occurs between two important days
in Israel. On Monday, Yom Ha'Shoah, we
commemorated the Jewish victims of the Holocaust.
And next Monday, Yom Ha'Zikaron, we will
commemorate our soldiers who have fallen in war and
all Israelis murdered by terrorism. Only after these two
remembrance days can we put our hearts into
celebrating our Day of Independence. These two days
of remembrance shed light on our people's unending
struggle to build a homeland for the Jewish people, a
free, independent and democratic State. Such solemn
days signal our desire to live in peace, prosperity and
cooperation with our neighbours.

Yet in the pursuit of peace in the Middle East, all
parties must realize that they have not only rights, but
obligations as well. The Palestinians and the wider
Arab world must show, in both word and deed, that
they too are committed to the peace process. They
should demonstrate their will not only to demand rights
but also to accept responsibilities. They must take
tangible steps to combat terrorism, to put an end to
incitement, to engage in direct negotiations and to
begin a process of normalization with Israel.

Israel is hopeful that the proximity talks will
serve as a stepping stone towards the resumption of
direct, bilateral peace negotiations. Only through such
negotiations can we hope to reach a comprehensive
peace agreement. Yet the success of such talks - and

their transition into direct negotiations - depends
upon all in the region taking confidence-building steps.

The Hamas terrorist rulers of the Gaza Strip
maintain Gaza as an epicentre of terrorism. With
support, financing and arms from Iran, Hamas
brutalizes its own people while launching deadly
attacks against Israeli civilians. On 1 April, across the
Egyptian-Gaza border in Sinai, a massive quantity of
weapons destined for Gaza was uncovered. Throughout
February and March, a wave of Qassam rockets and
other terrorist attacks exposed the civilian population
of southern Israel to serious threats and imminent
danger. As a result of these attacks, one agricultural
worker in Israel was killed, while dozens of civilians
were injured. Only yesterday, the Israel Defense Forces
discovered terrorists planting explosive devices along
the Israel-Gaza border.

Given this reality, Israel will exercise its right of
self-defence, pursuant to international law. Israel will
never fail to fulfil its obligation to protect the people of
Israel. Israel appreciates the efforts of the international
community for the support of humanitarian work in
Gaza. We maintain close coordination with the
Secretary-General and relevant United Nations bodies
for the supply of humanitarian aid to Gaza. In 2009
alone, 738,576 tons of humanitarian commodities were
transferred to the Gaza Strip and more than 100 million
litres of diesel were delivered to the Gaza power
station; 10,544 Gazan patients and their companions
received medical treatment in Israel. These numbers
reflect only part of the humanitarian aid provided to
the people of Gaza. Yet Israel is still a convenient
scapegoat for the situation in Gaza. However, the truth
remains self-evident.

The complicated situation in Gaza is a direct
result of the Hamas terrorist occupation. The
complicated situation in Gaza is a direct result of
Hamas's continued rejection of the obligations laid out
by the international community, namely: recognize
Israel, renounce violence and accept previous
agreements. The complicated situation in Gaza is also a
result of Hamas's ongoing imprisonment of Gilad
Shalit who is denied his human rights, including access
to international humanitarian personnel.

Beyond Gaza, the West Bank offers an alternative
future. As a direct result of Israeli-Palestinian
economic and security cooperation, life for Palestinians
and Israelis continues to improve. However, obstacles

remain. Violence and terrorism are ever-present
challenges. Israel is deeply dismayed to see a street in
Ramallah named in honour of Yehiye Ayash, a Hamas
terrorist-mastermind responsible for the murder of
hundreds of innocent Israeli civilians: men, women and
children. In another disturbing event, a town square
adjacent to Ramallah was renamed in honour of Dalal
Mughrabi, a leader in one of the bloodiest terrorist
attacks against Israel, the Coastal Road massacre, in
which 38 Israeli and American civilians were
murdered. Given that the Road Map for Peace
explicitly states that all official Palestinian institutions
must end incitement against Israel, what message does
the Palestinian Authority send by publicly honouring
terrorists?

At this point, I would like to respond briefly to
concerns that have been expressed regarding recent
measures relating to the prevention of the illegal
infiltration of individuals into the West Bank. These
concerns reflect a misunderstanding of the effect and
purpose of those measures. In fact, such measures
provide significant safeguards and due process
protection for existing legislation; they do not extend
beyond it. Let me be clear: these measures apply only
to unlawful infiltrators in the West Bank and do not
apply to other residents of the area.

Let me turn to the greatest danger facing the
Middle East and the world: Iran. Iran continues to
threaten to wipe Israel off the map of the world while
denying the Holocaust and reigniting anti-Semitism. At
the same time Iran supports terrorism and violence
against Israel and Jews far beyond the Gaza Strip. In
Lebanon, the Hizbullah terrorist organization continues
to amass arms from Syria and from its Iranian patrons,
with the active consent and support of Syrian
authorities. Recently, Syria supplied Hizbullah with
long-range missiles in an overt violation of resolution
1701 (2006). By doing so, Syria actively threatens the
fragile stability in the Middle East.

Yet the most alarming danger is that Iran
continues to pursue nuclear weapons capabilities, while
mocking the diplomatic overtures of the international
community. Such behaviour endangers not only our
region, not merely a specific group of countries: it
endangers us all, and this is recognized by all. The
Council therefore has an obligation to translate this
consensus into timely and effective action. To use the
words of a great poet, "If it were done when 'tis done,
then 'twere well it were done quickly" (Shakespeare, Macbeth, Act 1, scene 7).

The Iranian threat, the menace of terrorism, the
transfer of weapons to terrorist groups, the incitement
and hatred taught to Arab children: these are the true
dangers facing the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine. All in the region have a right to
live without threats, and all in the region have the
responsibility to confront these dangers. If those in our
region recognize the relationship between rights and
responsibilities, we will then be standing at the
threshold of a new era for peace in the Middle East.

