Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We also join the other
delegations in conveying our deepest condolences to
all the bereaved families over the tragic loss of human
life in the helicopter crash in Sierra Leone. We
understand that on board were also Pakistani
peacekeepers, who died in the accident, and we thank
the Council members who have expressed their grief
and sorrow over this tragic loss, and we will be
conveying those sentiments to Islamabad.

We would like to thank the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as their two Prosecutors,
for their comprehensive and very useful presentations
today.

Pakistan attaches great importance to the role
played by international tribunals set up by the United
Nations to prosecute crimes against humanity under the
genocide conventions and international humanitarian
law. The cornerstone of our policy is to promote
respect for and compliance with international law. We
support all efforts aimed at increasing the efficiency of
the ICTY and the ICTR. We hope that these efforts will
help in the fulfilment of the completion strategy of
these two Tribunals.

We appreciate the efforts of the two Tribunals in
pursuance of the completion strategy, as reiterated in
resolution 1534 (2004). We have taken note of the
difficulties the two Tribunals are currently facing and
how that might affect their completion strategy.
Pakistan stands ready to contribute to the efforts of the
two Tribunals to fulfil their completion strategies. We
also believe that there is a need for all States to
cooperate fully with the two Tribunals.

We are heartened to note the statement by the
Prosecutor for the ICTY that completion of the
investigations of the remaining un-indicted high-level
targets will be achieved as planned by the end of this
year. We are also pleased to know that the ICTR is on
schedule. We understand that the cases at the ad hoc
Tribunals are legally and factually very complex. We
have also noted the efforts of the Tribunals to address
such complexities.

Before concluding my brief remarks, I would like
to address a question to the President of the ICTR:
How would the arrest of 15 indictees and 16 suspects
who are at large affect the completion strategy if some
of those at large are not arrested soon or are arrested
after 2010?

