Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May, and takes note with interest of the three briefings
given by the representatives of Austria, France and
Costa Rica.

It is imperative that all States comply with their
international legal obligations and cooperate in the
implementation of United Nations resolutions on
countering terrorism. When crimes against humanity
are not punished and the use and abuse of State
terrorism are tolerated, it affects the consolidation and
promotion of democracy, the freedom of peoples and
international peace and security.

Our country reiterates its full condemnation of
terrorism and reaffirms its commitment to countering it
in all its forms and manifestations, with strict
adherence to international law, in particular
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Venezuela has been absolutely
consistent in its adherence to the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted in September 2006 by the
General Assembly in its resolution 60/288.

On 28 May 2008, the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States, upon Venezuela's
request, adopted a declaration on strengthening
cooperation in the fight against terrorism and the
impunity of perpetrators, based on Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). The declaration notes that
terrorism in all its manifestations affects the full
enjoyment and exercise of human rights and represents
a serious threat to peace. The declaration emphasizes
that all States shall deny safe haven to those who
finance, plan and commit terrorist acts or support them.

On 6 October 1976, a Cubana de Aviacion plane
exploded in the air. Seventy-three people died as a
result of a criminal action planned and carried out by
Luis Posada Carriles, Orlando Bosch and other
terrorists. Posada Carriles, a convicted and confessed
criminal, who was sentenced in our country and was
serving his punishment, escaped from a Venezuelan
prison with outside help.

The Venezuelan Government, upon learning of
the presence of this terrorist in the territory of the
United States and the freedom he enjoys there,
requested his extradition so that he should answer to
the law of Venezuela, in accordance with existing
bilateral cooperation agreements on this matter. The
Bolivarian Government reiterates the request of
extradition of terrorist Posada Carriles so that he can
be prosecuted for his crimes in Venezuela.

In conclusion, Venezuela reiterates its call upon
the Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to activate all the mechanisms available to
them and demand the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) to allow the timely extradition to
Venezuela of terrorist Luis Posada Carriles.

