Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Yesterday, we were informed that 200,000 to 300,000
refugees were on the move over a 9-kilometre stretch of
road in eastern Zaire. Today - fortunately - we know they
were headed in the right direction. Nevertheless, the image
conveyed by this and other, less auspicious, information
from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is both familiar and shocking. It is familiar, in that it
reminds us of the human suffering we witnessed in the
same part of the world as recently as 1994, suffering and
brutality of such intensity and on such a scale that it indeed
could be said to approach the greatest horror of the
twentieth century, the Holocaust.

Without any doubt, genocide had been perpetrated to
devastating effect and, equally clearly, the international
community failed to act to stop it. In the aftermath of the
7,000 or 8,000 people slaughtered for each of a hundred
days in Rwanda, we again said, "Never again". We also
said that we would improve the United Nations capacity to
react, and we have begun to bring changes to the
Organization's capacity to react quickly to crises by
enhancing its ability to deploy rapidly.

Now, barely two years later, we are again witness to
another human tragedy unfolding in the Great Lakes region.
A million and a half people in dire need have for the past
few weeks been suffering from our inability to come to
their assistance.

The more fortunate, the better-cared-for and healthier
members of the refugee community in the Goma region
may finally be going home, but we must bear in mind that
we have completely lost track of hundreds of thousands of
people dispersed in the mountains and forests of eastern
Zaire. Those people have been suffering a far more cruel
fate than those who were crossing the Rwandese border
today. They are, by all accounts, in truly desperate shape.
Food and medicine sit idly in storage, close at hand yet out
of reach of the needy, for aid agencies are being prevented
from accomplishing their tasks by armed men who seek to

 

use the pain and suffering of non-combatants for political
and military purposes.

In its resolution 1078 (1996) of seven days ago, the
Security Council stated clearly that the countries in the
region had a responsibility to create the conditions
necessary for the speedy and peaceful resolution of the
crisis. The Council also declared that the international
community needed urgently to act.
Our Prime Minister has done so, with the strong
support of the Canadian people. One of the results of the
consultations he has held with a score of world leaders
and international organizations, including the Organization
of African Unity, is Canada's decision to take a
substantial role in mounting a multinational humanitarian
intervention force to make possible the safe delivery of
humanitarian aid and to facilitate the voluntary
repatriation of refugees - that is, to save lives.

(spoke in English)

We did not set out to lead this mission, but we have
been gratified by the response from Member States when
it appeared that an offer of leadership might get such a
force into the field. We bring to this task a combination
of capacity, compassion and commitment. In announcing
our wish to assist, Prime Minister Chretien explained to
Canadians that, while Canada may not be a super-Power,
we remain a nation that speaks on the international scene
with moral authority. We believe that this is why the
international community has responded to the lead taken
by our Prime Minister.

We have no illusions about the risks and difficulties
involved, but we are absolutely convinced that there is no
alternative but to act. When we said, "Never again", we
meant it.

Canada cannot begin to act alone in such
circumstances. Clearly, we need not even contemplate
doing so. Countries are responding generously to the
Secretary-General's call to action in eastern Zaire. A
critical mass is already in place. Over 20 countries have
already committed over 10,000 troops. While the main
body of troops committed to date are from France, the
United Kingdom, the United States and Canada, we now
have firm offers from Europe, North America, Africa and
Latin America, as well as expressions of interest from
Asia.

 

In addition, we are only a little less encouraged by our
efforts to find donors to contribute to the United Nations
trust fund that is being established to support the
participation of African countries. More help in this area,
however, is urgently required from those who can afford
such contributions but who are not able to provide direct
assistance.

We now know that we have enough to do the basic
job. But putting together the multinational force is still a
work in progress. We need additional elements if that force
is to have the proper balance and the maximum desired
impact on the ground and to allow it to prepare the way for
follow-on forces.

We are especially grateful for the firm offer of
battalions from Senegal, Ethiopia and Malawi. African
participation in the multinational force is, of course, of vital
importance to its legitimacy and to its effectiveness.
Regional leaders and the Organization of African Unity
have played key roles in responding to crises in Central
Africa, and their advice and support in launching this effort
will be crucial. We welcome their Vital involvement in this
mission.

Such participation is, as we know so well, extremely
expensive, and we urge as many other countries as possible
to assist African countries to bear these costs and, in
addition, to provide the strategic transport and equipment
that will be required by our African partners in this venture.
Few countries are truly capable in the field of strategic
transport, and we will be relying heavily on their generosity
and commitment in the coming days. Finally, we could use
a good deal of fairly sophisticated medical support and
would welcome offers in this area.

Lieutenant-General Maurice Baril, the former Military
Adviser to the Secretary-General, who now commands the
Canadian Army, and who would lead this multinational
force, met yesterday with representatives of more than 70
countries to discuss the concept of operations for the
proposed mission.

Let us be clear about what the countries that make up
the force are seeking to accomplish. Let us be realistic in
our expectations. This force, as noted in paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution before us, will facilitate the immediate
return of humanitarian organizations and the effective
delivery by civilian relief organizations of humanitarian aid
to alleviate the immediate suffering of displaced persons,
refugees and civilians at risk in eastern Zaire, and to
facilitate the voluntary, orderly repatriation of refugees by

 

the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
well as the voluntary return of displaced persons. It will
do no more and no less.

We do not, therefore, envisage disarmament or
interposition as elements of the force's mandate. Indeed,
disarmament cannot be part of this mandate. If it were,
we would require a much larger and more robust force
and would need to engage in a war with those who most
evidently do not wish to be disarmed. Such a war would
bring enormous and immediate harm to the very people
we are seeking to save, as the elements with guns
continue to find sanctuary within the refugee population
that they continue to hold hostage.

In addition, soldiers engaged in disarmament could
not undertake their primary and immediate mission, which
is to make possible the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. If soldiers are fighting, they cannot also be
widely dispersed in humanitarian operations. Put simply,
our intention is to concentrate on the urgent and the
achievable: to save lives, rather than to make a vain and
necessarily imperfect attempt to address all the problems
of the region.

The proposed multinational force does not constitute
all of the international community's efforts to bring peace
and stability to Central Africa. The force would be
deployed for four months, and the transition from it to a
longer-term United Nations operation must be carefully
thought out. A civil component, including direct United
Nations involvement, is envisaged alongside the force, in
order to help establish the conditions that must underlie
any long-term solution, including engendering respect for
human rights and for justice in the region.

The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Raymond Chretien, is already engaged in
addressing the underlying causes of the conflict and is
offering advice to the Secretary-General on the longer-
term role the United Nations might play in the region. If
we are successful in our humanitarian mission, this
second task would focus primarily on civilian peace-
building, including political reconciliation and the
reinforcement of the institutions of civil society. This is
absolutely essential if the age-old hatred that has fuelled
endless, bitter and bloody conflicts in Central Africa is to
yield to a willingness to coexist, and if the cycle of
violence in the Great Lakes region is to be broken.

Indeed, the welcome prospect of the imminent return
of large numbers of refugees to Rwanda adds both

 

urgency and immediacy to this process of rebuilding. There
will be an urgent requirement for donors, agencies and
programmes to coordinate their efforts with a View to
ensuring that development activities are tightly focused on
buttressing the orderly and peaceful return of these
refugees. They will need shelter, health care and a wide
variety of other assistance in order to reintegrate smoothly
into Rwandese society. They will also need understanding
and compassion from the Government and people of
Rwanda. Canada will play a full part in helping to facilitate
this huge development challenge. The Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Canada, Lloyd Axworthy, has announced the
establishment of the Canadian Peace-building Framework
to assist with projects of this kind in the area. We
encourage other donors to consider similar initiatives.

Despite the heartening news that up to one third of the
Rwandese refugees in Zaire may finally be going home,
people will continue to die in eastern Zaire in appalling
numbers and their presence there will continue to
destabilize the region. Close to 1 million refugees will
remain at risk in Zaire, even if the reports of current
refugee flows into Gisenye are fully accurate.

The international community is clearly ready to act,
and to act now. In our judgement, therefore, the
international will now exists for the formation and dispatch
of a multinational force. The Government of Canada is
prepared to work diligently with other Governments to
enable the effective deployment of a temporary
humanitarian operation in eastern Zaire. I urge the Security
Council to authorize such an operation, and without delay.

