Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary Feltman for his briefing today, and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his comments.

The topic of compliance by the Iranian regime with
its international obligations reminds me of the fable of
the scorpion and the frog. The scorpion asks the frog
for a ride across the river. The frog, quite rationally,
asks: "how do I know you will not sting me?" And the
scorpion replies: "because it would kill both of us. We
would both drown." So the frog is convinced. He lets
the Scorpion get on his back and starts across the river.
But, sure enough, midway through, the scorpion stings
him. With his last breath, the frog asks: "why?" And
the scorpion replies: "because it is in my nature."

The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/515) is filled
with devastating evidence of the nature of the Iranian
regime. In paragraph after paragraph it documents the
Iranian Government's actions in defiance of resolution
to 2231 (2015): repeated ballistic missile launches;
proven arms smuggling; illicit procurement ofballistic-
missile-related technology. Iran's destructive and
destabilizing role in the Middle East goes far beyond
its illicit missile launches.

From Syria to Yemen and Iraq to Lebanon, Iran's
support for terrorist groups continues unabated. Iran's
weapons, military advisers and arms smugglers stoke
regional conflicts and make them harder to solve.
Iran's leaders abuse their own people. The Iranian
people deserve better. The Iranian people know the
horror of chemical-weapon attacks, and so it is sad and
horrifying * the irony that the Iranian regime now
supports a dictator in Syria who uses the same evil
weapons against his own people.

But, just as alarming as the actions ofthe scorpion,
is the gullibility of the frog. It has been almost two
years since the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2231 (2015), a resolution that this report confirms has
been repeatedly and deliberately violated by the Iranian
regime. And yet the Security Council has failed to even
take minimal steps to respond to the violations. What is
more, these violations are not occurring in secret; they
are being covered in the media, and yet the Council has
done nothing. Let me give an example.

Resolution 2231 (2015) banned Iranian Major
General Soleimani from travelling outside of Iran.
It gave all Member States a clear and unambiguous
obligation to deny him entry. Nonetheless, the
Secretary-General's report cites multiple press photos
and reports of the General travelling to Syria and Iraq.
And that is not the first time he has openly travelled
to other countries. This is a violation of the Security
Council's authority, plain and simple. Furthermore, it
is one that is occurring out in the open for the entire
world to see.

The Secretary-General's report makes clear that
Iran is in violation ofresolution 2231 (2015). And so the
question becomes: what is the Security Council going
to do about it? What will we do to make Iran understand
that resolution 2231 (2015) means something? We as the
Security Council must stand behind the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015). We must strictly enforce them
and show Iran that we will not tolerate its egregious
flouting of United Nations resolutions. Those measures
are there for a reason, and the Council should be able
to enforce them. For its part, the United States will not
continue to turn a blind eye to the Iranian regime's
behaviour. In its national capacity, the United States
will do its part to enforce resolution 2231 (2015). We
will work with our global partners to interdict cargo
that it prohibits, and we will continue to impose our
own sanctions on those who abet violations of it.

With regard to the parts of the resolution that
address the nuclear deal, as we have said previously,
the United States is now undertaking a comprehensive
review of that policy. Until the review is completed,
we will comply with our commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, and we expect Iran to
do the same. A continuance of the Iranian regime's
destructive, destabilizing behaviour will prevent
it from ever having a normal relationship with the
United States or the rest of the world, and its continued
oppression of its own people speaks volumes about its
true nature. At a military parade last September, the
Iranian Government first displayed the missile that
it fired into Syria last week. The new missiles were
accompanied by a banner that read "If the leaders of the
Zionist regime make a mistake, the Islamic Republic
will turn Tel Aviv and Haifa to dust". Those are not the
words ofa peace-loving regime or a responsible member
of the international community. They are the words of
a scorpion. The Security Council must recognize that
and act accordingly.

