Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Security Council is meeting for the third
time in less than a month to discuss the illegal practices
of the Israeli occupation. Today, we are discussing in
particular the recent decision of the Israeli Government
to begin work on the second phase of what it refers to
as the separation fence.

We have just listened to the statement of the
representative of the Government of occupation and
terrorism - the Israeli Government. We were not, of
course, surprised that the statement contained many
lies and allegations. His comments are only part of a
campaign to distort reality and mislead international
public opinion - a campaign that has been going on
for more than 55 years. The fact that he did not say a
word about where the wall is being built is proof that
his comments are mere allegations. Incidentally, it is
being built on the occupied Palestinian territories -
perhaps the representative of Israel is not aware of that
fact. He did not say in his statement that Israel has, de
facto, annexed land, that the wall has been built on
territory that is under dispute, or that that had been
done by means of fait accompli and the logic of force
alone. What are referred to as the disputed territories
are the remains of the Palestinian territories. Israel
wants to take control of what is left of the Palestinian
territories by using that particular logic.

Those who know Israel are well aware that this
method is not unusual. It comes as no surprise to us
that the occupation Government, which by law
prevents its citizens from learning the truth about its
practices in the occupied territories, is attempting to
mislead international public opinion concerning its real
objectives and true intentions. The current Government
is following the notorious method of the infamous
Goebbels: lie, lie and lie again, until others come to
believe what you are saying. Unfortunately for the
rulers of Israel, the world will not continue to believe
their lies. One day it will learn the truth - with the
exception of a small minority, who at some point in the
future will discover that they have been on the wrong
side.

Israel's objective in building its racist,
expansionist wall, is not, as it claims, to protect its
security. Rather, the wall is being built to achieve the
following objectives. First, the route traced by the wall
is far removed from the borders of the territories
occupied since 1967, penetrating deep into Palestinian
territories. This reveals the Israeli Government's real
intention: to create facts on the ground allowing them
to set borders as they wish, thus placing the Palestinian
people in large bantustans and isolating them. That
would make it impossible to achieve the objective of
the peace process with the Palestinians which is: to
establish a Palestinian State in the territories occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Secondly, by building the wall, Israel is in fact
annexing vast expanses of the territories of the West
Bank, thus violating one of the foremost principles of
international law: the acquisition of others' territory by
force is inadmissible. Therefore, Israel's acts violate
resolution 242 (1967), which provides the foundation
for the Middle East peace process.

Thirdly, the route traced by the wall clearly
reveals that Israel aims to consolidate its annexation of
occupied Jerusalem, in flagrant violation of resolution
478 (1980), which holds Israel's annexation of eastern
Jerusalem to be null and void.

Fourthly, Israel plans to enclose within the wall
large settlements established in occupied Palestinian
territories, containing more than 200,000 settlers. Thus,
Israel is not only violating the Fourth Geneva
Convention by building those settlements but goes
even further by annexing those settlements to Israel.
That was demonstrated very clearly by the Israeli
Government's recent decision for the wall to enclose
the "Ariel" settlement, which was established 22
kilometres into the occupied Palestinian territories.
Those actions are, in fact, war crimes under the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocol 1.
Therefore, Israel should be deterred from continuing
and no legal or political legitimacy should be granted
to its actions.

It can be seen from the aforementioned that the
present Israeli Government, led by General Sharon,
who is well known as an enemy of peace, is merely a
war Government aiming to put an end to the peace
process and any real chance of implementing it. Israel,
which attempts to justify its actions by claiming it is
combating terrorism, is in fact perpetrating war crimes
and terrorism against the civilian Palestinian
population, men, women and children, as they build
their expansionist wall as part of their policy of settler
colonialism. Israel is even exporting its crises through
aggression against Syria and Lebanon. The campaign
against terrorism is greatly harmed by the fact that
Israel is exploiting that campaign in order to conceal its
objectives and to divert attention from its acts of
expansion and aggression. If Israel's killings of dozens
of Palestinians in the last two days and the destruction
of more than 20 homes - as has been recognized by
United Nations agencies - is not terrorism, then what
is?

The Security Council, the principal body
entrusted with maintaining international peace and
security, is called upon to shoulder its responsibilities
in the face of Israel's criminal practices. The Council
must condemn Israel clearly and unequivocally. It must
deter Israel and make it clear to it that its settlements,
colonialism, the annexation of the occupied Palestinian
territories through the expansionist wall's construction,
to consolidate the annexation of occupied East
Jerusalem, and its aggressions against Syria and
Lebanon are illegitimate acts constituting a flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter and the
principles of international law, international
humanitarian law and the numerous resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, including the
resolutions on which the Middle East peace process are
founded. The Council's failure to shoulder its
responsibility would have a negative impact on its
credibility and would further exacerbate the situation in
the region, bringing dire and uncontrollable
consequences and distancing us from the objectives on
which the entire world has agreed: to bring just and
comprehensive peace to the region.

Finally, through Syria, the Arab Group has last
Friday submitted a balanced draft resolution that took
the concerns of the Security Council into consideration
and we hope that it will be put to the vote at the
conclusion of this open debate.

