Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): It is my pleasure to
address the Security Council on behalf of Portugal.
We very much welcome today's open debate, promoted
by the Senegalese presidency, on a very important and
ever-timely subject.

My brief statement is fully aligned with that
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.

Throughout human history, access to clean
water has always been a potential source of conflict.
Although water is the most abundant resource on the
planet, the fact that fresh water makes up less than
3 per cent of the Earth's hydric resources ready for
human consumption turns it into a scarce and valuable
resource. Furthermore, there is a great imbalance in
its availability, with water being a relatively abundant
resource in some regions and almost non-existent in
other populated areas.

The uneven distribution of this most critical
commodity, together with such other factors as
population growth, generates tensions, both internally
and among neighbouring countries, that can easily
escalate into major disputes and conflicts, as often has
been the case. The gradual diminution of quality water
supplies can also be traced to the pernicious effects of
climate change, as is well documented.

We know the facts. Lessons must be learned, and
actions should be taken to prevent potential conflicts
in future. That means we need to move definitively
away from the paradigm of water scarcity as potential
conflict generator, turning it into one of cooperation
based, one hopes, on solidarity among communities
and nations.

United Nations institutions, particularly the
Security Council, long ago recognized and have often
mainstreamed the importance of rational and inclusive
management of natural resources as a pre-emptive
measure for conflict prevention, which must be, and
increasingly is, at the very heart of United Nations
concerns and efforts. However, that has not prevented
new tensions and conflicts related to access to water
resources from emerging in different parts of the world.

The connection among natural resources,
social development and peace was first laid out in
the Stockholm Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, in 1972, where
the impact of the human footprint on the environment
was recognized and a normative structure for tackling
its negative effects was formulated. That paved the way
for the broader compromises of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, in Rio
de Janeiro in 1992, and 20 years after that ofthe Rio+20
conference, in 2012, where water sustainability issues
were at the very core of the discussions.

Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development reflects the full recognition of the
importance of preserving our planet's water resources
and the right of access to sources of clean water. It
explicitly calls on countries to implement the human
right to water and sanitation, which Portugal has
consistently supported, promoting it as ultimately
the right to life. The oft-quoted Antoine de Saint-
Exupe'ry once said that water is "not necessary to
life, but rather life itself". This has multiple valuable
implications, certainly including from a peace and
security perspective.

Forging common ground, building comprehensive
partnerships and strengthening international
cooperation is a path worth pursuing in this regard.
Against that background, despite the fact that the process
is lengthy and challenging, the action plan of the High-
Level Panel on Water, adopted last September, sets an
optimistic tone and includes important considerations
and key requirements and principles, notably the need
for political leadership for a comprehensive approach, a
commitment to the human right to safe drinking water
and sanitation, transparency and inclusion, autonomy
of all actors involved, collaboration among countries
and organizations, and continuous engagement.

The action plan also sets a wide range of mostly
interrelated priority actions, which in our opinion
deserve support, as they can truly have a positive impact
on improving water security, including undertaking a
profound analysis of water crisis risks and identifying
good practices for managing water-related natural
disasters. On that point, we believe thatjust as there are
so many regrettable disputes based on access to water,
there are also many successful examples of cooperation
based on negotiation and agreements, which could be
used on a case-by-case basis as good references forjoint
water-management mechanisms and the disciplined
sharing of water resources.

Other priority actions involve encouraging the
United Nations to establish a common platform
where States can exchange views and good practices,
providing information to the States on the benefits of
water-use efficiency, promoting academic studies on
the impact of water-related disasters and ways and
means to prevent them, and implementing projects that
bolster water security and the economic resilience of
marginalized communities. In our opinion, the message
set out in the action plan is a good one that should be
spread through traditional media and social networks.
We must make sure it reaches a widespread audience,
particularly local communities and youth.

Portugal shares the view that only a cross-cutting
and interdependent process based on a transnational
approach can provide the necessary legal and political
framework to manage the availability and use of fresh
water and access to sources for countries andpopulations
for whom that resource is scarce or access involves
risks. Portugal is fully committed to this common
endeavour and will present its voluntary national
review, in next year's High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, on the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goal 6 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

