Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on children
and armed conflict. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her
briefing, and the others for their briefings, as well as
the United Nations agencies supporting Palestinian
children, including UNICEF and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).

As the Security Council considers the situation of
children in armed conflict around the world, we appeal
to the Council not to forget Palestinian children, who are
suffering extreme hardship, shocking acts ofaggression,
oppression and gross human rights violations due to the
Israeli occupation and the persistence of that conflict
for nearly 70 years. Israel, the occupying Power, is
in continuous, grave breach of international law,
including, inter alia, the Fourth Geneva Convention,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Charter
of the United Nations and Security Council resolutions.
It is without a doubt that Israel systematically fulfils
three of the six criteria used to assess grave violations
against children.

First, Israeli occupying forces engage in a pattern
of killing and maiming children. The occupying
Power cynically claims that its military strikes are
"conducted in a precise and surgical manner", yet in
last summer's Israeli war on the Gaza Strip at least
540 Palestinian children were killed, constituting
20 per cent of the civilian casualties. Thousands more
children were injured and disabled. Those crimes
were not just a one-time occurrence. Israel's previous
assaults on occupied Gaza caused a high proportion of
child casualties, in addition to the incessant attacks on
children in the occupied West Bank by the occupying
forces and extremist settlers, with almost 1,200 injured
in the year of 2014 alone.

Secondly, the occupying Power deliberately targets
schools and hospitals. During the war on Gaza, the
Israeli Government repeatedly received the precise
locations of hospitals, medical centres and schools,
including those where it was fully aware that families
had been sheltering. Yet the occupying Power attacked
and damaged 279 schools and 75 health centres and
hospitals, in addition to the thousands of civilian homes
it targeted and destroyed. Again, these attacks were not
just a one-time occurrence, as the occupying Power
has systematically destroyed Palestinian homes and
civilian properties in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, rendering thousands upon
thousands of families homeless, forcibly displacing
them and leaving children in a state of perpetual
insecurity and trauma.

Thirdly, Israel denies humanitarian access to the
entire occupied Palestinian people, endangering the
well-being and survival of Palestinian children. Since
2007, Israel has subjected the more than 1.8 million
civilians in Gaza to an illegal, immoral blockade. The
situation has left Gaza devastated and dependent on
aid and has completely debilitated its economy and
infrastructure, including water networks, with 90 per
cent of water being unfit for humans. At this rate,
without a lifting of the Israeli blockade or the delivery
of assistance at the scope and scale needed, Gaza's
reconstruction will take over 100 years, a deplorable
situation inconsistent with international humanitarian
law. Children f 52 per cent of the population i are
suffering disproportionately.

Israeli policies, approved at the highest levels,
are not only gross attacks against children, but are
systematic violations of international law tantamount to
war crimes. Israel's deliberate oppression of Palestinian
children has no limits; not a day goes by in which
children's rights are not violated. In that regard, I must
also draw attention to the Israeli practice of detaining
Palestinian children, some as young as eight years old.
The Israeli military court is the world's first and only
juvenile military court, and since 2000 an estimated
10,000 children have been detained and prosecuted
there. Their numbers are growing. Over the past three
years, child detentions have increased by 87 per cent.
In detention, children are blindfolded, strip-searched
and subjected to physical and verbal abuse and solitary
confinement that traumatizes them. They endure cruel,
inhumane and degrading treatment amounting to
torture.

The occupying Power's collective punishment
and abuse of Palestinian children are also a source
of ongoing trauma and suffering. In Gaza alone, six
months after Israel's latest attack, Palestinian children
continue to suffer from hunger, fear, deprivation and
isolation. More than 400,000 children in Gaza are in
urgent need of psychosocial support. We commend
United Nations agencies, in particular UNICEF and
UNRWA, for their tireless efforts aimed at assisting
those children in need.

It is clear that the crimes committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, against children are a symptom of
a wider problem - a complete lack of accountability.
We have continued to repeat that the international
community's unwillingness to enforce international
law when it comes to Israel only fuels its lawlessness
and the culture of impunity among the occupying
forces. In this regard, we call on the international
community, including the Security Council, to take
three immediate steps to end this cycle of impunity and
protect Palestinian children.

First, we call on the Secretary-General to add the
Israeli occupying forces to the United Nations global
list of parties that consistently commit grave violations
against children. We urge Member States to join us in
this call. The evidence is abundant. The criteria are to
be assessed objectively. Any such assessment will lead
to the conclusion that the Israeli occupying forces must
be listed. Failure to do so implies politicization of the
mechanism, which undermines its credibility, and if
credibility is undermined for one case, it is undermined
for all cases.

Secondly, the international community should
demand the immediate and permanent release of
all children from Israeli captivity. There can be no
justification for detention and abuse of children.

Finally, assistance must flow into Gaza, and
the international community should do whatever it
takes to ensure Israeli compliance with international
law, including by lifting its illegal blockade. This is
imperative for a real change in the tragic situation of
Palestinian children under Israeli occupation to come
to pass.

The plight of Palestinian children cannot be
divorced from the wider political context. Only an
independent State of Palestine where the Palestinian
people can live in freedom and dignity will bring
permanent relief and lasting peace and security to
our children. The Palestinian leadership remains
committed to the two-State solution. However, the
Israeli Prime Minister has clearly made his opposition
known through words and actions. In that regard, it is
incumbent on the international community to apply the
pressure required to end Israel's occupation that began
in 1967 and bring the Israeli side into compliance with
international law. In the meantime, the Palestinian
leadership will continue to pursue accountability for the
Palestinian people, including children, through every
available legitimate avenue, including the International
Criminal Court.

