Lieutenant General Tesfamariam: I am honoured
to be here today to discuss the protection of civilians
in South Sudan, the primary task entrusted to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Let me start by expressing my deep appreciation to the
Mission's personnel, who, under the able leadership
of Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj, the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for South Sudan and Head of
UNMISS, continue to work courageously to protect
tens of thousands of civilians under the threat of
physical violence, safeguard human rights and facilitate
the work of the humanitarian community in delivering
assistance to the millions of South Sudanese in need.
I particularly thank the troop- and police-contributing
countries that have provided much-needed uniformed
personnel and assets.

In a situation of ongoing conflict such as that in
South Sudan, where the parties and allied forces pay
little heed to the laws of war, peacekeepers struggle to
implement their protection-of-civilians mandate. The
challenges facing UNMISS are numerous.

First, restrictions imposed by the parties on access
and the freedom of movement fundamentally hamper
even our most basic efforts to protect civilians. Both
sides continue to violate the status of forces agreement,
while obstructing or delaying the movement of
contingent-owned equipment and demanding illegal
access. Furthermore, those bearing the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians are themselves
perceived as constituting threats to the safety of
civilians.

Secondly, as we saw last month in Upper Nile state,
UNMISS protection-of-civilians sites have increasingly
been caught up in the crossfire. During the fighting in
Melut on 19 May, the Mission base was hit by more than
20 artillery shells and stray bullets. Nine internally
displaced persons (IDPs) were killed and 11 wounded.
UNMISS has been engaging the leadership on all sides,
urging them to cease combat operations and respect
the inviolability of United Nations premises. UNMISS
troops have also been taking reinforcement and surge
measures to protect civilians seeking shelter and
have been allowing for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

Thirdly, we face the challenge to the Mission's
efforts to protect vulnerable people, regardless of
their location. Protecting civilians is not just about
providing a secure static location, nor is it about
demonstrating a static presence. Rather, our focus is
on enabling the movement of civilians and proactively
protecting them in their areas of origin, securing their
traditional movements and enabling them to go about
their livelihoods. The Mission has been projecting its
presence outside its bases, conducting robust short- and
long-duration patrols to deter violence against civilians,
and proactively engaging vulnerable communities
through the establishment of forward operating bases
in Malakal, with plans to establish similar facilities
in Bentiu and Bor, since the pull factor of our static
protection sites cannot be ignored.

Some IDPs are encouraged to stay at the protection
sites for an extended period of time because of the
services provided. Since armed conflict broke out in
December 2013, these sites have grown and continue
to grow. There are now over 136,000 IDPs sheltering at
seven protection-off-civilians sites. For many who have
had no other choice than to seek protection, as well
as for those who see them as access points for service
delivery, the sites now provide a more convenient
and secure place in which to live. We must assess the
sustainability of this arrangement. Without a viable
peace throughout the country, we must genuinely
assess how long the Mission can, and should, provide
protection to those currently inhabiting the sites.

Beyond those challenges, the successful
implementation of the Mission's protection-of-civilians
mandate requires effective command and control,
steadfast commitment from the troops and sufficient
resources. From a military standpoint, command and
control is absolutely critical. The operational-level
protection-of-civilians strategy must be delivered at the
tactical level in contexts where days, and even weeks,
can pass without direct contact between commanders
and their subordinates. As peacekeepers in the field,
the strategy is necessarily decentralized: the unit
commanding officers have considerable freedom
of action. As such, they are a key force enabler and
a critical link in the protection-of-civilians chain.
It is therefore essential that there be trust within
the chain of command, as well as confidence that
commanders' orders and intent are understood and will
be implemented without fail.

The protection of civilians also presupposes a
steadfast commitment to the safety and security of
the people in one's area of operations. It is based on
the understanding that those responsible for such
protection are willing to take proactive measures and
to put themselves between the threat and the civilians
when required. Although an armoured unit may be
technically capable ofa military or police engagement,
that technical capacity alone is not sufficient to protect
civilians. I believe that willingness is a peacekeeping
operation's greatest protection asset.

Lastly, the protection of civilians requires
significant logistical, financial and human resources
that fit the mandate, expectations and realities on the
ground. The limitations that we face in that respect,
particularly the absence of critical enablers such as
close air support, adequate logistics, intelligence,
reconnaissance and responsive casualty and medical
evacuation capabilities, negatively affect our early
warning and daily operations.

In conclusion, I should underline that the protection
of civilians is a responsibility shared among key actors,
including the international community and the host
authorities. Success at the operational level depends
upon well-trained and well-equipped troops who have
the right mindset for deterring potential aggressors
and reducing levels of violence. Passive forces invite
aggression and manipulation, leading to increased
risks for all. Finally, successfully protecting civilians
requires innovative leadership that translates into
effective actions on the ground. The Security Council
plays a key role in holding accountable those who harm
civilians or directly obstruct our efforts to protect them.

