Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): Allow me to simply
highlight the main elements contained in my more
comprehensive report prepared for the Council. That
comprehensive version has been distributed and will be
posted on the Committee's website.

At the outset, I would like to underline that the
sanctions regime established under resolution 1267
(1999) is a powerful tool in the fight against Al-Qaida-
and Taliban-related terrorism. The measures taken
against individuals and entities on the consolidated list
are universal in nature and hence can complement
measures taken at the national, regional and
subregional levels.
Improving the quality of the consolidated list
continues to be at the core of the Committee's work. In
that regard, I would like to stress that the Committee
relies on the information provided by Member States.
Let me take this opportunity to emphasize that it is the
prerogative, but also the collective responsibility, of all
of us to bring to the Committee's attention any
information that one believes should be included in or
deleted from the list. Our common objective should be
to have a dynamic list reflecting the evolution of the
threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. In this
respect, and given the increasingly strong links
between terrorism activities and illicit drugs, I would
like to underline once again the possibility to submit
for listing the names of drug traffickers involved in the
financing of Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as provided for
in paragraph 12 of resolution 1735 (2006).

During the last six months, most of the
Committee's activities have been derived from its
consideration of the seventh report of the Monitoring
Team and the follow-up thereto. Different discussions
were held on the issues related to the three sanctions
measures: assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo.
The Committee has also been exploring ways to further
improve its procedures. As a result, a standard form for
de-listing has been developed and is now available in
the de-listing section of the Committee's website. The
Committee is also examining the procedures for
removing the names of deceased individuals and
considering the further revision of its guidelines with
regard to exemptions to the assets freeze and to the
travel ban, with a view to providing further guidance to
Member States.

Pursuant to paragraph 21 of resolution 1735
(2006), the Committee continued its discussion on the
identification of possible cases of non-compliance with
the sanctions measures. With the objective of
improving the effectiveness and implementation of the
sanctions regime, the Committee first discussed each
possible case of non-compliance mentioned by the
Monitoring Team and, secondly, derived horizontal
recommendations from this empirical analysis, aimed
at preventing the occurrence of such cases. I reported
to the Council on the Committee's consideration of this
matter in a briefing held on 24 April 2008. Identifying
possible cases of non-compliance constitutes an
ongoing exercise, and the Committee will continuously
follow up on that.

The Committee further considered the issue of
the criminal misuse of the Internet for terrorist
purposes. The Committee shares the concerns
expressed over the fact that the Internet constitutes a

powerful medium and instrument for Al-Qaida, the
Taliban and their associates. Although this is a complex
issue, of which certain aspects clearly go beyond the
Committee's mandate, it was agreed to continue the
discussion in the future.

This week, the Committee is starting its
consideration of the eighth report of the Monitoring
Team, submitted to the Committee in accordance with
resolution 1735 (2006). The report will shortly be
transmitted to the Council, and the Committee intends
to prepare a report reflecting its position on the
recommendations contained therein.

Further enhancing the dialogue with Member
States and increasing the transparency of its work
remain one of the primary concerns of the Committee.
To that end, I gave an open briefing to all interested
Member States on 18 December 2007.

Country visits are another way to interact with
Member States. As Chairman, I recently visited
Mauritania, Senegal and Mali. Several incidents that
occurred in their region during the months prior to the
trip had underlined once more that the terrorist threat
in the Sahel region is real. Whereas all three countries
had a good understanding of the sanctions regime and
demonstrated their strong commitment in the common
efforts to counter terrorism, authorities also clearly
expressed their need for assistance to further
strengthen their capacities.

Pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1735
(2006), the Committee met yesterday with
representatives of Denmark, Liechtenstein, Sweden and
Switzerland for an in-depth discussion on relevant
issues. This exchange of views has been, I think, of
mutual benefit. I would like to take advantage of
today's briefing to encourage all other interested
Member States to meet with the Committee.

I would also use this opportunity to sincerely
thank the experts of the Monitoring Team for their
invaluable support and contribution to the work of the
Committee. In addition to their visits and various
outreach activities, their input and proposals for all
issues on the Committee's agenda have been highly
appreciated and have undoubtedly contributed to the
progress made so far.
It is clear from events in past months that the
threat from Al-Qaida and the Taliban has not
diminished. Within the United Nations efforts, the
Committee is committed to continuing, in cooperation
with Member States, to assume its share of
responsibility in this global endeavour. To this end, the
Committee looks forward to further guidance from the
Security Council, inter alia, through the resolution to
be adopted in June.

