Mr. Roux: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
in your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for inviting
INTERPOL to present its strategy for combating the
global threats represented by chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) terrorism by non-State
actors, as well as to discuss the policing capabilities we
provide to our member States and the global community.

The use of CBRN materials by terrorist groups such
as Da'esh and by criminals and other non- State actors has
become one of the most significant challenges to global
security today. In 2010, INTERPOL made a strategic
decision to launch a comprehensive CBRN terrorism-
prevention-and-response capability in support of its
190 member States. The INTERPOL methodology for
countering CBRN threats specifically from non-State
actors has four main pillars that respond to the needs
of member States - intelligence and operational
data services; capacity-building; investigative and
operational support; and working in partnership. CBRN
threats are also a key element in INTERPOL's counter-
terrorism strategy, which was endorsed by its entire
membership very recently, in November 2016.

First, through our intelligence and operational
data services, we facilitate the secure exchange of
information among member countries and identify
criminals and criminal organizations through
intelligence analysis, which represents the foundation
of INTERPOL's work and mandate. INTERPOL
collects and analyses information on CBRN incidents
and conducts threat assessments, and shares
intelligence and analysis regarding CBRN threats and
incidents with INTERPOL's member countries and
partner agencies through monthly and ad hoc reports.
Specialized databases such as Geiger and Watchmaker
provide operational and specialized support to member
countries through the sharing of INTERPOL notices
and warning messages on individuals involved in
illegal CBRN activities by non-State actors.

The second pillar is capacity-building. Given
the gravity of a potential CBRN terrorist attack and
its consequences, prevention and countermeasures
constitute an essential element in both national and
international strategies. INTERPOL engages in
efforts to increase the level of CBRN awareness in
law-enforcement agencies, delivers training sessions
designed to increase law-enforcement capabilities and
provides prevention methodologies for use by member
countries. Major INTERPOL CBRN capacity-building
programmes include workshop training courses and
tabletop exercises.

The third pillar is investigative and operational
support. Strictly at the request of member States,
INTERPOL can provide operational support to them in
the form of incident response teams. In the event of a
terrorist attack, staff with expertise in CBRN matters
can be deployed to these teams. In addition, INTERPOL
runs a number of initiatives, projects and operations that
support the international law-enforcement community
in tackling the illicit trafficking of CBRN materials.

Fourthly, and lastly, is working in partnership. Due
to the complex nature of CBRN prevention and response,
a multidisciplinary approach is essential. Action needs
to be coordinated at the national Government level,
while also ensuring close cooperation and information
exchange among the various ministries, agencies and
institutions involved. This inter-agency approach needs
to be extended on an international level.

INTERPOL works in this global arena, connecting
our worldwide network of member countries and
maintaining close partnerships with other international
agencies and initiatives that are specialized in the
CBRN field, such as the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and others. I
stand ready to provide additional information to any
interested actor or Mission.

