The President (interpretation from Arabic): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of

Egypt.

Egypt voted in favour of the resolution creating the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the successor to
the United Nations Mission in Haiti, for a number of
important reasons.

First, it is important that the international community
close ranks in support of the democratic transformations
in Haiti and Haiti's social and economic reconstruction in
an environment of security and stability. That would
promote the development and flourishing of democracy
which, will be translated into well-being for the Haitian
people.

Secondly, the Egyptian Government is convinced
that the request from the President of the Republic of
Haiti for a continued international presence for a further
six months, supported by a resolution of the Organization
of American States, provides sufficient arguments to merit
the Council's response. We therefore express our
 

satisfaction that the resolution adopted represents a response
to Haiti' s requests.

International organizations and agencies must continue
their undoubtedly effective role in assisting the Haitian
Government to create strong economic and social
infrastructures capable of shoring up the achievements of
democracy.

The delegation of Egypt expresses its deep
appreciation to all States that have responded constructively
to Haiti's requests. We thank the Friends of Haiti, as well
as the Governments of the United States and of Canada, for
their contributions towards ensuring success and consensus
in the Security Council.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Lakhdar Brahimi for his effective, constructive role during
his service as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We wish the current Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Enrique ter Horst, every success in
the mission entrusted to him.

I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council. I call on the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
who has asked to make a statement.

