Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the two briefings delivered by
Mr. Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Salamanca, which we
believe complement each other. We thank Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, High Counsellor for
Post-Conflict, for being here today.

Three days ago, on 9 April, Colombians
commemorated the National Day for Memory and
Solidarity with Victims of the Armed Conflict, with
the slogan "For the Victims, For Peace". Peru joins
in paying tribute, first and foremost, to the goal of
reconciliation. We would like to again underscore the
example the peace process in Colombia set for Latin
America and the international community. At the same
time, we acknowledge the complexity of task and the
many challenges encountered in its implementation
phase. In that regard, we would like to address three
elements that we believe could help build trust in the
process of consolidating a shared vision of a future of
hope and beliefin sustaining peace, as sustaining peace
is inseparable from sustainable development.

We first want to welcome the commitment of the
Colombian Government to implementing the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace on a basis of national consensus, and
we reiterate our recognition of the Colombian people's

resilience and commitment to peace. In that regard, we
stress the importance of promoting and strengthening
the inclusive and coordinated dialogue between the
Government and all the parties involved in building
a peaceful future. It is particularly crucial to listen
to the voices of women, young people and indigenous
communities. We therefore support the assistance of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and
we want to emphasize the excellent cooperation that
has been established between it and the Government.
We especially welcome the efforts to reactivate the
National Commission on Security Guarantees in
order to address a fundamental element of the peace
agreement concertedly.

Secondly, the timely implementation of the peace
agreement is essential, and we should welcome the
words of President Duque Marquez, who has reaffirmed
his commitment to the transition, to freeing the country
from violence and seeking a life for the people of
complete coexistence, with income and opportunities.
We emphasize the importance of restoring the economy,
which is why we are pleased with the approval of the
16 development programmes with a territorial focus,
which will help to promote regional and community
development, and that the necessary resources
have been allocated for those initiatives within the
framework of the 2018-2022 national development
plan. In that regard, we would also like to highlight the
vital role played by the territorial areas in training and
reintegrating more than 3,500 former members of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias del Comun-Ejercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and their families, particularly
with a view to ensuring the progress of the transition
process after 15 August.

We also consider it a positive that the transition
strategy addresses the issues of land, security, the
provision of basic services and productivity. We
emphasize how important it is to decide on the future
directions for those areas as soon as possible and with
the full participation of all the parties concerned. Their
implementation also involves dealing with the issue
of security guarantees for former FARC-EP members,
social leaders and the communities in general, which
requires coordinated action on the part of all stakeholders
on the ground, especially in the most vulnerable rural
areas. The deplorable persistence of a pattern of
killings and violence against social leaders and human
rights defenders means that the well-timed Action Plan
for the Protection of Social and Community Leaders,
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists should be
fully implemented and complemented by the new
"peace with legality" plan. In that connection, we also
want to highlight the programmes for the substitution
of illicit crops established under the peace agreement,
which promote sustainable rural development as
well as voluntary and peaceful eradication. Our own
experience with alternative development has shown its
effectiveness, and we consider it important to ensure
that the new national strategy to combat drugs, "the path
to the future", continues to promote those measures.

Lastly, we want to reaffirm the spirit of the
peace agreement and to thank all the parties for their
commitment to respecting it in its entirety. In that
regard, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which we
recognize as a fundamental pillar of the agreement and
its commitments, not only plays a key role in promoting
access to justice, trust and national reconciliation
in Colombia, but also warrants a statutory law
enacted in accordance with Colombia's internal
institutional processes.

In conclusion, Peru reiterates its full support
to the authorities and the people of Colombia in the
implementation of the peace agreement and to the
Verification Mission team for their invaluable and
tireless work in this process.

