Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretarhy-General, for his briefing, which provided
a comprehensive description of the current situation
in Afghanistan and included valuable observations.
Mr. Haysom and the members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) deserve
our appreciation for their dedication in carrying out
their duties under the challenging conditions in the
country.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement, which outlined his Government's views
and analysis of the latest developments. Malaysia
congratulates Afghanistan on its historic transition
into the transformation decade. The process and the
progress are now firmly in the hands of its own people.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm to Ambassador Tanin
Malaysia's commitment as a partner to Afghanistan in
this time of progress and development.

As stated in the December 2014 document of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan entitled "Realizing
Self-Reliance - Commitments to Reforms and Renewed
Partnership", Afghanistan now stands alongside
Malaysia and other Muslim-maj ority democracies in the
community of nations. The Afghan leadership's strong
testament to inclusivity and stability has been reflected
in a number of subsequent positive developments
on the political track. We commend the patient and
respectful conduct of the ongoing negotiations between
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah under the power-sharing
framework. The way forward for the Afghan people
should be grounded in the principles of the country's
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity. In that context, we wish to express our
hope for a successful outcome to the final formation of
the national unity Government.

The "Realizing Self-Reliance" document outlines
numerous reform measures that the Afghan Government
aims to carry out. It is evident that they are under
no illusions on the complexity of the exercise. While
we note the realistic assessments presented by the
Afghan Government, we are more encouraged by its
drive and determination to succeed. We are confident
that Afghanistan will continue to build momentum
on that course, and we look forward to the upcoming
action plan on the implementation of its priorities.
The Afghan Government has pledged itself to strong
international engagement with increased Afghan
ownership and leadership in the areas of security,
governance, development and the effective delivery
of commitments - inter alia through the Kabul
process, the London Conference and the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework.

At the same time, we should also note the
importance for political and developmental activities
of international organizations active in Afghanistan
and for other international aid and resources to be in
greater alignment with the priorities set by Afghan
Government. Malaysia believes that, at the current
stage, it remains imperative for the United Nations and
the international community to continue to lend their
support, encouragement and assistance to Afghanistan
through reconstruction and redevelopment efforts for
rebuilding the country. In the light of the crucial need
for sustained assistance, we hope the donor community
will expeditiously fulfil their commitments to that end.

In relation to the humanitarian emergency response
to last month's extreme weather, Malaysia extends
its condolences to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan following the tragic loss of more than
220 lives and the displacement of more than 6,000
families across the country. We were encouraged by
last week's report by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs that stated that the emergency
response in the district of Panjshir had been phased out
and that the response gap in assessed areas appeared
to be minimized. Malaysia hopes and prays that the
people and Government of Afghanistan will quickly
recover from that calamity.

Despite the noteworthy developments, Malaysia
remains deeply concerned about the security situation
on the ground. As reflected in the recent UNAMA
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
in Afghanistan, the year 2014 saw the highest number
of documented civilian casualties; a total of 3,699
deaths and 6,849 injuries were documented. Malaysia
condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians by
anti-Government elements, which has led to the
highest toll on civilian lives in Afghanistan since
UNAMA began documenting civilian casualties. All
parties should respect both the letter and the spirit
of international humanitarian law in order to win the
hearts and minds of the Afghan people with a View to
their national reconciliation and integration process.

My delegation is particularly alarmed about
the increasingly negative impact of the conflict on
children. We are shocked by the repeated incidents
involving anti-Government armed groups killing and
maiming Afghan boys and girls and attacking schools
and hospitals. Malaysia welcomes the adoption and
endorsement, on 2 February, of a decree by President
Ghani Ahmadzai to criminalize underage recruitment
into armed forces. We encourage the Afghan
Government to continue to intensify its efforts to
comply with the action plan it had adopted pursuant to
resolution 1612 (2005).

Malaysia observes an increasingly positive
atmosphere in the region in support of the Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process. We welcome the convening of the inaugural
Afghanistan-China-Pakistan Trilateral strategic
dialogue, held on 9 February in Kabul. We also look
forward to Pakistan's hosting of the fifth Ministerial
Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process later
this year, following the successful outcome of the
previous Heart of Asia Conference held in Beijing in
October 2014. Such constructive regional engagement
is essential to reinforce support for Afghanistan's own
efforts towards an inclusive reconciliation process. On
that note, we commend the convening of the national
conference of the Afghan People's Dialogue on Peace:
Building the Foundations for an Inclusive Peace
Process, held on 15 January, and we are encouraged
by the efforts of the High Peace Council. That
convergence of developments deserves the focus and
attention of the international community. We hope that
key stakeholders in the country and in the region will
continue to intensify their efforts to that end.

Malaysia firmly supports the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts undertaken by the Government
of Afghanistan within the context of respect for the
country's democracy and Constitution, non-violence
and respect for the rights of all Afghan people. We
believe that an approach based on the principle of
moderation would be the most effective way to find
common ground and overcome the voices of extremists.

While Afghanistan endeavours to sustain peace
and stability in the country, Malaysia remains fully
committed in its peacebuilding efforts and its provision
of assistance to Afghanistan. I would like to take this
opportunity to place on record our appreciation to
the Government of Afghanistan for its invitation for
Malaysia to join the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF). Prior to the ending of the ISAF mandate,
a Malaysian medical team had been stationed in the
country to provide medical, dental and health-care
services to the Afghan civilian population. I should
also thank New Zealand in that regard, as the Malaysian
medical team received valuable logistical support from
the New Zealand transitional reconstruction team while
based together in Bamyan province. The Malaysian
Government is also committed to providing technical
capacity-building programmes for Afghanistan. Since
2002, more than 520 Afghan officials have received
training in Malaysia through the Malaysian technical
cooperation programme, the third-country training
programme and other frameworks.

Malaysia firmly believes that the international
community should continue to support Afghanistan as
the country proceeds down the path it has charted. The
interconnected nature of existing challenges requires
sustained and mutually reinforcing progress in various
fields. The entry into the transformation decade will
bring forth new challenges and new approaches for
collaboration in resolving them. We should now
concentrate on looking at approaches to complement
and seal the gains that Afghanistan has achieved.

Through resolution 2210 (2015), just adopted this
morning, the Security Council sets out the mandate
of UNAMA for the next 12 months. We are pleased
that UNAMA and the Government of Afghanistan
will continue to maintain a close partnership, which is
vital to ensuring sustainable peace and stability in the
country. The Secretary-General has also been tasked
with examining the modalities for the next steps in the
evolution of UNAMA's relationship with Afghanistan.
We hope that will lead to a more productive and effective
collaboration between the host county, the United
Nations system and the international community. I
would like to express my appreciation to the Spanish
delegation for its hard work on the preparation of the
resolution.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's sincere
commitment in supporting the Afghan Government in
its efforts to achieve peace, security and stability in the
country during the transformation decade and beyond.

