Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As I
address the Council, I am overwhelmed by sorrow at
the Council's hasty adoption this morning of a
resolution on the situation in Darfur at a time when my
Government is in a race against time to implement its
agreement with the United Nations. Perhaps the
adoption of the resolution answers many of the
questions that the Darfur crisis has raised for us.

The military rebellion in Darfur, which began in
February 2003, took place at a strange time, raising
grave suspicions and questions. Just as negotiations
were on the verge of attaining a peace agreement that
would have put an end to Africa's longest-running
military conflict, the Sudanese nation was taken by
surprise by the military rebellion in Darfur, which
quickly destroyed infrastructure, service facilities and
development projects, and which tore asunder the
social fabric and peaceful coexistence in the region.
That gave rise to the humanitarian situation of which
the Council is aware.

On the basis of our firm conviction that peace is
indivisible and of our responsibility to ensure that our
citizens enjoy peace, safety, security and a life of
dignity, my Government tried to address the rebellion
through serious national dialogue and sincere
cooperation with the international community. In that
context, my Government made constructive and, I
stress, good-faith efforts with the United Nations and,
bilaterally, with a number of members of the
international community. Those efforts culminated in
the 3 July signing of the joint communique issued by
the Government of the Sudan and the Secretary
General, which outlines a plan of action to contain the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur within 90 days.

I am not known for making lengthy statements
before the Security Council. But since the Council is
considering a matter with an immediate impact on my
country's destiny, and given the allegations that it is the
world's gravest humanitarian crisis, I am obliged to
make a detailed statement, especially as this is the first
opportunity we have been given to express our views:
we have been denied any such opportunity since the
Security Council was seized of this matter some
months ago.

As members know, the joint communique set out
specific obligations both for my Government and for
the United Nations. It might be useful - assuming that
the facts would actually make any difference - briefly
to review the commitments the Government of the
Sudan made in the joint communique and the status of
their implementation one third of the way into the 90-
day period.

My Government made commitments in the
following areas: humanitarian issues; human rights;
security; and a political settlement.

On humanitarian issues, the joint communique
calls for a moratorium on restrictions on humanitarian
work, including suspending visa restrictions and
permitting freedom of movement for humanitarian
workers; permitting registration of non-governmental
organizations; and suspending all restrictions on the
importation and use of all humanitarian assistance
materials, transport vehicles, aircraft and
communication equipment. To an unprecedented
degree, my Government has fulfilled all those
commitments. Even before the ink on the joint
communique was dry, we had fulfilled our
commitments, as certified by the United Nations and
all other parties.

Secondly, on human rights, the joint communique
calls for concrete measures to end impunity, and
commits us to undertake investigations of human rights
violations, ensure that the Independent Investigation
Committee receives the necessary resources, ensure
that human rights violators are brought to justice, allow
the deployment of human rights monitors and establish
a fair system, respectful of local traditions, that will
allow women to bring charges against those who have
raped them. As members are aware, my Government
has already mobilized and strengthened its police force
and judiciary system in the Darfur region; it has
accepted complaints and other information; it has
established the Independent Investigation Committee to
investigate human rights violations and has facilitated
its work; and it has permitted the deployment of human
rights observers in Darfur. In fact, observers from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights are already in the Sudan. Because of the
sensitive nature of issues of sexual exploitation in our
country, the Government of the Sudan has sent
investigative teams led by women judges to Darfur to
hear complaints regarding cases of rape.

The third set of commitments relates to security.
Here, the Government of the Sudan is obliged to
deploy a credible police force in all areas for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), to train police personnel in
human rights law, to ensure that no militias are present
in all areas surrounding IDP camps, to disarm the
J anjaweed militias and to ensure that credible action is
taken to ensure the voluntary return of IDPs to their
homes. In that regard, and as I indicated in a letter to
the Council, as of yesterday 4,812 out of 6,000 police
officers had been deployed in Darfur, with a special
focus on IDP camps. Moreover, a human rights training
programme for police officers has been set up, and the
voluntary return of IDPs has begun. To date, some
150,000 IDPs have returned to their homes. With
regard to the J anjaweed, perhaps the Council heard the
news of the arrest of 200 members of that group. They
were brought to justice, and some of them received
death sentences.

The fourth set of commitments pertain to a
political settlement. The joint communique demands
that the Government of the Sudan resume political
talks. The Government responded to the African
Union's invitation and dispatched a high-level
delegation, led by a federal minister and composed of
six state ministers, with full power to negotiate without
preconditions in order to reach a political settlement.

The Council is aware of the outcome of those
talks, which collapsed before they could even start
because of the intransigence of the rebels and their
insistence on stonewalling preconditions, which,
perhaps, reflected the wrong message that they
continued to receive from the international community.

That is the Government's balance sheet in terms
of our implementation. Concrete facts demonstrate this
on the ground. We signed the joint communique in
good faith and based on our conviction that it would
provide a credible and viable mechanism to meet the
humanitarian needs of the people of Darfur. It never
even occurred to us that the communique would be
used as a springboard to penalize the Government of
the Sudan, whether or not it fulfilled its obligations.

Today, after the adoption by the Council of the
resolution, it is our right briefly to review recent events
in order to draw lessons from them and to go over
some developments in which we acted in good faith
also.

The Council may recall that my Government
received, at the end of last month and earlier this
month, the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Secretary of State of the United States of America, and
that the joint communique was the culmination of the
dialogue that took place with the Government during
those two visits.

However, what is striking is that the United States
delegation here in New York circulated the first draft of
the resolution a few hours before Mr. Colin Powell, the
Secretary of State, left Khartoum, and that, before the
end of the Secretary-General's visit, the United States
delegation was fully aware of the provisions of the
joint communique, which was to be issued later.

We are not supporters of any so-called conspiracy
theory, but it is our right to seek a solution to this
labyrinthine puzzle. Given the suspicious
circumstances surrounding the adoption of this
resolution today and the modalities of the negotiations
that preceded it, is it not our right to say that this
resolution was, in fact, adopted before those visits even
started?

Furthermore, against that backdrop and given the
queries I raised earlier in my statement, one might also
wonder, in innocence and in good faith, if the Sudan
would have been safe from the hammer of the Security
Council even if there had been no crisis in Darfur, and
whether the Darfur humanitarian crisis might not be a
Trojan horse? Has this lofty humanitarian objective
been adopted and embraced by other people who are
advocating a hidden agenda?

We are fully aware that some activists within the
United States Administration have worked to foster the
rebellion and abetted the rebels in escalating their
activities, and that they are continuing to help them to
bring military pressure to bear against the Government
in the context of the Naivasha negotiations. We have
evidence - sound recordings - of their talks with the
leaders of the rebellion. We monitored the pressure
they exerted on United Nations personnel - pressure
aimed at preventing them from reporting positive facts
that would support the position of the Government of
the Sudan.

The consultations that took place on this
resolution showed that there is a divergence of views
within the Council. There are those States that deemed
it necessary for the Council to ensure its credibility by
allowing adequate time - since there is an accord
between the Government of the Sudan and the United
Nations - and believe that there is a need to support
the efforts of the African Union, which is endeavouring
to address the Darfur issue in an earnest fashion. On
the other hand, there are those States whose positions
were characterized by insistence and which exerted
overwhelming pressure to adopt a resolution,
irrespective of the decision taken by the African
leaders and of the developments on the ground, and
with bizarre disregard for the wishes of large and
influential geographical groups within the United
Nations - groups which drew attention to the fact that
hasty action on the part of the Security Council could
complicate the situation instead of helping to address
the issue, and called for allowing enough time for
regional organizations, in this case the African Union,
to play a part.

What is paradoxical about the resolution adopted
today is that it is fraught with contradictions -
something that does not befit an organ such as the
Security Council. To put it charitably, that is, perhaps,
the reason for the haste in adopting a resolution - any
resolution. Indeed, the resolution has become for some
an end in itself, rather than a means to an end. It is an
end - a framework within which they can involve
themselves in the internal political rivalries within the
Sudan.
Unfortunately, Darfur has become fertile ground,
soaked with the blood of innocent people, with
political rivals seeking the votes of the electorate and
exploiting the general ignorance of the history and
geography of peoples in remote areas of the world.

This resolution was determined before it was
adopted here. It was determined in the United States
Congress before it was even discussed here. We find
ourselves caught between the hammer of the opponents
of the American Administration, who do not want that
Administration to enjoy the valuable achievement,
which we appreciate, of the signing of the peace accord
in southern Sudan, and the anvil of that same
Administration, which would abandon the good deed it
achieved and sacrifice it at the altar of active fanatics.

The United States Congress has decided that there
is genocide and ethnic cleansing in the Sudan, contrary
to the judgement of the Summit of the African Union.
The United States Congress is the very last party to
speak of genocide, ethnic cleansing and slavery. Let it
go back to its history. This resolution has now been
adopted; we do not know what will happen between
now and 2 November.

Although my Government recognizes the fact that
there is indeed a problem in Darfur and is sincerely and
genuinely seeking a solution, we are faced with
campaigns of hostility and suspicion. While we see
some progress on the ground, we see also the
progressive escalation of a vendetta through the use of
the massive and powerful machine of the mass media
in order to spread disinformation originated by some
organizations that call themselves non-governmental
organizations, which would exploit the various crises
afflicting peoples throughout the world.

I have listened closely to the statements by the
resolution's sponsors and those that aligned themselves
with the sponsors. I was shocked and left speechless. I
have just witnessed an unfair and unjust policy of
double standards. Indeed, these are shameless acts. Are
these the same States that we see every day on
television, with their massive military machines,
engaged in the occupation of nations, firing upon
innocent civilians in Iraq and Afghanistan and playing
the role of loyal guardian to the occupying, usurping
forces in Palestine that kill and displace the unarmed
and innocent Palestinian people?

Why do those supporting States follow the
sponsors of this resolution without questioning them or
discussing virtues? Are there voices that condemn what
is happening? Why do they remain silent about the
crimes of torture, killing and rape that take place in
Abu Ghraib and the prisons of Afghanistan? Why do
those countries remain silent before the truth, like
silent devils? The fact that one possesses the power to
practice oppression and injustice does not give one a
monopoly over virtue. Virtue and injustice can in no
way be reconciled.

The resolution expresses support for the efforts of
the African Union. But in essence, it expropriates the
issue of Darfur from the African Union, revealing an
attitude of contempt for the African continent's
capabilities and potential. This is the result of a
domineering, colonial mindset. The resolution
shamelessly speaks of the joint communique and the
joint implementation mechanism, but it disregards the
implementation of that joint communique.

Resolution 1547 (2004), adopted by the Council
under Chapter VI of the Charter, calls for the role of
the United Nations in support of a comprehensive
peace agreement between north and south Sudan, but
today's resolution was adopted under Chapter VII and
calls for the deployment of United Nations activities to
Darfur.

The African Union has undertaken to address the
problem from its standpoint, which reflects its
knowledge of all new conditions. At a moment when
the African Union is striving to set up new mechanisms
for disarming the militias and is seeking a peaceful
solution by means of a plan taking into account the
situation of the rebels, the Security Council has jumped
in and hastily acted to pressure the Government and
undermine its position, demanding that the
Government deploy its forces to disarm the militias.
That in itself demonstrates the Council's obvious
ignorance of the facts on the ground. Although some
provisions in the resolution call on the rebels to respect
the ceasefire, those provisions are not strong enough
and might send the wrong signal, encouraging the
rebels to pursue their hostile actions. Given such a
situation, it would be impossible to disarm the militias
in a province where most of the population carries arms
even if our capabilities equalled those of the coalition
forces in Iraq. We all have to pause here to draw the
right lessons.

My Government, eager to fulfil its
responsibilities, will fully comply with the provisions
of this resolution. We will continue our tireless efforts
to mitigate the suffering our citizens and the population
in Darfur and to restore stability to that very dear and
traumatized part of our homeland. We will redouble our
efforts to ensure a peaceful settlement to the problem.
Let me take this sad occasion to express my
Government's thanks and appreciation to those
delegations that raised the voice of truth and
justice during the Council's consultations, which fully
shouldered their responsibility to ensure at least some
balance in that resolution and which sought to warn the
Council of the risks. In the consultations, they
expressed their position that the Security Council is not
serving the humanitarian cause by adopting this hasty
resolution. Once again, let me express our appreciation
for their sense of responsibility even under pressure.
We fully understand the circumstances surrounding the
adoption of this resolution. We thank member States
that abstained in accordance with their principled
positions. We fully appreciate their noble intentions.

