Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I, too, would like
to join others in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for his briefing. I think his visit to the region was very
welcome, and it is very good to have a first-hand
assessment from him of these situations of concern.

I will discuss the Sudan first. We share the
Under-Secretary-General's concern about the
humanitarian situation there. The United Kingdom has
been a longstanding friend of the Sudanese people, and
we have a longstanding commitment to helping them.
In the past five years, we have provided over $660
million in assistance. That makes us the world's second
largest bilateral donor.

We are very concerned about the humanitarian
situation, in particular the increased insecurity within
the camps and the unprecedented levels of violence
against humanitarian workers. It seems that much of
this is being carried out by rebel elements. The briefing
by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
which the Council heard yesterday, also made this
point and brought this issue home. We are very
interested in what the Under-Secretary-General said
about the situation in the Kalma camp, which has seen
thousands flee to nearby camps and seven humanitarian
workers killed in October. This is obviously
unacceptable.
We note the commitments of the African Union,
the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan to
set up a commission to review the situation. The
Under-Secretary-General's comments about the
prospects for taking this forward were welcome. I
simply wish to highlight that we share the concerns of
the United Nations and other speakers regarding the
expulsion of the head of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in south
Darfur. It is particularly regrettable that people whose
sole role and commitment is towards helping to relieve
humanitarian suffering are treated in that way.

We noted the Government of the Sudan's
commitment with respect to bureaucratic impediments
to humanitarian access. Such commitments now need
to be translated into action, and we look to the
Government of the Sudan to make an early
announcement of this extension.

It is disappointing that the high-level committee
has not met since October. I would like to use this
occasion to call upon the Government of the Sudan to
respect and fully implement its commitments under the
Joint Communique, and to review issues of concern
through the established channels.

As other speakers have said today, an effective
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is critical for delivering peace and
security. The United Kingdom continues to press all
parties, but particularly the Government of the Sudan,
to ensure prompt deployment of an effective force.
This will be a critical part of enabling safe and
sustainable returns and a safe and secure environment.

I would like to speak now on Somalia. We share
the concerns of others expressed today, and we support
the efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to address problems on the ground. We
would like to use this occasion to remind the
Transitional Federal Government that getting
humanitarian relief to people in need is their
responsibility. We would like to see action taken by all,
including the Government, to reduce checkpoints,
harassment, tax levies and the use of humanitarian
relief for political purposes. Respect for international
humanitarian law by all sides is an essential component
of that.

We agree with the Under-Secretary-General that
the Security Council needs to monitor the situation
carefully and that we should continue to remind all
parties of their obligations, and I take this opportunity
to do so. We look forward to continued briefings,

including by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould-Abdallah,
who will be here on 17 December, and we will look to
the Secretariat for advice on how we might resolve
some of the problems that have been highlighted today.

We also agree that the international community
more broadly needs to shoulder its responsibilities and
give what assistance it can to the people of Somalia.
The United Kingdom is the third-largest bilateral donor
to Somalia, and we have provided support for a range
of programmes that strengthen, for example,
governance and the rule of law or emergency health
services. Ultimately, however, progress depends on
political reconciliation and making progress on
security.

Finally, I would like to turn to Ethiopia and the
Ogaden. The Under-Secretary-General's visit there was
timely. It was a useful opportunity to assess
developments after the United Nations mission's report
in September. It is important that the Government now
work with the United Nations to address humanitarian
and other concerns, particularly on aid and access. It is
welcome that there is an agreement to allow the United
Nations to set up offices in the military zone, and we
endorse the request and messages that the Under-
Secretary-General made to the Ethiopian authorities.
We particularly endorse his suggestion that the
international community, including the Council,
continue to monitor this situation closely.

The United Kingdom welcomes the idea of a
high-level forum on the region, and we hope that the
Resident Coordinator might be able to fix a date for the
first meeting as soon as possible. We also welcome the
Ethiopian Government's readiness to have monthly
meetings with non-governmental organizations. We
believe that that could be a useful mechanism for them
to raise continuing problems that they have in the
region.

