Mr. Nasir (Maldives): I would like to thank South
Africa for organizing today's important debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. The Maldives remains deeply concerned
about the situation in the Middle East and views the
question of Palestine as particularly important.

This year has witnessed a further deterioration in
the human rights situation of the Palestinian people. The
limited electricity supply in Gaza has compromised its
water supply, sewage treatment and hospital operations,
and Gaza now has one of the highest unemployment
rates in the world. The Government of Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to place severe restrictions
on the human rights of the people of Palestine, limiting
the movement of people and goods into and out of
the Gaza Strip, as well as accelerating the unlawful
transfer of Israeli citizens to settlements in the occupied
West Bank. The occupation stands in the way of every
measure that would afford the Palestinians a modicum
of dignity. I wish to reiterate my Government's position
on adopting an international consensus on a two-State
solution, with the establishment of an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine within the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, where the Palestinian
people may live in peace, dignity and prosperity.

It is deeply troubling that while Israel, the occupying
Power, seeks to further exploit, damage and deplete the
natural resources in the occupied Palestinian territory,
we still find ourselves in this Chamber today expressing
our concerns about how little progress has been made
on ending such actions. The Maldives calls on Israel
to stop its attacks on Palestinian civilians, including
women and children, and to fully implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the question
of Palestine. The Maldives also urges the Council to do
more to bring lasting peace to the Palestinian people
and the region.

The ongoing conflict in Syria continues to result
in human rights violations and humanitarian crises.
This multilayered catastrophe in the Middle East has
had dire consequences for international security. The
mass exodus of refugees has further exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian people. Yet the
conflict is locked in a stalemate with no end in sight. My
Government believes that the United Nations and the
international community must do more to reinvigorate
talks to reach a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

The war in Yemen has affected millions of civilians,
with children being the hardest hit. We must do more to
help alleviate the dire situation of the most vulnerable.
Peace and prosperity must be at the heart of the efforts
to resolve the conflict, and peace must be seen as a
prerequisite to development.

The continued presence of conflicts in the region
has bred terrorism and Violence, with implications
extending beyond the Middle East to all parts of the
world. The Government of Maldives strongly condemns
terrorist attacks in the region, including those targeting
civilians, shipping routes and, most recently, two
pumping stations on the Saudi Aramco East-West
pipeline in Al-Dawadmi and Afif. These attacks
threaten the security and stability of the region as well
as the global economy. The scourge of terrorism is the
biggest threat to global peace and security. It is a global
problem that requires a global solution. The Maldives
stands ready to assist international efforts to combat
terrorism and counter violent extremism. The Security
Council, whose task is to maintain international peace
and security, must do more to ensure that its influence
and legitimacy are not compromised. It should increase
and further accelerate its efforts to see that its decisions
are enforced, which is essential if global peace and
security is to be maintained. The Maldives reaffirms
its support for the Council, as well as for the Secretary-
General, in all their ongoing efforts to bring lasting
peace to the Middle East.

