Mr. Lovald (Norway): Again, the situation in the
Middle East is causing great concern. The
implementation of the road map has stalled. The logic
of violence is prevailing, as it has so many times
before. Norway urges the parties to resume
implementation of the road map, which has the backing
of the international community and the acceptance of
both parties.

Norway has repeatedly condemned terror.
Norway's Foreign Minister will repeat this
condemnation in no uncertain terms when he meets
with President Arafat today. Furthermore, we will call
on President Arafat to ensure that Palestinian security
organizations are consolidated and will be reporting to
an empowered interior minister.

Norway recognizes Israel's legitimate right to
self-defence. However, we note with great concern the
recent decision of the Government of Israel on the
routing of the second phase of the wall, which in most
places runs illegally deep into the West Bank.

The chosen route will have several undesirable
side effects. It will result in the confiscation of
Palestinian land. It will prevent farmers from reaching
their land and crops. The residents of several
Palestinian villages will have their freedom of
movement further curtailed. The Palestinians see the
route as creating facts on the ground and as an attempt
by the Government of Israel to unilaterally decide the
borders of the future Palestinian State. Building the
wall on Palestinian land is undermining the
Palestinians' confidence in the peace process, and is
thereby endangering the prospects for a two-State
solution.

The Norwegian Government would have
preferred to see no wall erected between Israelis and
Palestinians, as we deem it hard to see the fence as a
means to sustainably address the security problems
facing the Israeli and Palestinian populations. That can
be done only by ending the occupation and establishing
a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. However, if the Government of
Israel chooses to continue to build the wall, it must be
built along the Green Line, and not on the West Bank.
Norway urges the Government of Israel to reconsider
the routing of the wall and to build the wall along the
Green Line or on Israeli territory instead.

