Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his first report (S/2016/589) on
the implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015). It has been
produced in challenging circumstances, but it is a strong
report that covers the full range of implementation.
I also thank both briefers, and Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his excellent work as facilitator.

On 14 July 2015, after nearly two years of
negotiation, the P-5+l and Iran agreed to the historic
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. All the parties
worked hard to uphold their obligations, which
culminated in the implementation of the deal on
16 January after the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) confirmed that Iran had completed all
the steps necessary to reduce its nuclear programme.
We welcome the latest IAEA report, issued on 27 May,
which confirms that Iran continues to comply with its
nuclear commitments under the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. The United Kingdom is committed
to working with Iran and our E3+3 partners through
the Joint Commission and the Working Groups
established under the deal. That includes our role on
the procurement channel established, for the export
of nuclear-related goods and services to Iran. We will
continue to operate transparently in that regard, while
respecting the confidentiality of applications made by
States Members of the United Nations.

The implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action triggered the first phase of sanctions
relief, including United Nations, European Union
and United States sanctions. We are committed to
ensuring that this delivers tangible economic benefits
for the Iranian people. We encourage businesses to take
advantage of those new economic opportunities. The
second phase of sanctions lifting, which will commence
a maximum of eight years after implementation day,
provides a further incentive for Iran. However, in the
meantime those restrictions remain in place, and we are
unswerving in our efforts to ensure that the sanctions
that remain in place continue to be robustly enforced by
all Member States.

I must be clear that we remain concerned about
Iran's regional behaviour. Its continued testing of
ballistic missiles that are designed to be capable of
carrying nuclear weapons is destabilizing to regional
security and inconsistent with resolution 2231
(2015). The United Kingdom determines that the
ballistic missiles tested by the Islamic Republic of
Iran are designed to deliver a payload of at least 500
kilogrammes, which is the weight of a first-generation
nuclear warhead. Those missiles are designed to reach
a range of at least 300 kilometres, which would qualify
as a strategic strike. Therefore, in our view, they are
designed to be inherently capable of delivering nuclear
weapons. Together with international partners, we
wrote to the Security Council in March to express our
concern, as ballistic missile launches have the potential
to heighten regional and global tensions. It is completely
unacceptable that references to Israel were reportedly
written in Hebrew on a missile, and we call on Iran to
refrain from such provocative actions. We urge Member
States to continue to enforce the sanctions regime on
ballistic missile technology, and encourage Members
States to act on and report all suspected violations of
those sanctions.
We are concerned that Iran continues to provide
substantial military and financial support to Hizbullah
and to the Syrian regime, in contravention of the United
Nations embargo on the export of weapons by Iran. We
are also worried about reports that an arms shipment
seized in March had originated in Iran and was likely
bound for Yemen. We therefore urge Member States
to continue to enforce the binding restrictions in place
under resolution 2231 (2015), and encourage Member
States to act on and report all suspected violations of
those sanctions.

The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a success.
We have always been clear that, for it to work, all sides
need to implement fully the provisions of the agreement
and of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). For Iran
to benefit from the deal, it must build the confidence of
the international community, including the commercial
sector, that it intends to enter into a new relationship
with the international community. As a regional Power,
we expect Iran to play a positive and responsible role on
the significant issues facing the region. We call on all
participants to redouble efforts to implement all aspects
of the deal, which will build that confidence.

