Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Even now, as the
month is winding down, we are pleased to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of February. We have noted with
appreciation your leadership and the role that you
continue to play. I thank you for allowing my
delegation to participate in this debate and to share our
views on the situation in Timor-Leste.

South Africa is particularly pleased at the
participation of His Excellency Deputy Prime Minister
Guterres in this meeting. We join others in welcoming
Ms. Ameerah Haq to the Security Council, and we wish
to offer our cooperation in working closely with her.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Timor-Leste (S/2010/85), and especially
for his inclusion of the comprehensive report of the
technical assessment mission to Timor-Leste, led by
Mr. Ian Martin.

South Africa remains satisfied with the steady but
certain progress that Timor-Leste is making in
developing and strengthening the democratic
institutions and processes in that country. We salute the
efforts of the Government, the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste towards enhancing stability and
making peace sustainable.

In that regard, we welcome the successful holding
of village or suco elections as another step forward in
the process of building the Timorese State. The high
voter turnout and the capacity illustrated by the
Timorese authorities to organize and oversee those
elections are indicative of the high level of
commitment of the people of Timor-Leste to restoring
normalcy and building democracy.

South Africa also welcomes the commitments of
President Ramos-Horta, Prime Minister Gusmao and
Mr. Alkatiri, made during their meeting in January
2010, to continuing discussions on issues of national
interest. Continued political dialogue is essential to
stability and strong democratic institutions in any
society. We will continue to support all efforts aimed at
fostering dialogue and reconciliation in Timor-Leste.

My delegation also welcomes the continued
improvement in the security situation in Timor-Leste.
We support the extension of the mandate of the United

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for another
12 months, as well as the gradual process of the
drawdown and reconfiguration of the Mission. We
agree with other speakers that the resumption of
primary policing responsibilities by the National Police
of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is a crucial next step in
strengthening the country's own security institutions. It
is important for the United Nations and the
international community to continue to support Timor-
Leste in building a strong, responsible, independent
and stable State.

We have noted the caution expressed by the
Secretary-General and the technical assessment
mission with regard to security sector reform, and
especially with regard to the PNTL. It is important that
the police be projected and accepted in the community
as the primary law-enforcement agency. In that regard,
it is important that the PNTL's capacity to implement
legislation be addressed through training, capacity-
building and the provision of logistical support.

South Africa has also noted the progress made
with regard to the justice sector and welcomes the
independent comprehensive needs assessment
undertaken by the Timorese authorities. It is important
that the recommendations of that assessment be
implemented. Capacity is essential to the achievement
of the rule of law in a society, and in that regard we
welcome and support all international efforts, including
those of the United Nations, to build capacity in Timor-
Leste's justice sector.

Nonetheless, no progress will be achievable if the
sustainable socio-economic development of the country
is not made a priority both by the Timorese
Government and by the international community. We
have noted with concern the Secretary-General's
assessment that many factors that fuelled the 2006
crisis are still present in society, making it vulnerable
to instability.
In that regard, South Africa continues to be
concerned over the high rate of poverty and
unemployment, especially youth unemployment. We
reiterate our call on the international community and
multilateral partners to align their programmes and
support with those of the Government, particularly the
National Strategic Development Plan, soon to be
released.

With regard to vulnerable groups, my delegation
is pleased with the progress made with regard to the
return to and integration of internally displaced persons
in Timor-Leste and the support provided to that country
through the Peacebuilding Fund with the aim of
ensuring that reintegration is sustainable.

We have noted the slow progress on gender
equality and the implementation of women's human
rights. In that regard, we encourage the Government of
Timor-Leste to continue all its efforts aimed at
achieving stability. It is our view that no effort aimed
at achieving stability in Timor-Leste can succeed until
women take up their rightful place as agents of change
in society.

Finally, I wish to reiterate South Africa's
commitment to the people of Timor-Leste. As a
member of the international core group, with our
partners in the international community we will
continue to support the efforts of the Government and
people of Timor-Leste and the United Nations to
consolidate stability in that country.

