The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Argentina.

I would like to begin by thanking all the Council
members for supporting the initiative of the presidency
to convene a wrap-up session.

It is true that we hope to have wider participation by
the membership, as my dear friend the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation has said. However, it is also true
that the Council, through its working methods, must
provide for and generate greater interest, credibility
and desire on the part of the broader membership to
participate.

When we were preparing to assume the presidency
of the Council for the month of October, we decided
not to overload the programme with activities beyond
those provided by previous Council decisions or
practice. Despite our self-restraint, we have had a very
busy month, with 3 open debates, 12 public briefings,
1 private meeting and 15 informal consultations, as
well as the adoption of 3 resolutions, the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly,
1 presidential statement and 14 press statements, 5 of
which were issued in a single day.

The three open debates - on 21 October on the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question (see S/PV.7281), on 23 October on the working methods
of the Security Council (see S/PV.7285), and on
28 October on women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) - although diverse, had at least two
things in common. The first is the large number of
non-members of the Council that participated in each
of the three debates and the high level of interest that
was generated, which demonstrates how important the
international community considers those issues to be.
The second is the consensus that emerged - among
the members of the international community, if not
necessarily among the members of the Council - with
regard to five matters.
The first is that the Security Council should play
an active and positive role in resolving the Palestinian
question by supporting concrete initiatives aimed at
making a two-State solution a reality, since that solution
is the only one with the potential to put a definitive end
to a conflict that has lasted too long and cost too many
lives.

The second is that the International Criminal Court
makes a positive contribution to achieving our common
goal of ending impunity for serious crimes under
international law, and that the Security Council should
be responsible for following up referrals made to the
Court.

The third is that the guarantees of due process are
not only a human right of the individuals targeted by
Security Council sanctions lists; they also contribute
to the effectiveness of sanctions regimes, making
them less vulnerable to challenges by domestic or
international courts.

The fourth is that, while improving the Council's
transparency and capacity for dialogue, and ensuring
that it operates more efficiently, are important, it is vital
that we acknowledge the international community's
expectations that we will continue to work for more
democratized decision-making processes and more
substantive and transparent interaction with the
membership as a whole.

And the fifth is that it is important to pay attention
to the specific and multidimensional needs and abilities
of women and girls who are refugees or internally
displaced, by strengthening the gender perspective and
focusing on women's human rights when designing,
implementing and monitoring policies for refugee and
displaced women and girls, and implementing and
translating the commitments made in resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions into concrete results.
This should also include integrating gender into the
post-2015 development goals and the reviews of the
sanctions system, our peacekeeping operations and the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, to be held
next year.

Many other situations occupied our attention
during October: Syria in its three aspects - chemical
weapons, the humanitarian situation and the political
process, Mali, Somalia, Yemen, Lebanon, the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, South Sudan,
Ukraine, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Western Sahara and, once again, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We received two reports on sanctions
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and C6te d'Ivoire.
We also held meetings with Force Commanders of the
Organization's peacekeeping operations, on Ebola and
with the President of the International Court of Justice.

The Council also renewed the mandates of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the
African Union Mission in Somalia - which included
the renewal of the Monitoring Group's mandate and the
partial lifting of the arms embargo - and of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the only United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Latin America and
the Caribbean, in a country whose stabilization is a top
priority for Argentina.

Given the impossibility of discussing all of
those issues, I would like to say something about the
Security Council's working methods. During October,
the Council adopted resolution 2180 (2014), on Haiti,
with four explanations of vote, and another, resolution
2182 (2014), on Somalia, with two abstentions and six
explanations of vote, and on both occasions it failed
to take the views and concerns of the countries of the
respective regions into account. I believe that those
are not good precedents, and that they certainly do not
reflect the Council's commitment to respecting regional
leadership, as expressed in numerous resolutions and
presidential statements on cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations.

Finally, concerning the situation created by the
recent outbreak of Ebola - which if left unchecked
could jeopardize the hard-won progress that has been
made in building peace in West Africa - I think it
is important that all of us, especially the members of
the Council, learn to work collaboratively to find a
comprehensive solution to the problem in coordination
with the other bodies of the United Nations. That also
means that the Council should not infringe on the
purviews of other entities in the system that have the
primary responsibility, and also possess the right tools,
for dealing effectively with a crisis that is essentially a
health and social issue. It does not mean that the Council
should relinquish its own responsibilities regarding the
potential impact that this tragic epidemic could have
on security conditions in the affected region. We know
that innovation is not always an advantage. However,
we believe we missed a valuable opportunity when we
were unable to organize a joint meeting between the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the
issue.

Since this is the last meeting for the Argentinian
presidency of the Council, I would like to heartily
thank all my colleagues for their guidance and support,
without which the work of the presidency would not
have been possible. I would also like to wish Australia
every success in its leadership, for which it can count
on Argentina's full support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

