Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to welcome the Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and the United Nations, Lord Ahmed,
as President at this meeting. I convey our gratitude
and appreciation to your country, Sir, and for your able
efforts during your presidency of the Security Council
to underscore the purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as for your positive role in maintaining
international peace and security. You have been keen
to revive the discussion within the Council on the role
of mediation as a tool to settle conflicts in today's
world. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their valuable briefings.

I would like to express my sincere condolences
to the international community for the passing of the
previous Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Annan. His death is a great loss for peace
and for humanity. He was a role model in the art of
mediation, and his sincere efforts and commitment to
the maintenance of international peace and security
serve as an example of wise leadership. May his soul
rest in peace.

Jordan believes that cooperation, tolerance and the
rejection of hatred in our world are highly important.
Differences among people are a reason for coexistence
rather than divergence. Humankind finds its essence in
the multiplicity ofits colours, races, cultures, languages
and religions. Unfortunately, we are witnessing at
this time multiple complicated conflicts that focus
on differences rather than points of commonality,
rapprochement and coexistence. That is why we need an
honest mediator who reconciles differences and builds
trust, hope and a horizon, who focuses on common
interests in order to resolve conflicts and achieve
understanding and peace.

In that regard, I would like to commend the United
Nations for playing a central role as an honest mediator
in managing, resolving or preventing conflicts through
different means, including the Mediation Support Unit
and the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation,
which was recently established by the Secretary-
General, as well as the commitment of the United
Nations to pursuing its endeavours through different
means, including United Nations missions in conflict
zones and the envoys of the Secretary-General.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan underscores its

support for all means of strengthening United Nations
mediation efforts in all conflict zones, based on our
belief that the peaceful settlement of disputes is the
only way to achieve lasting peace. We also commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General to prevent and
resolve conflicts and support diplomacy for peace. We
stress the importance ofimplementing the agenda ofthe
Secretary-General for building and sustaining peace,
which places prevention at the heart of the United
Nations activities to prevent conflicts. We emphasize
the importance of his efforts to strengthen and support
United Nations peace operations so that they are able
to confront emerging challenges to international peace
and security.

Mediation is an effective tool that can be used
throughout the stages ofconflicts, not only to settle them
but also to prevent them or address their root causes
and contain their effects. The longer the conflict goes
on, the more the solutions become complicated and the
more difficult the mediation becomes. The ones who
suffer the most in such situations are innocent people,
including women, children, the elderly and young
people. That is clear in the current bloody conflicts in
the Middle East, most important the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Jordan has sought, through different means
and with all parties, to reach a comprehensive, lasting
and just solution to that crisis - a solution that meets
the aspirations of the Palestinian people to freedom,
dignity and their own State along the 4 June 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
From here within the Chamber, we call on the
international community to step up its mediation
efforts in the Middle East as a peaceful means of
settling disputes, reconciling differences and stopping
bloodshed, so as to ensure the stability of the region
and the world. It is important to find individuals and
parties that can build on sustainable solutions in that
violence-affected region to achieve a more promising
future that meets the aspirations of all the peoples in
the region to security, peace and prosperity.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein, has adopted a moderate approach in its foreign
policy. Jordan has always been the voice of wisdom and
moderation and at the forefront of States calling for
the primacy of reason and dialogue over violence and
extremism. That is reflected in our position on a number
of regional and international conflicts and crises and in
our principled position on the Syrian crisis. We have
always stated that there is no military solution to the
crisis; the only solution is a political one that meets the
aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people and preserves
the unity and territorial integrity of Syria with security
and stability. Jordanian diplomacy has also played an
important role in establishing a de-escalation zone in
southern Syria by reconciling differences and building
trust among the parties.

Jordan is a contributor to international
peacekeeping operations. It contributes more than
100,000 troops, including Jordanian women. Jordan
stresses the important role of those peacekeeping
operations. We also underscore the special role
that women play in peacekeeping operations and
in building and sustaining peace. It is therefore
important to increase the participation of women in all
institutions and mechanisms that seek to prevent and
resolve conflicts, as well as in mediation processes,
especially in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000),
which recognizes women's active role in establishing
peace and security. I call for all obstacles that prevent
women from playing their important and critical role to
be eliminated.

Jordan has sought to link the women agenda with
the youth agenda in its national plans to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in accordance
with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015). In
that connection, Jordan commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General to strengthen gender equality within
the United Nations.

In order for mediation to be successful it must
address the root causes of problems before they
escalate. Mediation must also take into consideration
the suffering of people and the different dimensions
of conflicts, including humanitarian, economic, social
and geopolitical factors. It should also seek to promote
tolerance, justice and coexistence as the ultimate goals
for all humankind.

All forms of discrimination and injustice must
be eliminated in order to sustain peace and combat
exclusion and poverty. It is also necessary to implement
the 2030 Agenda, as that would contribute to preventing
conflicts, developing social peace and alleviating
humanitarian suffering, which can lead, in many cases,
to violence, extremism and conflict. I also note the
important role that can be played by local institutions,
civil society and regional organizations, and the need to
increase their capacities and skills to that end.

In conclusion, unified support by the Security
Council for all mediation efforts is essential to
their success through providing political and moral
support to mediators, who contribute to efforts aimed
at preventing and resolving conflicts and reaching
comprehensive and lasting solutions. We hope that this
debate will be the beginning of a path on which we
will walk together towards a future we want in a world
that focuses on understanding rather than violence, on
cooperation rather than repulsion and on dialogue to
reach solutions rather than imposing them.

