First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a very important topic: the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law, including the strengthening of cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations this year, the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and principles set forth in its founding text, the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the three pillars that continue to shape the essence of its action: peace and security, development and human rights. The Charter confers on the Security Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, which makes an essential contribution to the peaceful settlement of disputes, the prevention of the outbreak of conflicts and the preservation of peace and security throughout the world. To that end, the Council must ensure respect for the territorial integrity of States, the prohibition of the threat or use of force and the promotion of the peaceful settlement of disputes. For its part, when the International Court of Justice is applied to, it rules on legal disputes submitted to it by States and may give advisory opinions on legal questions that may be submitted to it by the two principal organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies of the United Nations that are duly authorized to do so, in accordance with the mandate conferred on it both by the Charter and its Statute, whose seventy-fifth anniversary we are also celebrating. The action of those two organs in the exercise of their respective functions is complementary and distinct. The strengthening of the existing cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice, within the institutional framework provided by the Charter of the United Nations and with full respect for their respective mandates, as envisaged by the Charter, contributes positively to the work of the Council. The Security Council has often confirmed that the rule of law and justice are fundamental elements of both conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes and are the cornerstones of sustainable peace. Drawing lessons from the bellicose past of humankind, from conflicts and from human suffering, we recognize that peace and security, respect for territorial integrity and respect for human rights and the rule of law are intrinsically linked. Far from being a legal issue in the strict sense, strengthening the rule of law is closely linked to various political, economic and social factors. Strengthening the rule of law should be an integral part of the political process and should be coordinated with such processes, and not separated from them, so that they can reinforce each other. The Kingdom of Morocco's commitment to good governance is unwavering. That commitment is guaranteed by the Moroccan Constitution, which clearly enshrines it in title XII. The rule of law does not arise out of circumstances; rather, it is the fruit of a long-term and lasting commitment that is realized through continuous efforts and concrete actions. The coronavirus disease pandemic has brought about unprecedented global challenges. As a result, the response, which can only be collective, will have to be based on international cooperation and solidarity. Efforts must be redoubled to maintain the primacy of the rule of law, and the pandemic must not be used as a pretext for allowing progress to be eroded, particularly in the field of human rights and humanitarian law. Morocco remains willing to continue to be part of any United Nations effort to effectively and universally strengthen the rule of law. We wish to commend the responsiveness of the Court, which has taken commendable steps to ensure the continuity of its action and fulfil its judicial function, in particular by adapting its working methods, amending its rules of procedure and using technology to hold meetings and convene hearings by video- teleconference. Similarly, we welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of its resolution 75/129, entitled "Trust Fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International Court of Justice", which our Mission co-sponsored, and we hope that initiative will contribute to effective capacity-building in developing countries. Finally, we thank the President of the Court for his tireless efforts throughout his mandate and congratulate him for an outstanding presidency in these unique and exceptional circumstances that we have all come to know and continue to experience.
