Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Chairman of the 1267
Committee, Ambassador Mufioz, for his thorough
briefing on the results of the most recent l20-day work
period of the 1267 Committee and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. They have
done a great deal of work for which we are grateful to
them.

I would like to comment on a number of elements
of the briefing. We support developing contacts by the
Committee and the Monitoring Team, with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its experts,
for the purposes of increasing interaction among those
bodies. We also support establishing contacts between
the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee, as well
as with other agencies that work towards fighting
terrorism.

We welcome the meeting held during the
reporting period with the representatives of
INTERPOL, as well as the trip by the Monitoring Team
to INTERPOL's headquarters, in order to establish
practical cooperation.

We note the Monitoring Team's substantial
contribution to the work of the Committee, including
the preparation of a written opinion on submissions by
States of reports under Security Council resolution
1455 (2003). It is essential to continue to encourage
those States which have not yet submitted such reports
to do so. We would also like to note that success in
combating terrorism, depends on the unified efforts of
the entire international community. In that context, we
believe it is important to establish a credible dialogue
between Member States and the 1267 Committee on all
aspects of the sanctions issue.

In that context, we attach great importance to
future trips by the Monitoring Team and by the Chair
of the Committee to selected States. Such trips give us
an opportunity to ensure that States are committed to
meeting their obligations on the ground, and will
enable us to determine possible needs for technical and
other types of support from the international
community for the purpose of sanctions
implementation. That goal could be achieved by
inviting States' representatives to meetings with the
Committee.

One of the Committee's key tools is the
consolidated list. We are pleased to note that, for the
period under review, the list has been filled with new
names and additional information essential to the
proper identification of terrorists. We call on member
States to continue to provide such information to the
Committee so as to increase the effectiveness of its
work with the list. We also fully support the tasks
that the Committee has assigned itself for the future.

