Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
recent weeks, innocent civilians, both Palestinian and
Israeli, have continued to suffer revenge and reprisals
as a consequence of a new cycle of violence. The
parties' mutual accusations concerning the immediate
causes of the recent violence are, unfortunately, very
familiar. Shamefully, we have become accustomed to
being witnesses of violence. Since September 2000,
and even before, we have been hearing the same
arguments from both sides. For that reason we cannot
help asking ourselves how much more suffering
innocent Palestinians and innocent Israelis have to
endure before some of their leaders abandon the dead-
end road of mutual negation and set off irreversibly on
the journey towards peace, reconciliation and
recognition.

We believe that an essential step towards putting
an end to the vicious circle is for the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to recognize each
other's legitimate aspirations to security and to live in
peace and dignity, and then to take concrete steps to
realize them.

Israel's right to live in peace and security requires
that the Palestinian Authority take decisive measures
against individuals or groups that carry out attacks
against Israeli targets. We believe that the new
Palestinian Government must take a clear stance
against violence and immediately act to halt Qassam
rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip and suicide attacks,
and to dismantle the terrorist infrastructure on its

territory, as it has been called upon to do in the road
map.

Argentina strongly condemns the terrorist attack
committed a few hours ago in Tel Aviv and conveys its
sincere condolences to the families of the victims and
to the Government of Israel. We stress that there can be
no justification whatsoever for the killing of innocent
civilians. Likewise, the new Palestinian Authority
Government must fulfil the three conditions set by the
Quartet and by the Security Council, which my country
fully supports.

The Palestinian right to live in peace with dignity
cannot be achieved unless Israel puts an immediate end
to military operations in the occupied territories, to
extrajudicial executions and to other practices that
contravene international law.

In the same vein, Israel must cease all settlement
activity and halt the construction of the separation
barrier on Palestinian territory. In that regard, we
cannot fail to observe that if the prospect of a viable
Palestinian State becomes an ever-more distant dream
due to constant Israeli unilateral actions in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, it will become increasingly
difficult to persuade the Palestinians that it is
imperative to accept the path of compromise.

We reiterate that peace cannot be imposed
unilaterally or by force. On the contrary, it must come
about through a just and final solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and can be achieved only through
good-faith negotiations between the two parties. For
that reason, any territorial modifications to the line of
4 June 1967 must be agreed upon in the framework of
those negotiations and not be the outcome of faits
accomplis on the ground.

The Palestinian right to live in peace and with
dignity also relates to the restrictions on freedom of
movement and access. The isolation of the Gaza Strip
has undoubtedly contributed to the increased suffering
of the population of that territory and to the further
deterioration of the already dire humanitarian situation.
We reiterate our call to Israel to take measures to keep
the Karni crossing permanently open. Both parties
should attach priority to the Agreement on Movement
and Access of November 2005, and to its urgent
implementation.

In essence, that is the message we would like to
convey to the Israelis and the Palestinians. We regret
that the Security Council was unable to transmit a
similar message last week and that the negotiations on
a draft presidential statement failed. In my country's
View, the final version of the draft text was balanced
and would have constituted a sound basis for a timely
reaction to the current events in the region.

To conclude, I would like to underline that
despite the persistent differences between the parties,
we all share a common interest and duty to prevent a
security and humanitarian crisis in the Middle East, in
particular in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
remain convinced that the best way to avoid such a
crisis is through good-faith negotiations leading to the
establishment of a sovereign, democratic and
contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and security.

