Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Believe me, Mr. President, when I say
that I regret having yet again to begin a statement by
expressing my delegation's consternation and deepest
sympathy following the reprehensible terrorist attacks
that have rocked Afghanistan in the past few weeks.
Through the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
who is here with us today, I would like to convey our
solidarity with the victims and our gratitude to, and
support for, the Afghan Government in its resolute
efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.

Spain fully subscribes to the statement to be
delivered shortly by the observer of the European Union,
but I would also like to make a couple of comments in
my national capacity.

I would first like to commend the Secretary-
General for his recent trip to Kabul, just a few days ago,
which once again served to emphasize the international
community's strong support for Afghanistan and the
solidarity of the States Members of the United Nations
with the Afghan nation and its people.

The challenges facing Afghanistan right now are
numerous and significant. They include maintaining
security and combating terrorism and insurgency;
effectively implementing the reform agenda and
achieving sustained economic growth that has an impact
on citizens' daily lives; preparing for the next elections
and consolidating democracy and institutionality
through an inclusive political process; managing the
humanitarian crisis posed by the situation of internally
displaced persons; and combating the festering wounds
that drug production and trafficking have inflicted
on the country's economy. While much progress has
been made in the past few years, much remains to be
done. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/508)
and today's briefing by Ambassador Yamamoto, his
Special Representative, show that the reality is far from
positive. However, as the Secretary-General pointed out
during his visit to Kabul, the resolute commitment of
the citizens of Afghanistan to moving forward despite
the difficulties is clear. The international community
cannot be less stubborn.
I would like to emphasize Spain's support to the
Afghan authorities in their determined efforts in all
those areas, and at the same time to urge all political
stakeholders to keep the progress and well-being of
all Afghans at the forefront of their minds in order to
ensure that it is that goal that ultimately guides their
actions. I want to particularly encourage efforts to
achieve reconciliation and support the quest for peace.
When that goal is reached, while at the same time the
achievements relating to respect for the rule of law
and human rights and the equality of all Afghans are
maintained, the other challenges I mentioned can be
tackled in the full certainty of success. That peace,
moreover, will redound positively to the benefit of the
citizens ofthe entire region, notjust ofAfghanistan. We
welcome the recent regional initiatives for peace and
urge all actors in the region to commit unreservedly to
supporting all efforts to end the conflict and achieve
reconciliation.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Spain's
firm and resolute support for the work of United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and all
the United Nations agencies and programmes that
benefit Afghanistan and all Afghans. We await with
great interest the results of the strategic review of
the Mission, which is called on to contribute to the
international effort in support of Afghanistan through
better and more efficient use of available resources,
while also strengthening Afghanistan's ownership of
its own future.

