Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): We too wish to convey our deep condolences
to China and Myanmar for the humanitarian
catastrophes with which they are dealing.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the initiative of
organizing this Council debate on peacebuilding and
post-conflict stabilization, an issue that Burkina Faso
pays particular attention to.

My delegation endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Jamaica on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Countries emerging from conflict face numerous
challenges, such as the destabilization of their
economies, the collapse of security services and the
defence forces, dysfunctional public administration and
judicial systems, and more. All that places them in a
very precarious situation. The current examples of
Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and many other
countries are illustrative in that regard.

Therefore it is urgent to help those countries
emerge from that transitional period with an
appropriate peacebuilding programme, which the
Secretary-General, in his 1998 report entitled "The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa", has already
described as "actions undertaken at the end of a
conflict to consolidate peace and prevent a recurrence
of armed confrontation" (S/1998/318, para. 63).

For my delegation, any consideration of post-
conflict stabilization must recognize the essential role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission. With regard
to the Commission's activities, it seems to us that,
while significant actions have been undertaken and
partial results obtained - in particular in Burundi and
Sierra Leone and soon, we hope, in Guinea-Bissau -
the road still ahead of us is a long and difficult one.
The Commission must redouble its efforts to mobilize
partners and take adequate steps so that the priorities it
has identified are matched to those of the

Peacebuilding Fund. That implies close cooperation
between those two structures, which have
complementary mandates, as well as a clear
understanding on the part of each of its particular role.

As a financing organ, the Peacebuilding Fund is
better equipped for designing or evaluating projects
submitted to it. The Commission, more political in
nature, should coordinate the efforts of all
stakeholders, launch a constructive dialogue with all
national actors, promote in all circumstances national
ownership of the process, and make recommendations
and suggest integrated peacebuilding strategies in
accordance with the spirit and the letter of resolution
1645 (2005).

In addition to the contribution made by the
Commission, we recognize that United Nations
integrated missions, even if they have not wholly
achieved the expected results, have made a significant
contribution in the area of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in the immediate post-conflict period.
Now, the issue of the deployment of multidisciplinary
units of civilian experts should be accorded higher
priority as well as the deployment of police advisers.

Given the need for significant resources during
this crucial phase, international financial institutions
also must play an important role, working together
with the United Nations system.

These efforts should dovetail with those of
subregional and regional institutions, which, given
their proximity and their unique understanding of the
socio-economic and cultural problems of the countries
of their regions, are better able to mobilize efforts at
the subregional level and to help strengthen bilateral
relations between countries emerging from conflict and
other States.

Thus, the Economic Community of West African
States, for example, is playing an active role in the
reconstruction of Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone.
Similarly, numerous countries of the subregion are
participating bilaterally in peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts in these countries. Therefore, the
United Nations must work closely with the subregional
institutions - in a spirit of partnership, of course.

With regard to the priority sectors in the context
of post-conflict reconstruction and a return to lasting
peace, my delegation believes that equal emphasis
should be placed on strengthening the rule of law,
administrative reform, the thorny issue of debt and the
relaunching of economic activity.

To conclude, we would like to underscore the fact
that all of these processes must be carried out in the
framework of a partnership with local authorities in
order to promote national ownership. We also wish to
underscore the need to involve all components of
society, in particular women, in post-conflict
reconstruction.

