Mr. Lubbers: Mr. President, let me thank you for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council. It has
been over two years since I have had the occasion to do
so. While taking this opportunity to update the Council
on a number of humanitarian crises, I will also address
two main themes. First, I will underscore the link
between forcible displacement and international peace
and security. Secondly, I will address the issue of the
sustainable return of displaced populations and its
positive impact on the creation of durable peace and
stability.

Allow me first to focus on displacement and on
the implications for peace and security. Wherever there
is displacement, there are movements across borders.
Therefore, by definition, conflicts that generate refugee
movements necessarily involve neighbouring States
and thus have regional security implications. As we
have seen most vividly in the Great Lakes region in the
1990s and more recently in West Africa, the lines of
conflict frequently run across State boundaries due to
the various ethnic and cultural ties among the affected
communities.

This also leads to mixed movements of
populations, including not only refugees but also
armed elements seeking sanctuary in neighbouring
countries. The presence of armed elements in refugee
camps and settlements has a number of grave
consequences for the security and welfare of refugees,
including possible military incursions, forced
recruitment and sexual abuse. Those factors create an
unstable and insecure operating environment for
humanitarian workers. In addition, the presence of
armed elements gives rise to security concerns for host
communities and receiving States and has an impact on
regional peace and security.

I remember vividly my first visit to West Africa
in February 2001, shortly after being appointed High
Commissioner. At the time, there were Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) incursions into refugee-populated
areas in Guinea from Sierra Leone, and armed rebels
from Liberia were also circulating among the refugee
camps - some of which we had no access to at the
time. During that visit I called on the RUF and on
Charles Taylor for access to, and the secure passage of,
refugees. Despite the subsequent stabilization efforts in
the region, we are still suffering today from cross-
border armed movements in West Africa, with its many
refugee camps. The Mano River region, with its cross-
border movements of armed elements and of arms, has
now expanded to include C6te d'lvoire.

A current example which concerns me greatly
involves parts of Sudan and the spillover effect on
Chad. In southern Sudan, positive developments in the
peace talks have given rise to hopes for the return of
600,000 Sudanese refugees currently in exile in
neighbouring countries. Yet those developments are
increasingly overshadowed by the situation in Darfur.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) took part in the high-level
United Nations mission to Darfur, which was headed
by my colleague Jim Morris from the World Food
Programme. As members are aware from his briefing
to the Council, it is estimated that at least one million
people have been displaced as a direct result of
violence and have suffered gross human rights
violations.

Currently my Office is working together with
partners to assist the affected population in Darfur and
to try to create the conditions for eventual return, but
we must have access. If the situation does not improve,
we will see further refugee flows into Chad. The
international aid community may be quickly
overwhelmed, and there is the potential for
destabilization of the subregion.

The humanitarian situation is appalling on both
sides of the border. I visited Chad in March. Since then,
I have received more and more news regarding the
presence of armed elements near the border areas inside
Chad. There are now strong indications that both
Janjaweed militias and various groups associated with
the Sudanese rebels are operating in those locations. In
view of the increasing insecurity in the border areas,
where tens of thousands of refugees remain scattered
and without effective access to humanitarian assistance,
my Office has been working tirelessly to move the
population further inside Chad to safer areas. Despite
the massive logistical constraints, more than 60,000
refugees have already been relocated. While there is, of
course, no absolute guarantee that armed elements will
not reach the new campsites, and it is possible that, even
at a distance, they may serve as a resting ground for
combatants, distance does make the camps less
accessible for the staging of active cross-border military
operations. Despite the terrible situation in Chad, I am
sad to report that, unfortunately, in a way, the safest
place for Darfurians today is in Chad.

Returning to the theme of refugee security,
although host Governments are primarily responsible
for ensuring the safety of refugee-populated areas, the
international community has a responsibility to assist
States that lack the capacity and resources to do so
themselves. The United Nations can help advocate that
host countries assume their responsibilities, and I
encourage the Security Council do so in the case of
Chad.

That brings me to the subject of peacekeeping. In
many countries where UNHCR works, the return and
sustainability of refugees and of displaced persons is
directly dependent upon peacekeeping. This past
Monday, the Council held an open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The Secretary-
General spoke about the integration of various
elements - including the implementation of peace
agreements; the management of political transitions;
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons;
human rights programmes; and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration - into mission
mandates. I fully support his statement. The concept of
multidimensional peace operations has worked well in
Afghanistan and in Sierra Leone, and I am encouraged
to see that it is coming together in Liberia, despite the
enormous challenges facing the Mission there.

On that point, however, I would like to make the
plea that - given the nature of conflicts today -
greater attention be devoted to finding a formula for
peacekeeping missions to operate in cross-border
conflict situations, where appropriate and where
endorsed by the affected Governments. All too often,
conflicts become regional, but responses continue to be
country-based. Chad is a case in point. Perhaps we
have had something of a breakthrough on this in West
Africa with respect to cooperation between the various
United Nations missions in the region on a number of
cross-border issues. That can now be developed into a
broader strategy for the future.

The report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (S/2000/809), led by Mr. Brahimi, states
that peacekeepers and peace-builders are inseparable
partners. I very much agree with that statement. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and I myself have been
putting in place measures that would allow us to better
support one another in the common pursuit of helping
countries torn by conflict to create conditions for
sustainable peace. I very much support his statement
last Monday (see S/PV.4970) that peacekeeping
operations must draw on the resources and expertise of
the whole United Nations system.

Thanks to the Security Council, important
language has been incorporated into a number of recent
peacekeeping mission mandates that recognizes the
importance of engaging peacekeepers in monitoring the
physical safety of displaced populations and of
returning refugees. Following the political unrest that
has plagued Cote d'Ivoire since September 2002, I
have been very concerned about the fate of the
Liberian refugees who have been caught up in the
conflict there. I was therefore particularly pleased
when the Security Council tasked the United Nations
Mission in cote d'Ivoire with monitoring the situation
of the Liberian refugees to help ensure their safety. I
trust that the Council will consider a similar
monitoring role related to returns for the expected
United Nations missions in Burundi, Sudan or
elsewhere, as deemed appropriate.

I would also like to inform the Council that my
Office has begun to support the various United Nations
endeavours on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). We recognize that, while no one
United Nations body has a specific mandate for
combatants, it is in everyone's interest to come
together to ensure the success of DDR. In many cases,
there is a link between combatants and the family
members who are in our refugee camps. Thus, my
Office can support DDR efforts by ensuring the
protection of the families of combatants, linking up
with other actors such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) on family reunification,
and including demobilized combatants in community-
based reintegration programmes. For example, my
Office has been supporting the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) with DDR efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by ensuring the safe
repatriation of family members of combatants and
monitoring their return and reintegration.

In West Africa, I have been advocating for a
regional approach to DDR, in cooperation with the
United Nations missions in the region, the Mano River
Union countries - plus cote d'Ivoire these days -
and the Economic Community of West African State
(ECOWAS). The conference of Mano River heads of
State, which should be taking place today, will provide
a good opportunity to raise this issue again.

I just returned from a visit to the region and was
pleased to see the efforts my Office in Liberia has
made to support DDR efforts there. We are working on
this issue as part of a coalition of actors, including the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
UNICEF, under the umbrella of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). However, I was disturbed
to receive reports on Tuesday of riots in Monrovia
related to DDR. Last year I called for Charles Taylor to
step down and urged that an international peacekeeping
force should fill the security vacuum. We have made a
lot of progress since then, but disarmament and
demobilization are still a challenge and can be
successful only if the necessary resources for
reintegration are made available from the beginning. It
is the only method to ensure prevention of the
recurrence of conflict in the region.

By incorporating concepts such as DDR into the
work of my Office, as I have explained just now, we
can create the conditions necessary for the return of
displaced populations, while also making a major
contribution to the building of confidence, stabilization
and a climate of peace.

One other endeavour in terms of our cooperation
with United Nations missions and support for the
broader political process, which is worth mentioning
here, is that of Western Sahara. As members know, we
have put in place a package of confidence-building
measures that has helped defuse tensions in the area. A
recent breakthrough has been the family exchange
visits. More than 400 people have had the opportunity
to visit their long-lost relatives, and thousands more
are waiting in line to do so. The operation would not be
possible without the excellent cooperation of all parties
involved and, especially, of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). I
am hopeful that this may gradually lay the groundwork
for political negotiations to finally resolve this long-
standing dispute.

Let me now turn to the second theme on which I
want to focus: returns and their impact on peace and
security. We have already established that population
movements across borders have clear peace and
security implications. But what are the peace and
security implications if populations cannot return to
their homes or if they do so without the capacity of the
collapsed State to absorb them? In fact, the popular
notion of a post-conflict situation is in many senses
somewhat misleading. Countries where internal armed
conflicts have come to an end are frequently
characterized by deep social division, chronic political
instability, damaged infrastructure, high unemployment
and trauma. As a result, they remain dangerously
perched between the prospect for continued peace and
the danger of a return to war.

UNHCR's experience is that the longer refugees
and internally displaced persons are forced to stay
away from their homes, the more embittered they
become. In most cases where there are refugee
movements, displacement is either forced or coerced in
some manner. And even if displacement was not the
original intention of the conflict, it sometimes becomes
an overriding factor and, indeed, further exacerbates
the conflict. As time goes on, the camps and the
settlements where refugees find temporary shelter may
become breeding grounds for despair, and the refugees
themselves may become more vulnerable to political
and military manipulation. In such cases, the
prolongation of displacement can itself become an
obstacle to peace and to the achievement of lasting
solutions to conflict. Yet, despite that, political
negotiations often fail to address the grievances of
populations that have been forced from their homes,
which can in turn hinder the success of the peace
process.

The critical factor is to determine the conditions
for the safe and the sustainable return of refugees to
their homes. Peacekeeping alone cannot sustain peace;
it can only create the space in which peace may be
built. There is the transition from war to peace, but
also the transition from a breakdown in State
institutions to the rule of law. We often talk about the
differences between internally displaced persons and
refugees who have crossed an international border, but
the border itself is not the issue. In fact, the defining
characteristic of both is the lack of State protection,
because the State is either unable or unwilling to
provide it. Therefore, in the transition from war to
peace, it is critical that the protection and the rights of
all groups within the State, including those who fled
during the violence, are guaranteed in the peace
agreement. That is also essential for reconciliation.

Although my mandate is refugees, I have also
come to be known as the "High Commissioner for
Returnees". Since I was appointed High Commissioner
in January 2001, I have been focused on finding
durable solutions for refugees. The problem is that, in
post-conflict situations, the return of large numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons needs a
balanced and integrated approach to make returns
durable and part of sustainable peace-building. War-
torn communities, which often suffer just as much as,
or more than, refugees, cannot be expected to absorb
large numbers of returnees without an immediate
improvement in their capacity to meet basic needs.
This is the critical period when international
development agencies need to make the investment in
reconstruction and reintegration programmes. It is not
only about repatriation. In areas of return, local
communities as well as returning refugees and
internally displaced persons deserve integration and
rehabilitation projects.

These programmes need to be incorporated
systematically into post-conflict relief efforts; planning
should in fact begin at the outset of any emergency.
With this in mind, UNHCR became a member of the
United Nations Development Group (UNDG) with the
aim of ensuring that refugees and returnees are
included in the formulation of post-conflict policies as
well as longer-term development programmes. I have
also personally launched a number of initiatives to try
to address this issue, working in partnership with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World
Food Programme (WFP), other United Nations
agencies, the World Bank and bilateral development
partners. One such initiative, called the "four Rs",
helps to connect the transitions between repatriation,
reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction. In
doing so, we also practice reconciliation: it is about
return and reconciliation. We are now building on the
success of pilot projects in Afghanistan, Sierra Leone
and Sri Lanka, and we hope to implement similar
initiatives in Liberia, Burundi and, eventually, in the
Sudan. I mentioned disarmament earlier. However, it is
worth noting here the importance of also incorporating
ex-combatants who have been demobilized into
reintegration programmes.

Under the theme of returns, I would now like to
provide some encouraging news regarding Africa. I am
pleased to report that never before have there been so
many opportunities for durable solutions in so many
parts of Africa. There is enormous potential for
resolving long-standing conflicts, consolidating peace
and putting an end to long-standing refugee and
internally displaced persons situations. In Eritrea,
Angola and Rwanda, hundreds of thousands of
refugees have gone home over the past few years. In
Sierra Leone alone, more than 240,000 refugees have
been able to return home thanks to the presence of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the broader stabilization efforts of the international
community. We hope to complete the Sierra Leone
repatriation during the course of this year. In Liberia,
we have a long way to go, but we hope to begin
repatriation for the more than 320,000 refugees who
fled the country, as well as for hundreds of thousands
of internally displaced persons - we are now involved
in 20 camps for internally displaced persons - once
the situation further stabilizes. I think this will be
possible as from October. In Burundi, progress on the
political front has enabled UNHCR to facilitate the
repatriation of 35,000 refugees since the beginning of
this year, and many more will follow.

We have a common responsibility to reduce the
risk of conflicts recurring and to ensure that this
progress continues. The opportunities are there, but the
question is, will we seize them? Many challenges lie
ahead: peace processes must be strongly supported at
all levels; efforts must be made to ensure the
effectiveness of programmes aimed at the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, including youths; comprehensive
strategies should be developed to support peace-
building and reconciliation efforts; humanitarian
agencies must be given adequate resources to help
refugees and internally displaced persons return home
in safety and dignity; and the social and economic
aspects of post-conflict reconstruction must be
addressed in a timely and coordinated way. There will
be no peace and development in Africa without
reintegrating uprooted people and making them
productive once again.

Here I would like to raise concerns about inequity
in the resources that are committed to Africa. While
our emergency teams struggle to move tens of
thousands of refugees from the border areas in Chad,
this life-saving operation and the operation to prepare
the ground for eventual repatriation to the Sudan
remain seriously under-funded. Our operations in
Liberia also face severe shortages. I realize that the
Council is not seized of funding issues. However, this
is also a political point, and one that needs to be
addressed if we are to end the hostilities in the Sudan
and sustain the peace process in Liberia. Surely the
pledges for Liberia at the donors conference here in
New York earlier this year were generous. But pledges
have to be translated into effective funding and into
concrete action.

I would like to turn now to another part of the
world. In Afghanistan, the situation has begun to
improve since the end of 2001, and more than 3 million
refugees and internally displaced Afghans have
returned to their homes. My Office is actively working
with the Governments of Iran and Pakistan to facilitate
the return of 1 million more this year. I would like to
add here that Iran and Pakistan have shouldered a great
burden in hosting Afghan refugees for more than 25
years. Their generosity and their observance of
international protection and asylum principles must be
recognized as an example for other nations. It is a
special pleasure for me to make that observation at the
very time that Pakistan is presiding over the Council.
Thank you so much, Mr. President.

Despite the progress that has been made on
returns so far, it is estimated that there are still around
3 million Afghans remaining in both Iran and Pakistan.
In the tribal areas of Pakistan neighbouring
Afghanistan, there are about 200,000 refugees. I
recently had the opportunity to return to the region,
during the month of April. During that time, I ensured
that my Office was focused more than ever on the
repatriation effort. In particular, we will aim to
accelerate the closure of the refugee camps in the
border areas in order to help alleviate the security
liability for Pakistan and for the international
community at large.

That being said, the lack of security inside
Afghanistan is clearly one of the key factors preventing
or discouraging the return of Afghans. This is
particularly evident in areas where factional fighting
continues to create a negative climate for resolving
displacement. Disregard for the rule of law and other
factors such as forced recruitment, illegal taxation and
house and land occupation also prevent returns from
taking place. These problems must be addressed with
high priority. When I visited the region in April, I met
with refugees and internally displaced persons to
discuss their prospects for return. When asked what
would enable them to go home, the overriding response
was the deployment of international troops to their
areas of origin.

I am aware of the plans of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) to expand the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to a
number of locations, including through the
establishment of more Provincial Reconstruction
Teams - which actually should be provincial
stabilization teams. I welcome those plans. However, I
recently wrote to the Secretary General of NATO to
express concern about the modest troop pledges made
at the Berlin Conference and about the slow pace of the
expansion. ISAF expansion is of crucial importance to
the successful completion of the Bonn process. It is
also a key issue for the return of refugees and displaced
persons - particularly leading up to elections.

For our part, my Office supported the
Government in the establishment of a Return
Commission - including the participation of both the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and UNHCR - to address the issue of
returns of internally displaced persons, specifically
Pashtuns to the north. The Commission is working
actively with the local leaders in the north in order to
try to prevent any further displacement and to create
conditions for sustainable returns to take place. But
again, we need the Council's support on the security
issue and the expansion of ISAF, along with the
Provincial Teams, in order to succeed.

I cannot conclude without mentioning my
concern about the situation in Iraq, an issue that also
continues to preoccupy the Security Council. As
members are aware, the war in Iraq caused no massive
refugee movements. But the power vacuum and the
unremitting turmoil have led to the collapse of public
services and to insecurity for the majority of Iraqis.
Although opportunities remain bleak for refugees to
return home to a situation of instability, my Office is
working to help those Iraqi refugees in Iran who are
interested in repatriation to return home. Repatriation
convoys, many of them to Basra, started last
November. Although operations were halted in April
owing to fighting and to security concerns, they were
able to resume two weeks ago. Those are cautious,
small steps, but I hope that they will contribute in some
measure to the future stability of Iraq.
Issues of internal displacement - including in
the north, where UNHCR will assist with the return
and reintegration of displaced Kurds - are now being
addressed through what I call "plan B". Plan B is being
carried out only through national staff and non-
governmental organizations. I hope to go back, as soon
as security permits, to "plan A". Plan A means
international staff working in Iraq in order to carry out
further humanitarian assistance and reconstruction, to
undo the terrible wrongdoings of Saddam Hussein, to
assist the victims of the Arabization campaign, to assist
the Marsh Arabs and to ensure the rights of the Faili
Kurds. We will work with the Iraqi minister for
uprooted people - with Iraqis and for Iraqis.

I also praise the efforts of United Nations
national staff members for their courage and
dedication. Through them, and in cooperation with
international and national non-governmental
organizations such as Premiere Urgence, the
International Islamic Relief Organization and the
Intersos Humanitarian Aid Organization, we have been
able to continue lifesaving activities. For example,
together we distributed emergency supplies to more
than 50,000 people caught in the recent upsurge of
violence in central and southern Iraq. But I would like
to repeat that they also eagerly look forward to the day
when international staff will be able to return to Iraq to
complete their mission.

That brings me to a final point, on the security of
United Nations staff members. With more than 4,000
UNHCR staff members currently working in the field,
often in very remote and dangerous locations, this issue
is of particular concern to me and to my Office. The
bombing of the United Nations office in Baghdad last
August was a tragic reminder of the risks that staff
members take in the name of peace and justice. What
lessons shall we draw from that? The answer is
certainly not what I call Iraqization - by that, I mean
the tendency to believe that the whole world is like
Iraq. I disagree with the notion that the United Nations
should start operating in a radically different way in
every country in which it operates, on the basis that it
is now a terrorist target everywhere. My Office cannot
operate from a fortress: we cannot, and we should not.
If it comes to that, we might as well pack up and go
home.

As the Council is aware, the Secretary-General
has set up a team to look into the issue of staff safety,
and efforts are currently under way to improve the
security of United Nations personnel around the world.
For my part, I am determined to ensure that, whatever
changes are made, the system allows for - and indeed
encourages - a differentiated country-by-country
approach. Security Management Teams established in
the field must be empowered to take decisions on the
ground that are relevant to the local circumstances.
That should not be eroded by the bureaucratization and
centralization of our security management system. I
support the idea that the highest United Nations official
in the country should have the ultimate responsibility
for the security of all United Nations staff in that
country. In short, "Operate in a secure way" must be
our leitmotif. I will stop here, but I ask the Council for
its continued support in helping us to ensure the safety
of United Nations staff members.

UNHCR's ability to protect refugees and to find
durable solutions depends largely on the effectiveness
of its partnerships. That includes partnerships with
other entities of the United Nations system,
international organizations outside the United Nations
system such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross, regional organizations and initiatives such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the New Partnership for Africa's Development
and, of course, non-governmental organizations.
Because of the link between refugees and international
peace and security, a strong relationship must exist also
between UNHCR and the Security Council.

Today, I outlined a number of initiatives that my
Office is taking to work in support of current
peacekeeping endeavours. Likewise, the Security
Council's influence and its ability to take decisive
political action are critical in helping to avert
humanitarian catastrophes. It is important that the
Security Council continue to provide leadership and
direction in bringing together the various domains of
the United Nations system, including peacekeeping,
peace-building, humanitarian action and even
development.

