I, too, would like to thank David Shearer and Edmund Yakani for their very enlightening presentations. I would like to emphasize three points: the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the increase in intercommunal violence, and the need to continue the peace process. First, the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic in South Sudan are extremely concerning, in particular for an already fragile health system, as David Shearer has highlighted. The people of South Sudan, who were already suffering from a serious humanitarian crisis and lack of access to basic health care, are particularly vulnerable, as we all know. However, measures to fight COVID-19 must not result in limiting humanitarian access or the mobility of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). The violations of the status-of-forces agreement in recent months, as well as the recent attacks against humanitarian workers, are intolerable. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, is an obligation that applies to all. We also call on the Government to take action to combat hate speech and calls for violence against United Nations personnel. Secondly, the increase in intercommunal violence since the beginning of the year is also very concerning. Intercommunal violence aggravates the humanitarian crisis, in particular by driving new displaced people onto the roads. Sexual violence and violence against children are unbearable and perpetrators must be brought to justice. The establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, provided for in the agreement with the support of the African Union, should contribute to fighting impunity and reducing the scale of violence. In that context, I would like to commend the efforts of UNMISS to increase its mobility and to deploy as best as possible in these conflict zones, in particular through temporary bases. Conflict prevention actions at the community level are also more relevant than ever. I would also like to reiterate that the sanctions regime remains essential to fighting violence, limiting the proliferation of weapons and deterring perpetrators of human rights violations. Finally, France calls on the Transitional Government of National Unity to spare no effort in order to implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. The peace process must continue, despite the severe constraints of the COVID pandemic. An agreement on the distribution of the seats of the governors is urgent. As we know, lack of authorities at the local level favours intercommunal violence. Progress on security arrangements is also expected. Furthermore, this peace process must progress with respect for fundamental freedoms, in particular for journalists and civil society. It must also fully involve women and young people. This is a sine qua non condition for lasting peace. Before I conclude, I would like to express France's support and appreciation to all United Nations personnel, as well as to all humanitarian and medical personnel in South Sudan. In this particularly difficult period, their work is more necessary and more admirable than ever.
