Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September, and to express my thanks for
the opportunity to participate in this meeting on the
current situation in Haiti and the challenges facing the

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in the light of the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/446). I would also like to
thank his intermediary, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his
briefing and, above all, for his ongoing laudable work
as head of MINUSTAH. I also thank Ambassador Leo
Merores for his briefing this morning.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the Eastern
Republic of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, so I would only like to add a few additional
comments.

In that regard, let me reiterate the firm
commitment of Argentina to Haiti - a commitment
that has endured for 16 years and is expressed today by
our continued participation in MINUSTAH. Following
the earthquake in January, we have deployed to the
Mission an additional infantry company of 150 military
personnel to assist in the distribution of humanitarian
aid to the Haitian population.

We endorse the terms of the reconfiguration of
the mandate of the Mission authorized by this Council
in resolutions 1908 (2010) and 1927 (2010), and share
the view expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report that the best time to assess the advisability of
modifying the current mandate and troop level of the
Mission will be after the legislative and presidential
elections in November and the installation of the new
president and Government.

Similarly, my delegation also shares the view of
the Secretary-General that Haiti, under the leadership
of the Haitian Government and with international
support, has successfully avoided a second-wave
disaster of epidemics or social unrest. We believe that
MINUSTAH's presence was a decisive stabilization
factor in that regard.

The political and economic situation in Haiti
remains complex as a result of the physical destruction
and great loss of institutional capacity caused by the
earthquake. The tragedy undid the progress that has
been made in many areas in Haiti. It has resulted in the
renewed commitment of the international community
to rebuilding and strengthening the Republic of Haiti.
In these circumstances and in order contribute to
reconstruction efforts, we are working with Peru to
provide MINUSTAH with the Jose de San Martin
combined engineering company.

Let me also recall that, out of its concern for the
development of State institutional capacity in Haiti,
Argentina actively engaged in regional police
cooperation so that Haiti could take full responsibility
for internal security in the not-too-distant future.
Following a number of preparatory meetings, in 2009
Argentina and Chile issued an assessment report and
plan of action on police cooperation with Haiti, with a
view to coordinating, institutionalizing and assessing
the educational and professional training to be offered
to the Haitian National Police. This cooperation was
suspended owing to earthquakes in both Haiti and
Chile, but the initiative will resume when the Haitian
Government completes an updated a report setting out
priorities and needs in this area.

I note that, as a participant in the donors'
conference that took place on 31 March, Argentina
pledged $16 million as its share of the $100 million
contribution pledged by the countries of the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR). These funds have
already been made available to the UNASUR Secretary
General to carry out cooperation projects to be
identified at Port-au-Prince through the UNASUR
technical secretariat; they will relate to food security,
risk-prevention and averting natural disasters and
building Haitian State capacity. We pledged a further
$1 million for cooperation activities and programmes
that Argentina caries out in Haiti through the United
Nations Development Programme, principally on food
security and institution-building.

My delegation believes that MINUSTAH remains
a decisive factor in sustainably establishing a secure
and stable environment in Haiti, as the Secretary-
General observes in his report. That is why we believe
it is essential that the Mission's mandate be extended.

I conclude by recalling that in Haiti we are
working in the hope that the day will come when the
MINUSTAH mandate has been fulfilled and that the
presence of the United Nations and the international
community will no longer be needed because Haitians
are able to shoulder full responsibility for their
economic and social development. To attain that goal,
it is important to continue to work to build the
institutional capacity of the Haitian Government, in
accordance with national priorities and in a framework
of appropriate United Nations coordination of
international assistance.
