Mr. Mazimhaka (Rwanda): Allow me first of
all, on behalf of my Government and of my delegation,
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December, and on a job well done thus far, half way
through the month. We also recognize the distinguished
work of the previous President, Ambassador Durrant of
Jamaica.

The Government of Rwanda is grateful to the
Security Council for having found time on its busy
schedule to debate the issue of the exploitation of
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, an
issue which, in our View, has given rise to a great deal
of grief and recrimination on all sides. We thank the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the timely
completion of its eagerly awaited reports.

The reaction of my Government is set out in
Security Council document S/2001/1161. I shall
therefore be brief as concerns the details of our
reaction.

On the allegations concerning the exploitation of
the wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Government of Rwanda has noted that, in the
present addendum (S/2001/1072) to its report, as
before, the Panel, in the case of Rwanda and its
Government, did not indicate the names of
organizations involved in the exploitation of resources.
But we do not have all the details of its investigation;
we shall await the Panel's further work on this issue.

Commercial activities allegedly carried out by the
Rwandan Government or its army should be carried
out, as elsewhere, through recognizable organizations
or companies, which has not been the case either time
we have had this report.

However, we have noted that, in the case of the
allies of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, a direct link between exploitation and
the continuation of the war was established. Our
reaction to the previous report was that we had wanted
this to be looked at, so it is gratifying, therefore, that
work has been done in that direction.

A system of payment through concessions,
contracts and joint ventures, which previously had
been publicly acknowledged by the parties themselves,
is now on record in the work of the Panel.

Some of the resources go to finance the arming
and training of ALIR forces - which, again, is
something we have been bringing to the attention of
the Council over the past year as we try to implement
Lusaka and as we continue to encounter difficulties in
carrying out the process of disarmament.

Secondly, the Panel did not fully establish links
between the exploitation of resources and the
operations of the Rwandan Patriotic Army. Once again,
if there is any evidence, we did not see it in the report
of the Panel and therefore cannot make any further
comments on it.

However, in the response that it gave, the
Government of Rwanda recognizes that the Panel made
recommendations in the right direction. These
recommendations point to a positive and constructive
approach to the central issues that are at play in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The key elements of the Panel's recommendation
are, first, that everything must be done to give the
Democratic Republic of the Congo effective control
over its territory and to protect its resources from illicit
exploitation; and secondly, that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) should accelerate the process of
the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration of the armed groups.

The Rwandan Government endorsed the Panel's
View that, in the absence of a resolution to the conflict,
it would be unrealistic to expect that an end could be
put to this exploitation. This should refocus our
attention onto the full and speedy implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement, as we mentioned in our
response.

The Government of Rwanda added in its report
that the disarmament of the Interahamwe and the
former Rwanda Armed Forces (ex-FAR), rebaptized
ALIR, will certainly lead to the withdrawal of all
foreign forces, including the Rwandan forces. Rwanda
in particular has already seen a direct link between the
active and hostile presence of these forces and the
deployment of its forces in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The Rwanda Government also noted that the
Panel's acknowledgement that continuing or
intensifying fighting appears to be aimed at preventing
effective demobilization in the Democratic Republic of

S/l'V.4437

 

the Congo and that credible sources informed the Panel
that several ALIR combatants had been incorporated
into the Congolese Armed Forces.

Rwanda believes that this shows the Security
Council definitively that Rwanda's problem is the
support that the Government of Kinshasa has been
giving, and continues to give, to these genocidal
terrorist forces in their quest to wage war against our
country.

We note also that the reports made mention of the
leadership of these forces, most of whom are indictable
criminals, enjoying unlimited freedom of circulation in
the capital, Kinshasa. This goes against the norms and
obligations of international law.

Given these realizations and the facts that have
been brought to light by the Panel - and which, as I
said earlier, we have been bringing to the Council's
attention for a long time - one would like, however,
to focus on the positive elements of the report and to
try to make some specific recommendations for a way
forward in the continued search for peace and security
in our region.

One of the issues raised by the Panel of Experts is
that of the continued low-key war that is being waged
in north Katanga and in the Kivus by the armed groups
supported by the Kinshasa Government and its allies.
We must address this issue and others before we can
think about making progress in this direction.

We must look for ways of enhancing the process
of ending the conflict as a whole, not elements of the
conflict alone. I note here that, when we continue to
say that there is a ceasefire along the main front line,
we are really being blind to the fact that the front line
has shifted eastward towards the borders of Rwanda,
Uganda and Burundi.

The second issue is the restoration of full
sovereignty to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This includes State authority and the withdrawal of
foreign forces from that country.

My Government could not agree more with the
Panel on these two issues. The Lusaka Agreement for a
ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
brings together all of the elements necessary to put an
end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. At this stage, two important elements are not
receiving adequate attention from the Council, and yet
they are indicative of the difficulties we are facing in
the process of implementation.

The first is what is euphemistically referred to as
the transfer of the war to the east; the second is the
inter-Congolese dialogue, which is an essential element
in restoring the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I will make what I hope are helpful observations
as we look for a way forward.

Let me say that, with respect to question of the
transfer of the war to the east, it is not really a transfer.
The current conflict began in the east, where the ex-
FAR and the Interahamwe had been waging a war of
extermination against the people of Rwanda. That
objective has not changed. However, the same
forces - rebaptized ALIR, as I said earlier - took
advantage of the deep disengagement carried out by the
Rwandan forces to penetrate through a weakened
defence to push back into the east, where they had been
chased from.

With the help of the authorities in Kinshasa,
ALIR is able to obtain the endless flow of supplies
needed to sustain the war. The report adequately
describes how this is done and how the resources are
secured. Whereas forward units continue to wage war
in north Katanga and Kivu, a large part of ALIR is
effectively integrated into the Congolese armed forces
(FAC). Again, the Government in Kinshasa must have
the resources to maintain this annex to its own national
army. The leadership of ALIR - all of them officers of
the ex-FAR, indicted or indictable for genocide - are
leading a life of luxury financed by the authorities in
Kinshasa.

It is with these facts in mind that the Government
of Rwanda proposes the following: the deployment of
phase III of MONUC should be done expeditiously.
MONUC and the Joint Military Commission (JMC)
should systematically carry out surveillance of
resupply routes, both by air and by land, and, in this
specific case, along Lake Tanganyika. That is within
that mandate of MONUC and the JMC.

MONUC and the JMC should monitor and report
movements of armed groups, since these are the ones
responsible for the continuation of the conflict. The
Security Council, and in particular those of its
members that enjoy good relations with the
Government of Kinshasa, should make strong

Sll'V.4437

 

representations to that Government to stop giving
assistance to those forces, in conformity with all recent
Security Council resolutions.

The Security Council should call on the
International Tribunal for Rwanda to locate and arrest
the leaders of ALIR who are already indicted for
genocide, with - we hope - the following results:
first, the activities of these armed groups, which
threaten the peace process, will be severely hampered
by these actions; secondly, voluntary disarmament and
demobilization can then become a realistic goal; and
thirdly, the deployment of phase III of MONUC will
then be justified.

On the restoration of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we would like to
say that that principle has been reaffirmed in the
Lusaka Agreement and all relevant Security Council
resolutions. It has also been a subject of contention in
the context of the current debate about who is
responsible for the resources of the Congo - there is a
contest between the Congolese actors as to which of
them is the legitimate custodian of that sovereignty.

The Lusaka Agreement provides for a
straightforward and speedy resolution of this issue,
through the inter-Congolese dialogue. Fortunately, the
dialogue has begun, and I was glad to hear the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo say that the recent contacts were not in vain,
although, because of the many actors interested in the
process, the advance of this process is being observed
through subsets of the dialogue, rather than the
dialogue itself. However, it is not the form that matters;
if progress can be made, so much the better.

As the Panel has pointed out in its reports,
everything must be done to give the Democratic
Republic of the Congo control over its territory so that
it can protect its resources from exploitation. It is with
that in mind that we encourage the Congolese parties to
the dialogue, now fully constituted, to go about the
process selflessly, courageously and with a clear sense
of the historic importance of the moment.

We urge the Security Council, therefore, to
continue to take an active role, directly and through its
members, in pushing the dialogue forward. To this end,
it is important to do the following: urge the negotiators
to return to the table as soon as possible; give all
support, financial and political, to the process; urge the
Government to take the lead while accepting the roles

of other Congolese parties assigned to them through
the Lusaka Agreement, to which it is a signatory; and
encourage the facilitator and others who are offering
help to coordinate their efforts.

In conclusion, the Rwandan Government once
again welcomes the reports and fully shares the
forward-looking assessment of the problems in the
region. The Rwandan Government will continue to
support the work of the Panel, as mandated by the
Security Council. Rwanda considers the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to be non-
negotiable. It can be exercised only on behalf of and
for the benefit of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This includes sovereignty over
the natural resources and other forms of wealth they
collectively possess.

The Government of Rwanda, however, insists that
the military activities carried out by ALIR from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the support of the current Government in
Kinshasa, constitute a major obstacle to the full
enjoyment of sovereignty by our two sister States. It is
therefore imperative that the two Governments work
together, within the context of the provisions of the
Lusaka Agreement, to fully implement the process of
disarmament and demobilization.

The Rwandan Government urges the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to dissociate
itself from the activities of ALIR, which is a terrorist
organization - an organization led by people who
carried out genocide in Rwanda - and to immediately
cease the support that it gives to it. In particular, ALIR
should be removed from the FAC; its inclusion is a
clear indication that the Kinshasa Government is
preparing to hide these criminal forces with a view to
their future use against Rwanda or against the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Given our experience over the past seven years,
Rwanda can only be reassured by a stable Democratic
Republic of the Congo, fully in control of its territory
and willing to promote the principles of good-
neighbourliness and cooperation. The Government of
Rwanda will continue to cooperate fully with the
Lusaka Agreement partners and the Security Council in
promoting peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.

Finally, I want to put on record our objection to
the repeated accusation by the Government of the

S/l'VA437

 

Democratic Republic of the Congo that Rwanda is
deliberately infecting the Congolese people with the
HIV virus and AIDS.

