Ms. Seder (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden. Let
me also mention that Sweden is presently chairing
the International Contact Group on the Great Lakes
Region, and I am happy to be accompanied today by
our Special Envoy, Ambassador Lena Sund, who is also
Ambassador to Angola.

At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for this important initiative, which comes at a critical
juncture but also at a moment of renewed opportunity
for the Great Lakes region. I would also like to express
my appreciation for the valuable testimonies made
earlier by ministers from the region, as well as for
the briefings by the Secretary-General, the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security and the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.

For too long, tension and conflict have been far
too common in the Great Lakes region, resulting in
suffering for millions of people. We need to do more
than just manage crisis and its consequences. We need
to collectively support and strengthen international and
regional efforts to prevent conflict by addressing the
root causes of conflict. That includes a wide range of
issues, such as socioeconomic needs, climate change,
good governance and human rights, just to name a few,
all of which are fundamental elements for building
sustainable peace, long-term stability and development.
The now three-year-old Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region includes such a broad
agenda. It recognizes that peace and development are
two sides of the same coin and has tangible plans and
actions of fundamental importance to reduce fragility
in the region. Let me touch upon three areas that we
believe deserve particular attention.

First, with regard to the role of regional
organizations, the Nordic countries have consistently
advocated for strengthened cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, because
local ownership is a precondition for legitimacy and
effectiveness in peacemaking, as well as in facing other
challenges. We welcome and support the increasingly
important roles played by the African Union and
subregional bodies in the context of the Great Lakes
region, in particular the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). We encourage
their stronger partnerships and their institutionalized
collaboration with the United Nations.

Secondly, the lack ofjobs and economic opportunities
fuel conflict. We have already recognized that only in
partnership with the private sector will we be able to
realize the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and advance
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We are
therefore encouraged by the Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, which was
arranged jointly by the United Nations and the ICGLR
last month. The role of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank in promoting economic growth
should also be recognized.

It is important to note that Governments and
businesses have a responsibility in securing decent
work conditions, combating corruption and promoting
human rights and environmental standards so that
economic growth leads to sustainable economic, social
and environmental development. The importance of
good governance and predictable framework conditions
for investments and private sector development cannot
be emphasized enough. Let me echo what Said Djinnit
said earlier about the importance of how natural
resources can serve countries and peoples and not
become a scourge or continue to be one. The region
has much potential. There are ample opportunities for
economic growth and job creation.

Thirdly, on the role of women, we emphasize
the importance of the full and active participation of
women in the prevention, the management and the
resolution of conflicts, as well as in post-conflict
efforts and cooperation. In the experience of the Nordic
countries, the genuine participation of women in all
aspects of life, in all aspects of peacemaking, is an
indispensable foundation for sustainable development.
The Great Lakes region has shown leadership in
ensuring women's participation in decision-making.
In that particular regard the example of Rwanda stands
out, with now around 50 per cent women members of
Parliament.

Let me turn to the developments in Burundi. We
remain deeply concerned about the reports of violence
and the risk that economic decline could become an
additional driver of the crisis. We welcome the strong
regional leadership by the East African Community
and the African Union, President Museveni and former
President Mkapa, with the support of the United Nations.
We were pleased to learn that the African Union and
the Government of Burundi have agreed to increase
the number of human rights and military observers.
Impartial monitoring can help clarify allegations and
ease tensions, and thereby prevent the escalation of
the conflict and help create an enabling environment
for dialogue. We believe that a political solution can
be found, and strongly encourage all parties to refrain
from using language that will encourage divisions
along ethnic lines.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that the Nordic
countries will remain committed to the people of
the Great Lakes region. That commitment goes back
to the 1960s, when the then Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjold so tragically paid with his life when
trying to make peace in the war-torn region. We now
look forward to cooperating with the country to realize
the great potential of the Great Lakes region.

