Mr. Hyseni: It is an honour to address the
Security Council at this point in time, almost six
months after Kosovo became an independent State. The
Security Council has played an important role in every
stage of post-war developments in Kosovo. It is
therefore my pleasure to speak here today about the
progress made in Kosovo after independence,
especially in the wake of the entry into force of
Kosovo's new Constitution on 15 June.

As members of the Council know, we declared
our independence in February in line with the
provisions and recommendations of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy Marti Ahtisaari. The
Comprehensive Proposal of President Ahtisaari has
been endorsed by the Parliament of Kosovo and the
Government has put together plans to implement it in
its entirety.

So far, 43 States around the world, including
most of the countries in our region of Europe, have
recognized our independence. Many of them have
generously offered us their support in building a stable,
multiethnic and democratic State and society. We

expect many other countries to recognize Kosovo as an
independent State in the months ahead.

We are aware that independence has not solved
many problems my country faces. Kosovo still has
significant work to do to repair its devastated economy,
which was mismanaged for decades and systematically
destroyed by the Milosevic regime. The youngest State
in the world is in desperate need of investment from
abroad and economic development.

To that end, I am happy to report that the recent
donor conference on Kosovo was a great success. The
donor community has generously pledged over
€1.2 billion to support Kosovo's economic recovery
and development. I take this opportunity to extend our
deepest appreciation to all donor nations. Likewise, I
wish to reiterate the firm commitment of the
Government of Kosovo to full transparency and
accountability as we work with our donor partners to
implement various projects.

In recent weeks, Kosovo has taken major steps
towards becoming a more just and democratic State.
The new democratic Constitution of the Republic of
Kosovo, which entered into force on 15 June, is an
excellent example of a modern constitution that reflects
the highest international standards on human and
minority rights. That foundational document was
prepared with the help of international experts and
incorporates minority-rights protections from the
Ahtisaari plan, and the people of Kosovo are very
proud of it.

Also on 15 June, over 40 pieces of legislation
from the Ahtisaari Proposal entered into force. Those
laws cover such crucial areas as the decentralization of
local Government and the protection of minority rights
and of cultural and religious heritage. Both the new
constitution and the entry into force of those laws
create basic prerequisites to implement the Ahtisaari
plan in its entirety.

Beyond just adopting legislation, the Government
of the Republic of Kosovo has already embarked upon
on-the-ground implementation of the Ahtisaari plan.
For example, plans for the establishment of protective
zones around Serbian Orthodox sites and for the
decentralization of local governance - namely, for the
establishment of new Serb-majority municipalities -
are already under way.

Reconciliation among our communities is a
standing priority of the Kosovo institutions. The
President is in the process of establishing within his
office a community consultative council, and the Prime
Minister of Kosovo has already established a special
office within his Cabinet for outreach to the minority
ethnic communities.

Reconciliation goals are being best served also by
our multi-ethnic coalition Government. The Kosovo
Government has two ministers from the Serb
community and one from the Turkish community and a
number of deputy ministers from minority
communities.

As members of the Council know, after the
declaration of independence, Kosovo welcomed and
invited the European Union and NATO to perform
functions in Kosovo. The establishment of the
International Civilian Office to supervise the
implementation of the Ahtisaari plan and the
deployment of a European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX Kosovo) to help us in the police and justice
sectors have been widely appreciated in Kosovo.
Although there have been isolated violent challenges
by certain illegal structures in the north of Kosovo,
including attacks which resulted in the tragic death of a
United Nations police officer, the overall situation has
remained calm and orderly, and that has helped us
make a smooth transition to the new status.

In response to the new situation in Kosovo, the
Secretary-General took the initiative to reconfigure the
United Nations presence in our country. The President
of the Republic of Kosovo, His Excellency Mr. Fatmir
Sejdiu, wrote to the Secretary-General on 16 June 2008
to express his appreciation of that initiative. In line
with that, we will continue to work closely with the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, as reconfiguration moves
ahead. We understand that the United Nations will
continue to perform rule of law functions, for a limited
period of time, until the European Union becomes fully
operational throughout Kosovo. We look forward to
working with EULEX, and we firmly believe that its
deployment throughout Kosovo can only help security
and stability in Kosovo and in the region.

Let me take a moment here to express our
gratitude to all the men and women of the United
Nation Mission in Kosovo for their good work and for
helping us rebuild our devastated country and shattered
society over the past nine years.

Kosovo will continue to hold out a hand of
friendship and cooperation to Serbia. We will not
withdraw the strong commitments to friendship and
cooperation with Belgrade and with all of our
neighbours. As we have stated so many times before,
Kosovo and Serbia are linked by ties of geography,
infrastructure, trade, culture, et cetera. We will
continue to insist upon and to seek normalization of
relations with our neighbour to the north, based on
shared values and common interests. We will continue
to react with restraint, moderation and goodwill,
believing this to be the only way towards the
establishment of a democratic, multi-ethnic State,
where there is room and opportunity for all and whose
future lies squarely on the path to European
integration. Ultimately, both our countries share the
desire for a brighter future in the Euro-Atlantic
community of democracies.

Pristina is ready to engage in discussions with
Belgrade, as two independent States, on a wide range
of practical issues of mutual interest. The Secretary-
General has likewise proposed that each country
discuss with the United Nations a number of practical
arrangements. As President Sejdiu stated in his address
to the Council on 20 June (see S/PV.5917), we are open
to this dialogue. We, of course, have taken very
seriously the Secretary-General's commitment to
consult with us, as no arrangements can be viable
without the full participation and approval of the
Government of the Republic of Kosovo.

Finally, I wish to underline Kosovo's strong
commitment to becoming a full and contributing
member of the international community. We will seek
full membership and participation in each and every
regional and international structure and initiative, in
line with our strong desire for good-neighbourly
relations. Close cooperation among countries is an
indispensable prerequisite for the early admission of
our countries to the European Union family of
democracies and the wider community of nations. In
the twenty-first century, no country should be forced
into unwanted isolation. The Republic of Kosovo looks
forward to working with all of the members of the
Council to promote our shared goals of international
peace and security.

In conclusion I wish to once again express our
gratitude for the opportunity to present the views of
Kosovo.

