Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to briefthe Security
Council on Burundi as it considers the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2013/36).

It gives me great pleasure and privilege to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
Janueary. Under your skilled leadership, the Council
is in very good hands. As this is the first time that I
am briefing the Council on Burundi, I would beg your
indulgence in using the full time alloted to me.

As the Council knows, the Burundi has traveled a
long path out of the cycle of violence that plagued it for
more than four decades. The United Nations has been
at Burundi's side every step of the way. The people and
Government of Burundi have the greatest appreciation
for that support. As I begin my presentation, allow me,
Mr. President, to thank the Government and people of
Burundi for the very high esteem in which they hold
the United Nations. I have been humbled by the warm
welcome I have received and the cordial relationships
we have established since my arrival in their beautiful
country. The work of the United Nations in Burundi
is both respected and valued. It is in appreciation of
the priceless support of the United Nations to their
country that the Government of Burundi has made it
a duty to reciprocate and give back to the community
of nations, in particular by providing critical forces to
peacekeeping operations, most notably in Somalia, and
often at a high human cost. We will never be able to
thank them enough for their sacrifice.

On behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Security Council for your dedication in
the search for lasting peace in our ever more global and
complex world, most specifically in Burundi.

Throughout 2012, Burundi continued to make
further progress in consolidating peace and stability.
By comparison with the situation that prevailed
during the years of war, today's Burundi is a far better
place to be in and to live in. Historians and observers
may tell members that never before has the country
witnessed such a long and uninterrupted period of
democratic experience and stability. The Government
and people of Burundi need to be commended for that
major achievement in a post-conflict context. They
deserve our continued support. That is not to say that
the country has overcome all of its challenges. I will
discuss both achievements and challenges with the
Council today, through the lens of the benchmarks that
the Council asked the Secretary-General to submit to it,
and measure Burundi's progress against.

A number of the positive trends reported by my
predecessor, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Karin Landgren, to whom I am ever grateful,
during the previous briefing on Burundi to the Council
in July 2012 (see S/PV.6799) have been further
consolidated. Determined to overcome the effects ofthe
long-standing conflict, Burundi has continued to make
progress on its path towards a more peaceful, more just
and more cohesive society. However, the impact of the
boycott of the 2010 elections continues, unquestionably,
to affect negatively Burundi's political landscape.
The political standoff between the Government and
the extra-parliamentary opposition has led to tense
relationships - sometimes with a violent edge to
them - thereby putting an unnecessary and regrettable
strain on political space. Needless to say, that is
contrary to the letter and spirit of the consensus that
has animated the peace-consolidation process since the
Arusha Accords. Burundi's long-term stability - and,
more immediately, the successful preparations and
conduct of the 2015 elections - hinge, critically, on
maintaining both.

Burundi is to be commended for its efforts in
strengthening governance and institution-building,
leading to continued improvements in mechanisms to
fight corruption and build accountability. Burundi's
new Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) was
finalized and adopted in January 2012, and the new
United Nations Development Assistance Framework in
January 2013. We congratulate Burundi for the clearly
articulated vision and excellent road map that those
documents provides us with.

The conference of Burundi's development partners
that took place at the end of October in Geneva helped
to mobilize major support for the implementation of
the new PRSP, in an impressive show of confidence by
Burundi's international partners. The many partners and
friends of Burundi who attended the conference could
see for themselves that Burundi had travelled a long
path. Democratic elections were held twice since the
end ofthe conflict. And the efforts that the Government
has been making to strengthen good governance and
the accountability of institutions are beginning to pay
off. Burundi, on the other hand, restated in Geneva, and
in subsequent statements by its highest authorities, its
commitment to the principles of democracy, inclusion,
human rights and reconciliation.

As I mentioned earlier, the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council contains an evaluation of
the progress made against each of the eight benchmarks.
Allow me to briefly highlight key points from the
assessment.

(spoke in French)

The democratic process in Burundi continues to
take on strength, despite the fact that, as I said a few
moments ago, the impact of the boycott of the 2010
elections is still being felt. The majority of the most
important institutions continue to improve and to
carry out their responsibilities with greater confidence
and efficiency. We can be pleased that today that
the opposition's rejection of the legitimacy of the
institutions that emerged from the elections appears to
be waning.
One of the negative aspects of the boycott was a
decrease in the diversity and representative character of
legislative bodies, thereby circumscribing the chances
for genuine debate and the search for consensus in
addressing major issues of national concern. As nature
abhors a vacuum, we have also witnessed a shift from
the opposition to civil society when it comes to the
Government's actions, with civil society increasingly
being on the frontlines in opposition.

In spite of that tension and the divergence of views
on a great number of issues that are severely testing
Burundi's experience of democracy, the discussion
between the Government and the extra-parliamentary
opposition is continuing. For example, we should
welcome the fact that the controversy surrounding the
appointment of the members of the new independent
National Electoral Commission has been overcome.
Everything must now be done to support the work of
that important institution, so as to allow it to organize
the 2015 elections in an atmosphere of calm.

Generally speaking, I would like to commend the
receptiveness of Burundi's authorities and opposition
leaders to our humble advice and suggestions to be
more accommodating.

In spite of those political challenges, Burundi
continues to enjoy an outstanding level of security and
stability. That is undoubtedly due, in large part, to the
successful reform of Burundi's army and its growing
professionalization. Now that things are calmer within
its borders, Burundi has become an important actor
in international efforts at peace, including efforts led
or supported by the United Nations. Working with
international partners, the United Nations has continued
to provide the necessary support to strengthen the
professionalism and accountability of the security
sector, including people's confidence in Burundi's
security forces.

While the overall security situation has remained
stable, cross-border incursions by armed group
continued throughout 2012, leading to armed clashes
with Burundi's security forces. Although most were
low-level clashes, those incidents nevertheless reveal
that there are still Burundians who will turn to armed
violence to achieve political goals. The Secretary-
General unreservedly condemns all recourse to armed
violence as a means or tool of political expression,
and calls on all Burundian political forces to choose
dialogue and turn to democratic institutions over
violence. When it comes to cross-border movements of
armed groups, it is crucial to foment greater stability
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That is an essential element of a comprehensive
strategy to build lasting peace in Burundi.

It is also essential to put an end once and for all
to acts of intimidation and factional violence in the
context of Burundi's political landscape. Burundi,
which has suffered too much from exclusion and clan
mentality, continues to show the world that it has the
necessary maturity to overcome its differences through
dialogue. That was the right choice in Arusha in 2000,
and it continues to be the right choice today.

Achieving a process of transitional justice that
meets the dual objectives of reconciliation and providing
justice is indeed crucial, but as yet incomplete under
the Arusha Accords. The Mechanisms of Transitional
Justice is at the very heart of the absolute need to take
responsibility for the past by each Burundian and by
the country as a whole. In that regard, transitional
justice is an essential element of national restoration
and reconstruction. There is national consensus on
putting in place the basics. The country's President
has on many occasions underscored the willingness
of the Government to set up a truth and reconciliation
commission. A bill that has garnered the attention
of the entire country is currently before the National
Assembly for consideration. Throughout 2012, the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights stressed the need to address this issue in a
manner consistent with international norms and best
practices, as well as in line with national expectations.
Accordingly, BNUB submitted its comments on the
draft law to the President of the National Assembly.
We are hopeful that, in its wisdom, that body will
strike a constructive balance between the essential
need to promote national reconciliation with the need
to provide justice in order to put an end to impunity
and overcome the deep divisions that have afflicted the
people of Burundi for so long.

For the same reasons, all stakeholders should
ensure that the truth and reconciliation commission to
be established be viewed as independent, legitimate and
credible in the eyes of all Burundians, first and foremost,
but also in the eyes of the country's international
partners. The United Nations has supported Burundi
since the beginning of the process and remains prepared
to support a Truth and Reconciliation Commission
that is fully in line with international principles and
common aspirations.

Significant progress has been achieved with respect
to governance and the strengthening of institutions,
allowing ongoing improvement in anti-corruption
mechanisms and enhanced accountability for
institutions. As proof of this, Burundi has been ranked
highly in several global and regional ratings systems.
The National Strategy on Good Governance and the
Fight against Corruption has begun to yeild concrete
results, and the positive performance of the Burundi
Revenue Authority is clear to all. The commitment
of the President to pursuing his zero-tolerance policy
against corruption lends significant political credibility
to such efforts.

There is no need to stress the essential role that
the judicial system can play in helping to establish a
Burundian society based on respect for the rule of law,
peacebuilding and stability. It is therefore important to
enhance it and to ensure that it is representative, while
also shoring up the publics's trust in it. However, we
must recognize that the judicial system also continues
to encounter major challenges.

I will now turn to human rights. The human
rights situation showed some encouraging signs of
improvement in 2012 compared with the two previous
years. For example, the number of extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions and/or deaths that
could be considered as politically motivated, as well
as cases of torture documented by BNUB, decreased
significantly compared with the previous year,
although the number of instances of abuse continues
to increase overall. BNUB and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights have worked
tirelessly to support the Government in ensuring
national capacity-building in promoting and protecting
human rights in Burundi. This has been accomplished,
inter alia, through close cooperation with the Ministry
of Human Rights and support to the Independent
National Human Rights Commission that was set up
in July 2011. The Commission has seen a significant
increase in the number of cases recorded, studied and
completed this year. It has also opened three regional
offices, which has expanded its scope and enhanced its
efficiency.

Civil society organizations continued their
outreach work on relevant issues, including human
rights, corruption and social issues such as the
increase in food prices. While it is clear that tensions
continue to plague the work of such organizations, we
must welcome the positive examples of cooperation
between the Government and civil society. We must
also stress that the existence of a dynamic civil
society and independent media are valuable assets for
Burundian society. We must do our utmost to ensure
that those stakeholders continue to play their essential
role of monitoring and outreach, ethically and in a
responsible manner, in order to contribute to enhancing
democracy gains and to achieving the national strategic
development objectives.

The eighth criterion, which deals with economic
and social development, is without doubt that to which
the Government of Burundi is giving the highest
priority, and rightly so. Burundi continues to face
major challenges. Despite the incredible progress
that has been achieved, Burundi remains one of the
poorest countries in the world. For too long, the peace
dividends that could have served as a solid basis for
development have not met expectations. Now more than
ever, the country needs the support of all its partners
in order to win the fight against the extreme poverty
that still affects the overwhelming majority of its
people, despite their courage and industriousness. Joint
efforts of the international community are therefore
absolutely essential to help the country improve its
productivity and promote economic growth towards
shared prosperity.

In the short term, the country needs significant
budgetary support to allow it to deal with the many
challenges that are inherent to the functioning of a
post-conflict society. The further commitment of the
private sector through investment is also essential in
potentially productive sectors such as energy, the food
industry, infrastructure or mining resources.

I would like to express my sincere admiration

and appreciation for Ambassador Paul Seger, as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for the truly decisive role he has played
and continues to play in enhancing the international
community's awareness of the absolute need to support
Burundi's efforts to fight poverty and pursue growth.
Once again, I reiterate that I am fully prepared to work
with him in carrying out his noble mission. We are
particularly grateful to the Peacebuilding Commission
for its efforts to prepare and ensure the successful
organization of the donors conference in Geneva and
for its support to the peacebuilding process in Burundi,
in particular through the Peacebuilding Fund, which
has been so skilfully managed by my colleague, Under-
Secretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins.

(spoke in English)

Lifting a country out of poverty and healing
the wounds of long-term and cyclical violence are
immense challenges. Overcoming them requires the
contributions of all elements of society. I am confident
that the Government of Burundi and its people know
that an open, more democratic Burundi will be better
prepared to respond to the major tasks it faces.

The United Nations has been Burundi's partner
throughout the long and often arduous peacebuilding
and peace consolidation processes. We remain at
Burundi's side today. We believe that there is a true
opportunity for Burundi to firmly establish an era of
transformative politics through inclusion, dialogue and
the search for the common good. To move forward,
it is crucial, however, that we not lose sight of the
objectives Burundi set for itself in Arusha and in its
2005 Constitution - building institutions that strive
for good governance and equitable growth, while
forming a society that respects diversity and human
rights - in short, consolidating a vibrant democracy
where all citizens can live in peace and freedom.

With the 2015 electoral campaign just two years
away, it is now essential that both the Government and
the opposition play their parts in ensuring a continuing
consensual approach in dealing with the challenges
ahead. That is why the Secretary-General has called
on all to intensify their efforts to nurture dialogue and
normalize relations and to ensure that the foundations
for a peaceful and participatory campaign period are laid
now. I am confident that, if the remaining challenges in
Burundi's peace consolidation process are addressed in
such an atmosphere of openness and mutual support,
we will succeed, and that beautiful country will be able
to ensure that those who are children now can exercise
their right to a better future. It is our assessment that
sustained United Nations and international political

engagement, combined with adequate backing of the
country's development strategy, are still required to
help achieve that vision.

The Secretary-General therefore recommends
that the mandate of BNUB be extended for one year,
consistent with the views of the Government as set out
in a note verbale of 24 December 2012. In consultations
with the highest authorities of Burundi, I have had the
opportunity to review our collaboration and discuss the
way forward, including with the Permanent Secretary,
who is here with us today. Against this backdrop, the
Secretary-General intends to field a strategic assessment
mission, which will provide a further assessment
of the situation through the existing framework of
benchmarks, and will inform his recommendations
regarding the future presence of the United Nations in
Burundi. He will present the recommendations in his
next report to the Council, taking into account the views
and consultations with the Government of Burundi.
As I conclude my presentation, I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to all my colleagues,
in particular Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
his team in the Department of Political Affairs, and of
course those in Burundi, both in BNUB and colleagues
from the United Nations system, for their dedication
and support in helping Burundi and its people. I would
also be remiss not to thank the very dynamic diplomatic
corps in Bujumbura for their invaluable support.

Allow me in closing to make one last comment on
a rather personal note.

(spoke in French)

From the green hills of Ngozi in the north-east
of Burundi to the banks of the life-giving waters of
the majestic Lake Tanganyika, a powerful and united
outcry is heard. It is that of the men and women of
Burundi, appealing for the emergence of a more
harmonious, just and peaceful society as the basis of a
more prosperous and promising nation for present and
future generations. These men and women, young and
old, from all ethnic backgrounds and of all religious
convictions, will not understand why their legitimate
expectations should be disappointed. Together and in
support of the Burundi Government's efforts, that hope
can serve as powerful leverage to achieve the strategic
objectives that Burundi has set for itself. I have no
doubt that the Council has heard Burundi's outcry and
that it will once again be able to respond favourably
with all the strength of its authority.

