Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing, as
well as his dedicated efforts to establish an intra-Syrian
dialogue. We also listened with interest to Ms. Sabah
Al Hallak.

As Mr. Pedersen hasjust informed us, the first round
of intra-Syrian negotiations within the framework of
the Constitutional Committee took place on 30 October
in Geneva. Its establishment and the start of its work,
with the decisive assistance of the Astana format, was
unquestionably an achievement for the Syrian people.
I recall the Council that the idea of establishing a
Constitutional Committee was adopted in 2018 in Sochi
by representatives from every stratum of Syrian society
participating in the Syrian National Dialogue Congress.
We are pleased by the initial outcomes of this process,
which is aimed at shaping Syria's future. We hope that
the next stage of negotiations, which begins next week,
will be held in a constructive atmosphere, and we wish
the Syrians and Mr. Pedersen every success.

We agree with the Special Envoy that this is
only the beginning of a long and difficult journey.
We therefore believe it is essential to approach the
intra-Syrian dialogue cautiously. Any attempts to
interfere with its work and impose decisions on the
Syrians that are incompatible with their national
interests are unacceptable, as is the imposition of
artificial time frames or demands for concessions that
apply to only one of the parties involved. We believe
it is also important to remember the key principle of
the work in the Constitutional Committee, enshrined in
resolution 2254 (2015), which stipulates that it should
promote the advancement of the political process, led
and implemented by the Syrians themselves. We urge
all our colleagues to adhere to that principle.

As the guarantor nations of the Astana process,
Russia, Turkey and Iran are ready to continue to assist
the Syrian parties and the Special Envoy in the quest for
a political solution to the Syrian conflict. At the same
time, all of the Astana countries' actions will be based
on strict respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Today's positive turn for the better in the work
of reaching a political settlement creates the conditions
necessary for concrete steps to be taken towards the
provision of comprehensive humanitarian assistance in
Syria's post-conflict reconstruction. It is a pity that as
we just heard, our colleagues from the United States
are still unwilling to abandon their stereotypes andjoin
that process.

The most worrisome humanitarian and military
situation is still in areas that the Syrian Government
does not control east of the Euphrates River, in the
Idlib de-escalation zone and in the area occupied by
the United States around Al-Tanf. Thanks to Russia
and Turkey's signing on 22 October in Sochi of a
memorandum of understanding, the situation in north-
eastern Syria has been brought under control. The
efforts undertaken have enabled the prevention of a
large-scale armed confrontation and civilian casualties.
We have long emphasized that resolving the issue of
the aspirations of the Kurds, who are an integral part of
Syria's multi-ethnic society, will be impossible as long
as the Syrian Government cannot regain control of its
entire national territory and borders. We are ready to
continue to assist the Syrian authorities and the Kurds
in establishing a broad dialogue on their most pressing
issues. At the same time, we are trying to correct the
harm done throughout Syrian society by those who at
one time or another have attempted to take advantage
of the Arab-Kurdish disputes beyond the Euphrates.
Unfortunately, those attempts are still continuing.
Except that now they are accompanied by open
declarations about the existence of their real motive,
which is the desire to cash in on the illegal extraction
and smuggling of Syrian oil.
We would like to point out that the participants
in the work of the Constitutional Committee include
representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, civil society and the Syrian opposition,
including those that control armed groups. In this
way everyone with a genuine interest in the process of
determining Syria's political future has come together
in this peace process. And yet outright bandits and
terrorists continue to threaten Syrian society. Most of
Idlib is therefore controlled by militants from Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, a group that the Security Council
has designated as a terrorist organization. Militants
are terrorizing the local population, using civilian
infrastructure for military purposes and sheltering
behind civilians, preventing them from leaving Idlib.
Terrorists from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham regularly fire
on neighbouring settlements using modern weapons.
About 600 such attacks were recorded in October, and
there have been more than 28 such incidents in just
the past 24 hours. There are reports of executions,
detentions and violent dispersals of demonstrations by
ordinary people against the terrorist authorities in Idlib.
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock spoke about
the situation in the besieged town of Kafr Takharim at a
recent Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8664). I will
say it once again. While the opposition is conducting
negotiations in Geneva, terrorists are fighting in
Syria. We therefore warn against attempts to pass off
these jihadists as the so-called moderate opposition or
local administration.

I want to point out that some of our colleagues
are still relying on unverified or extremely dubious
information sources in analyzing reports claiming
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
join others in urging for compliance with international
humanitarian law. We and our Syrian partners are doing
all we can to protect the civilian population, whom the
terrorists are using as human shields. However, we have
often felt certain that a great many reports of these sorts
of strikes are in fact fake. Unfortunately, the sources
for the latest of these reports are regularly manipulating
the information in them, and we therefore have no
confidence in them, especially since there have been no
active military hostilities or large-scale operations in
Idlib recently, and there are none right now. We urge all
of our colleagues to be very cautious before presenting
such information as the truth. Otherwise they will
essentially become participants in an information war
fighting on the side of the terrorists.

With the assistance of the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab
Republic, together with the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the United Nations, efforts continue
to resettle Rukban camp. We hope that the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons there will
be resolved soon. And we will not cease pointing to
the dire situation in the Al-Hol camp. We urge all
who care about Syria's humanitarian welfare to join
the efforts in that regard and to provide all Syrians
with humanitarian assistance without discrimination,
politicization or preconditions. That includes not only
post-conflict reconstruction projects but also lifting
unilateral sanctions in the interests of normalizing the
life of the Syrian people.

