Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for inviting us to
today's meeting. We also thank you for steering the
work of the Security Council this month.

Like those who spoke before me, I would like
to commend today's briefing of the very detailed
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2017/695). Its relevant findings are an excellent
description of the situation on the ground and reflect
the willingness of international community, including
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to help Guinea-Bissau to resolve the crisis
by peaceful means - an inclusive and sincere political
dialogue and appropriate reforms.

Driven by a deep concern about the stalemate in the
process aimed at resolving Guinea-Bissau's political
and institutional crisis, which has lasted for more than
two years, despite the fact that stakeholders have signed
the Conakry Agreement on 14 October 2016 in order to
find a sustainable solution to the crisis in the country,
the fifty-first ordinary session of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in
Monrovia on 4 June, called upon all political actors
to take all the necessary, immediate measures to
ensure the smooth functioning of Guinea-Bissau's
State institutions, in the interests of the population. To
that end, the summit requested that the international
community and development partners honour their
pledges and commitments.

Following the assessment of the situation delivered
by the high-level ministerial committee tasked with
monitoring the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement after its visit to the country on 23 and
24 April, the summit took note of the promises made
by stakeholders to ensure the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement. It called upon all actors concerned
to strictly adhere to the terms of the Agreement. In the
light of all that I have mentioned and given the political
stalemate, which is a detriment to stability and social
peace, the Monrovia summit reaffirmed the primacy of
the Conakry Agreement as the only credible basis on
which to resolve the crisis.

For its part, and to demonstrate its commitment
and good will, ECOWAS decided to extend the mandate
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau by an
additional three months. Its withdrawal had initially
been scheduled for 30 June in order to maintain the
calm required to enable all Bissau-Guinean political
actors and stakeholders to implement the Agreement.

Unfortunately, two months following the extension
of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau, motivated by the request of the President of
Guinean-Bissau, Mr. Jose Mario Vaz, to give a chance
to the success of the initiative ofa group of women who
have been committed to facilitating the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement, no significant progress has
been made with regard to the conflicting issues fuelling
the crisis. The latter include, inter alia, the appointment
of a Prime Minister by consensus during the interim
period leading up to the 2018 legislative elections,
the formation of an inclusive Government and the
reintegration of the 15 members of the African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde.

Lastly, with a view to ensuring a rapid and lasting
exit from the crisis and after commending the neutrality
observed thus far by the Guinea-Bissau army, ECOWAS
has affirmed its steadfast determination to implement,
if necessary, sanctions targeted against all those who
would impede the proper implementation of the Conakry
Agreement - the first step in the implementation of
the ECOWAS six-point road map signed in Bissau on
10 September 2016.

At its fifty-first ordinary session held in Monrovia
on 4 June, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State
and Government elected the President of the Republic
of Togo, His Excellency Mr. President Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbe, as Chair of the of the subregional
Authority. The new Chair immediately and urgently
appealed to the parties to the conflict to exercise
restraint and responsibility so as to ensure every chance
ofa negotiated and durable exit from the crisis. He also
held meetings on 16 June in Lome with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General concerning
short-term prospects and modalities of support to
ensure the success of the ECOWAS mediation process.

In relying on the Conakry Agreement, he believes
that Guinea-Bissau is at a decisive turning point
regarding its future and that henceforth it is now up to
all stakeholders, on the one hand, to accelerate the pace
of normalization by settling all the ongoing disputes
and, on the other hand, to concentrate the vital forces
of the nation on the tasks of recovery and economic
development so as to meet the immense expectations of
its youth and general population.

Moreover, he did not fail to warn of the dangers of
the persistence of the crisis in a region of West Africa
that is facing an increasing number of new dangers,
first and foremost among which are terrorism and
transnational organized crime, which are fuelled, to
a large extent, by chronic political instability, poverty
and the social disarray they engender.

Finally, I would like to convey the gratitude of
the ECOWAS senior leaders to the African Union,
the United Nations, the European Union and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries for their
unyielding and continued confidence in and support for
the mediation efforts of ECOWAS.

