The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Brazil, Nigeria, South Africa,
Sweden and Tunisia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Prodi to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Malcorra to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Acting Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Antonio to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/470, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on support to African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alain Le Roy. I now give the floor to
Mr. Le Roy.


