Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): Let me take this
opportunity to express South Africa's condolences
to our Ethiopian friends and colleagues as well as to
the countries affected by the tragedy of flight ET-
302, which has also affected members of our United
Nations family.

I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this briefing on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) this morning.
We also thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and Ms. Storai Tapesh, Deputy Executive Director of
the Afghan Women's Network, for their informative
briefings. We also appreciate the participation of
Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, National Security Adviser of
Afghanistan, and appreciate his presence here today.

South Africa would like to welcome the holding
of parliamentary elections in Afghanistan under
Afghan auspices in 2018 and looks forward to the
presidential elections that are expected to take place
later this year, on 20 July. We would like to reiterate
our support for the progress made on electoral reform
in Afghanistan, which we hope will ensure that the
upcoming elections are credible, timely, inclusive, free
and fair, safe and transparent and meet the hopes of
all the people of Afghanistan. We need to support the
people of Afghanistan as they rebuild trust and work
towards reconciliation.

South Africa would also like to commend the
efforts of UNAMA, whose work has been invaluable
in strengthening the capacity, capabilities and
professionalism of Afghanistan's electoral assistance
and monitoring bodies. In this regard, South Africa
will support the renewal of the mandate of UNAMA.
We are confident that this will bring positive gains
for the people of Afghanistan during the election and
post-election period in July. We also welcome the
positive role of civil society and women's organizations
in contributing to the peace process and preparations
towards the elections. We welcome the reported positive
developments in Afghanistan, especially the resurgent
role of Afghan women, the nationwide dialogue
among women there and the increased participation
in decision-making structures of Afghanistan. This
inclusive approach towards the consolidation of peace
in Afghanistan will play an important role in long-term
sustainable peace and development in the country as
well as in the region.

The recent escalating levels of violence in
Afghanistan, particularly the indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, remain of concern. The continued
violence could undermine the progress that has been
made in the security and political environments,
especially in the lead-up to the elections. This could also
exacerbate the already serious humanitarian situation,
which would leave many with the choice of migrating
or turning to acts of violence in their communities.

The human cost of conflict further weakens the
society in which it takes place and has devastating
effects on the most vulnerable groups, in particular
children, women, people living with disabilities and
the elderly. Their hopes for a secure future deteriorate
with each day that passes and we do not act effectively
in their interest.

South Africa calls on all parties to protect Afghan
women, children and those that have been displaced
from attacks and particularly from sexual and gender-
based violence. We also wish to condemn the unlawful
recruitment and use of children by armed forces and
call for the protection, release and reintegration of
all children associated with armed forces and armed
groups. We also wish to express our deep concern
about the growing links between drug production and
trafficking in Afghanistan and terrorism.

We strongly condemnthe violent and terrorist attacks
in the country, including attacks using improvised
explosive devices, suicide attacks and assassinations.
This could weaken the progress made by the Afghan
authorities and the parties and stakeholders involved in
bringing about peace and stability in Afghanistan.

We urge all parties to engage in direct talks and
continue with their efforts to preserve the gains made
over the years, including on issues such as human
rights, in particular women and children's rights. In
this regard, South Africa believes that a comprehensive
and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political
process that provides for the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and a comprehensive political settlement is the
only long-term solution to the situation in Afghanistan.

We welcome all forms of international engagement
and appreciate the efforts of all stakeholders in
encouraging Afghanistan to find solutions aimed at
achieving a long-lasting, durable peace.

