Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing and for relaying the message from the
Secretary-General.

In the midst of horrendous attacks, several decades
ago the British people coined an expression that is truly
appropriate for today: "Keep calm and carry on". We
believe that today more than ever our first priority
should be to keep calm and continue in our work. For
despite its complicated and long-running, the Syrian
conflict must remain within the multilateral.And that
is precisely why the Security Council has a primary
responsibility. We must resolutely reinvigorate and
strengthen the political nature of the three primary
forums in which the issue has been discussed - the
Security Council, the Geneva negotiations and the
Astana talks - so as to strengthen the ceasefire and
contain the use of violence.

The fundamental principles that guide the conduct
of Uruguay at the international level are deeply rooted
in its character as a small country without an army
posing a threat to absolutely anyone else. The non-use
of force in international relations is therefore a cardinal
principle Uruguay's foreign policy. We accept the
use of force only in accordance with the principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. Uruguay deems any other use of
force illegitimate.

Uruguay, throughout its history, has consistently
rejected the unilateral use of force, including in such
cases as the 1950s Korean invasion and the invasion
of Hungary, as well as the use of force against Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Afghanistan and Iran. We have always
rejected the unilateral use of force. Uruguay hopes
that this individual incident, which occurred against
the backdrop of the inability of the main Powers to
resolve the conflict in Syria, does not lead to additional
attacks and that the parties will refrain from further
actions that will only aggravate the situation and lead
to an endless spiral of violence that could also spread,
directly or indirectly, to other neighbouring countries.

Uruguay believes that the principles of international
law must be considered as a whole and that therefore
another key principle here is absolute respect for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In the past six years, we have seen
the worst atrocities committed against the civilian
population. The investigations carried out by the
Joint Investigative Mechanism have revealed the use
of chemical weapons by both the Syrian Government
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham/Da'esh
terrorist group. The most recent example was Tuesday's
horrendous chemical-weapon attack, a war crime that
should receive the strongest possible condemnation on
the part of the international community, as the use of
chemical weapons poses a threat to international peace
and security.

However, in the midst of all of this we must
not overlook the Council's duty to identify those
responsible for the chemical-weapon attack in Khan
Shaykhun. Up until a few hours ago, the Council was
intensively negotiating to adopt a draft resolution that
would facilitate the conduct of an investigation aimed at
determining who was responsible. Now more than ever
before, the Council must shoulder its responsibilities so
as to clarify that incident and demand accountability
for the abhorrent crimes committed.

We must also reflect on the situation in which
the Council finds itself owing to the existence of the
privilege of the veto in the adoption of its resolutions,
and the aggravating factor of the use or threat of the use
of the veto with respect to resolutions relating to crimes
against humanity.
Uruguay, as a signatory to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group code of conduct,
calls once again on the members of the Council to
commit to not use the veto in situations ofthis kind. The
use of the veto strips the Council of its functionality
and effectiveness and further imbalances its work. We
reiterate the importance of resuming all multilateral
negotiations under way so as to bring about a solution
to the conflict that is afflicting the Syrian people.

