Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset let me
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing. Let me also thank Ms. Adele Raemer
for her input. Regrettably, as we have just heard from
the Special Coordinator, the situation on the ground
continues to deteriorate. The reporting period was
characterized by acts of violence, including the firing
of rockets by Palestinian militants from Gaza against
civilians in Israel, on the one hand, and by Israel's use
of lethal force against Palestinians, on the other hand.
Casualties occur on both sides of the conflict.

In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016), reaffirming its previous resolutions with
regard to applicable international law and the parameters
of a peaceful solution through the Middle East peace
process. The only way forward for the Palestinians and
Israelis is to negotiate a two-State solution - the State
of Israel as an independent and democratic State and
a viable Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza,
the two living side by side in peace and security, with
borders negotiated on the basis of the 1967 lines.
Poland's position on the Israeli settlement policy is
clear and remains unchanged. It is also the European
Union's position. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. The illegal Israeli settlements erode
the viability of the two-State solution and the prospects
for a lasting peace.

We also reiterate our concern about the calls for a
possible annexation of areas in the West Bank. Such a
move would constitute a serious breach of international
law and deeply damage peace efforts. Poland would
like to echo the concern with respect to the demolitions
and seizures of donor-funded humanitarian projects.

Let me now turn to the situation in Gaza, which
remains dire. We call on all parties to take urgent
steps towards achieving a fundamental change in
the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situations in Gaza by ending the closure policy and
facilitating the sustained opening of the crossing points
important for the daily lives of the people of Gaza.
At the same time, we must address Israel's legitimate
security concerns.

On the political track, we have to acknowledge
that the process is currently almost entirely blocked.
Intra-Palestinian division only aggravates the situation
of the people of Gaza and weakens the national
aspirations of the Palestinians. Poland welcomes
ongoing discussions on the holding of Palestinian
general elections - the first Palestinian elections to
be held since 2006. They must be organized across
the occupied Palestinian territory, and a broader
intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on the
modalities of these elections. It is critical that the
important Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation
efforts continue.

We remain gravely concerned at the continuing
violence, terrorist attacks against civilians and
incitement to violence that greatly exacerbate mistrust
between Israelis and Palestinians, and which are
incompatible with a peaceful resolution. There is
no justification for terrorism. The indiscriminate
rocket and mortar attacks against the Israeli civilian
population are totally unacceptable and must stop. Such
attacks are prohibited by international humanitarian
law, and Palestinian militants must cease the
practice immediately.

The security situation in Gaza remains very fragile,
with three serious military escalations occurring in
2019. The killing of the nine members ofa family in an
Israeli air strike, whose home was mistakenly targeted,

must be investigated. The situation continues to be at
risk of a major escalation, and the immense suffering
of the people continues.

Let me stress that the Israeli security forces must
fully comply with the principles of necessity and
proportionality when using force. On the other hand,
relevant authorities and protest organizers in Gaza must
ensure that protests remain peaceful. Furthermore, both
sides have a legal and moral obligation to fully protect
the rights of children and prevent violations and abuses
of their rights. Neither Palestinian nor Israeli children
must suffer the consequences of this conflict.

Allow me to conclude with a word about the United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). The Agency remains a key
contributor to the stability and security of the region.
Accordingly, Poland welcomes the General Assembly's
renewal of the UNRWA's mandate last week (resolution 74/83). We will continue to support the Agency in
its efforts aimed at providing necessary services and
assistance to Palestinian refugees.

