Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): First, we would
like to warmly welcome you, Mr. President, as you
preside over our meeting this morning. We would also
like to join our colleagues in welcoming warmly
President Kagame to this meeting.

Since you, Sir, have urged us to be brief in the
interests of time, I will just mention three points this
morning.

The first point that is clear, especially after
meeting President Kabila and now having met
President Kagame, is that we have a unique window of
opportunity to relaunch the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. It is clear, judging from the atmosphere in
this Chamber this morning and when we met President
Kabila, that there is a certain expectation that we
should take full advantage of this window of
opportunity. In the nature of these things, however, this
window of opportunity can close very fast, so we hope
that if, as a result of this meeting, there is some
forward momentum, we will have made a useful
contribution. We would therefore urge all the parties
concerned to make a serious and concerted effort to
meet the increased expectations that have been
generated by these two meetings.
The second point I wish to make is that we are
pleased that plans are under way to consider the
deployment of phase II of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). We believe that MONUC can be
a key catalyst in changing things on the ground in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but for its
deployment to take place, we need an effective
ceasefire and the disengagement of all foreign forces.
All the parties must adhere fully to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and to the Harare disengagement
plan. We also urge immediate implementation of
relevant Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
1304 (2000) and 1332 (2000).

My third and final point is that we agree, of
course, with all those who have said that there can be
no peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
until all foreign forces are withdrawn. However, a
durable peace - again, as many have said this
morning - cannot be achieved until the valid security
concerns of all the parties have been addressed.

We are also aware, listening to the remarks made
this morning, that there is another complication. The
vast territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
offers the potential for plunder, exploitation and
extractive economic agendas. In this regard, we hope
that all the parties involved in the issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will realize that the
fruits of long-term economic development are much
richer than the fruits of such short-term economic
agendas, and we hope that all the parties involved will
realize that, if we can move towards an effective peace
process, all the parties involved in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo will benefit.

