Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council summit held last September
decided to strengthen the effective role of the Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa. It is necessary and opportune
that we hold a discussion today on ways to implement
the spirit of the summit. I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for your initiative and efforts in holding this
open debate.

In their statements this morning, many of our
colleagues representing States not members of the
Council offered comments, proposals and even
criticisms on the work of the Security Council. In
strengthening its work, it is very important for the
Council to take into consideration the views of the
Member States of the United Nations.

Over the last six months, the Security Council has
made extra efforts and has made some headway in
monitoring and containing international conflicts and
disputes. The Council has continued to pay special
attention to Africa. It responded in a timely manner to
the ceasefire Agreement reached between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and a peacekeeping mission was promptly
deployed in that region. It has continued to focus on
the situation in Sierra Leone. By taking initiatives such
as dispatching a mission to Sierra Leone and to
relevant West African countries and by strengthening
coordination with regional organizations concerned in
this regard, the Council has made extra efforts to
address this issue. Furthermore, in facing the new
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it
seized the opportunity and adopted a resolution on the
deployment of the next phase of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

As for strengthening peacekeeping capacity, the
Security Council started the process last September by
taking the lead in reviewing the Brahimi report. It
established a Working Group of the Whole to continue
its deliberations on relevant issues. The sound
recommendations contained in the Brahimi report are
being implemented step by step. For example,
communication and coordination with relevant regional
organizations and troop-contributing countries have
been further strengthened, which is a welcome
development supported generally by troop-contributing
countries. The end of last year also witnessed the
resolution of the issue of peacekeeping assessments,
which will bolster the peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations. To that end, Member States have
provided input, and the input provided by some
Council members in this regard should be put on
record.

The Council has also made commendable efforts
in controlling hot-spot issues, stopping conflicts and
carrying out preventive diplomacy. In order to curb the
violent conflict between Palestine and Israel, members
of the Council and Member States have been working
hard to find a solution acceptable to all sides. However,
the Council's endeavours in addressing a number of
issues that threaten world and regional peace and
security - including the Palestinian-Israeli conflict 4
have so far failed to yield overall satisfactory or
effective results. On certain issues, the Council has not
been able to play a fully effective role. Some other
issues have eluded resolution for a long time, thus
constituting a challenge to the authority of the Security
Council. The reasons for all of this, which may involve
many aspects, have already been mentioned by some
previous speakers and deserve the attention of the
Security Council.

As one of the permanent members of the Security
Council, China has always attached great importance to
the role of the Council in maintaining international
peace and security. The Chinese Government maintains
a serious and responsible attitude towards
implementing the spirit of the Security Council summit
and places a special emphasis on action. For instance,
China has continuously put African issues high on its
agenda of priorities and has been committed to making
its own contributions, both within and outside the
Council, to peace and development in Africa.

As to questions on which there are still
differences and to which there is no easy solution, we
have always maintained that solutions acceptable to all
sides should be sought earnestly by exploring common
ground on the basis of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and in the service of the
higher interests of international and regional peace and
security. In this spirit, for instance, China has actively
participated in discussions on the question of
peacekeeping operations, as well as the question of the
scale of assessment for peacekeeping operations, and
has made constructive efforts and contributions in
those regards. The Chinese Government is working to
create conditions for its strengthened participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Besides the personnel that China has already
contributed or is going to contribute to relevant
peacekeeping operations, the Chinese Government is
right now working with the Secretariat on details of
China contributing logistic contingents to peacekeeping
operations. In a word, much remains to be done in
improving and strengthening the work of the Security
Council, and we are ready to make unremitting efforts,
together with other Council members and all United
Nations Member States, to this end.

Before concluding, I also wish to briefly touch
upon the question of improving the working methods
of the Security Council. The workload of the Council
has been increasing at such a rate that, as time goes by,
it will undermine the Council's efficiency, functions
and ability to deal with important peace and security
issues in a timely and effective manner. Therefore, the
Chinese delegation has continuously supported the
reform of the Security Council's working methods.
Improving working efficiency and increasing
transparency constitute two important components of
the reform. A balance should be struck between the two
for such reform. The Security Council should focus on
the primary issues of maintaining international peace
and security. It is impractical to pack the Council's
agenda with all other important issues listed on the
agenda of the United Nations.

