Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
your duties, and the United States on its presidency of
the Council last month.
I would like to begin by thanking all of the
Committees for their work, and their Chairs for
updating us on the implementation of these important
resolutions. I particularly want to welcome the
collaboration and joint work being done between the
Committees, as is evidenced here today. I would first
like to address the work of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

No country is immune to the threat of terrorism
and no region is exempt from the threat that flows
from the poisonous ideology that underpins it. Only
through collaboration between countries, within and
between regions, can we defeat it. We need a network
of willing and capable countries to tackle the terrorist
threat. While much is being done bilaterally, the United
Nations has a major role. A willingness to tackle this
threat should of course be a matter of self-interest, but it
also flows from binding Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. And while capability flows
from the Committees, including the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, it also flows from the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre. I very much welcome the joint work
that we are seeing under the leadership of Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-
General Coninsx.

The United Kingdom agrees with the assessment in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/770) that Da'esh
has evolved from a territorial entity into a diffuse,
covert network that operates in a number of countries.
Al-Qaida and its affiliates remain a persistent threat and
challenge, and we are also facing threats to international
peace and security from terrorist groups that have been
inspired by Da'esh and Al-Qaida, in addition to others,
such as extreme right-wing groups. Terrorist groups
constantly change their methods and approaches, and
we must be flexible and adaptable in response. As the
Ambassador of Peru has said, a feature of the threat in
recent times has been the outflow of foreign terrorist
fighters from many countries represented around this
table. But as well as focusing on that, we must now
focus on returnees to our countries and relocators to
other theatres. Nor must we forget the foreign terrorist
fighters currently in prison, and others convicted of
terrorism-related offences who may pose a threat both
at home and abroad.

The United Kingdom wants to stress the important
role that the private sector, academic researchers and
civil society can play in supporting Member States
and United Nations bodies in countering terrorism
and violent extremism. During the United Kingdom's
August presidency of the Security Council (see S/PV.8330), we were pleased to invite a civil-society
briefer, Ms. Joana Cook of the International Centre for
the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence, in
London, to share with the Council findings from her
recent report on Da'esh women and minors, which
enriched our understanding and discussion.

I would like to stress that sanctions remain a key
tool in combating terrorism. We welcome the continued
engagement and cooperation of all Council members in
our international efforts to counter this threat, and I also
welcome the appointment of Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati
as Ombudsperson. The United Kingdom welcomes the
ongoing efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee's Executive Directorate to address a
broad spectrum ofissues raised by recent resolutions, in
particular resolution 2396 (2017). As others have said, a
global passenger name record standard is needed, and we
welcome the International Civil Aviation Organization
project of the Office of Counter-Terrorism to promote
its responsible use, and recognize the generous support
of the Government of the Netherlands in that regard.
Furthermore, we continue to encourage States to move
towards the implementation of the Global Aviation
Security Plan.

In line with resolution 2395 (2017), it is important
that CTED assessment and analytical tools are updated
and made fit for purpose, and that they inform the
capacity-building activities of the United Nations,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism and its
partners. We are pleased to invite CTED to conduct a
visit to the United Kingdom in 2019, and look forward
to working with the Committee in order to share
good practices and technical-assistance needs. I also
encourage other States to work with CTED to facilitate
similar visits to their own countries. We can all learn.

Moving on to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to acknowledge
the Committee's achievements, particularly regarding
the completion of initial reports and the engagement
of the Committee's Working Groups. We support the
Chair and Committee's focus on practical steps to
support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
such as voluntary national action plans. We welcome
the example set by Chile and Colombia in conducting
a peer review of the resolution's implementation, and
suggest that the Committee encourage other countries
to do likewise.

We acknowledge that the Committee has played
a crucial role in enabling the meaningful exchange
of information between States, improving the
matchmaking processes that better meet assistance
needs and help to build long-term capacity. It is now
time for the Committee to become more active and to
strategically consider new and emerging threats. In
particular, we encourage the Committee to consider
responses to topical counter-proliferation issues
affecting the implementation of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 2325 (2016), such as emerging technologies
and proliferation financing, and to consider the role
of international organizations and multilateral forums
in raising awareness of those issues. We hope the
Committee will meet more often going forward. We
encourage the ongoing work aimed at raising awareness
and the profile of resolution 1540 (2004).

The effective implementation of these resolutions
is vital to protecting hard-fought global norms and
the rules-based international system. Let us step up
our efforts.

