Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of all,
on behalf of the Haitian delegation, I would like to
welcome Senegal's initiative, a country with which
Haiti has strong ties, to organize this debate under
into the framework of the necessary consideration
of asymmetrical threats with a direct impact on the
maintenance of international peace and security.

One of the first items that caught our eye when
taking a retrospective look at United Nations efforts
in peacekeeping matters during recent decades is the
magnitude of the tasks carried out in all continents
and all domains pertaining to the maintenance of
peace. The successes, some of which have been
resounding, were many. However, we cannot ignore
the partial successes - what one might even refer to
as failures - due in some cases to gaps and strategic
and operational shortcomings that clearly demand
our attention in terms of the need to deepen our
collective understanding. The successes and failures,
past and present, are replete with lessons to be learned
and must be used to help the Organization, the Security
Council in particular, as well as the States concerned
to better shoulder their responsibilities in peacekeeping
and in the protection of populations.

Today we are witnessing a proliferation of
conflicts ofa political, ethnic or religious nature, often
accompanied by violence committed against civilians,
which make peacekeeping operations increasingly
complex. In the vast majority of cases these are
armed conflicts bereft of any international character;
rather they are conflicts of an internal or intra-State
nature. The Secretary-General recalled recently that
over two thirds of United Nations military, police and
civilian personnel deployed throughout the world were
concentrated in places where there was in fact no peace,
and where the deployment of operations takes place in
the absence of clearly identified parties to a conflict, or
of any viable political process. In several cases, troops
deployed by the United Nations face situations of
violence, conflict and so-called asymmetrical threats,
which tend to compromise the success of the efforts
invested by the international community.

That increased complexity of peacekeeping
operations, which is unanimously recognized, is also
due to the growing power of non-State entities, such
as the Islamic State, which is a prime illustration of
the new threats to peace. Asymmetrical threats, above
all terrorism, mean higher risks for Blue Helmets,
as reflected by the surge in recent years of attacks
against peacekeeping personnel in different parts of the
world - in Mali, in the Golan Heights, in the Central
African Republic, in Somalia, in Darfur and elsewhere.

Today peacekeepers are called upon to carry out
increasingly greater missions and tasks. In some cases,
the gaps in mandates are in plain sight, and sometimes
call into question, as we have seen in Rwanda or more
recently in South Sudan, the very capacity of the United
Nations to properly respond to asymmetrical threats
that flow from such multidimensional and complex
environments.

That is why it seems to be a timely moment for
the international community to engage in an in-depth
consideration, as we are doing today, to adopt robust
measures to strengthen the capacities and resources
of Blue Helmets and to allow them to operate in
increasingly complex environments and to grapple
with emerging challenges to peacekeeping, above
all asymmetrical threats - whether from terrorism,
organized crime or other sources. It is a matter of
ensuring that peacekeepers are better protected in
discharging their mandates with regard to security
issues, the protection of civilians, the rule of law,
guaranteeing human rights and significantly improving
the capacities of countries emerging from conflict.

The Republic of Haiti has been hosting the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for 12 years
now. Our experience over these years has allowed us
to learn many lessons that can prove beneficial at a
time where there is increasing clamour for what has
become an urgent necessity, namely, redefining United
Nations peacekeeping mandates and developing new,
better tailored tools that allow peacekeeping missions
to improve their effectiveness in a global environment
that is in constant flux.

While welcoming the role played by the Security
Council as part of its fundamental mission of collective
security through peacekeeping operations, allow
me to highlight the invaluable contribution of two
Member States of the Organization that once remained
outside peacekeeping operations themselves. I want to
single out Japan and Mexico. Japan is already a major
financial donor to peacekeeping missions, while within
the region and beyond Mexico enjoys a solid reputation
of impartiality that has already proved its worth.

In conclusion, let me set out a few thoughts that my
delegation considers to be essential:

First, peacekeeping is not only a matter of
increasing budgets, but also of taking into account new
requirements, both in terms of security management,
training peacekeepers, their involvement in the
process of establishing the rule of law and sustainable
development.

Secondly, the effectiveness and success of
peacekeeping operations requires, above all, respect
for the key principles defined by the Charter of the
United Nations, including the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-useof force.

Thirdly, my delegation also believes it is crucial
that peacekeepers be by the side of the communities
and civilians they are mandated to protect.

Fourthly, the root causes of conflict, such as
underdevelopment, extreme poverty, marginalization
and exclusion, must be treated as priorities.

Fifthly, the role of police contingents is paramount
when it comes to rebuilding the rule of law, establishing
long-term stability and consolidating democracy.
The protection of civilians mus lie at the heart of our
priorities.

Finally, the onus lies with all Member States to
ensure that peacekeeping tasks correspond better to the
realities ofthis day and age in the light ofthe new threats
to peace, especially the so-called asymmetrical threats.

