Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting oer. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and share
his serious concerns about the situation in Kosovo. We
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team for their work and for
their objective briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). The assessments we have heard show that
the area continues to have serious, major problems
that require urgent solutions as well as the attention of
the international community. Needless to say, we also
listened attentively to Ms. Citaku's statement.

Today a number of delegations painted a delightful
picture of events that does not jibe with our appraisal,
which I will share with the Council, ifI may. The Kosovo
project continues to reveal its flimsy foundations. There
was new proof of the dysfunctionality of Kosovo's
artificially created institutions in the eruption of an
internal political crisis there, as a result of which the
winners of the extraordinary parliamentary elections
of 11 June have been unable to get any work done for
more than two months. It appears that the politicians in
Pristina, with no fear of accountability, are defaulting
on the commitments they made in the framework of
the Brussels dialogue. There has been no movement
whatever to settle the fundamental question of the
creation of a Serb-maj ority community of municipalities
in Kosovo, which was agreed on as long ago as April
2013. We urge the European Union mediators to
intensify their efforts to resolve this issue so that the
crucial guarantees ofthe rights ofKosovo Serbs and the
area's other minorities can finally be assured.

The problems related to the protection of Serbian
religious and cultural heritage are as critical as ever.
We are concerned about the fact that physical attacks
against Serbs continue, arson is committed against
their property and there are attempts to prevent
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) from
returning. There are serious concerns as well about the
ongoing attempts by the Kosovo Albanian authorities
to appropriate property belonging to the Serbian
Orthodox Church, as well as problems in ensuring
the rights of believers. In that regard, we would like
to draw members' attention to yet more specific cases
of illegal actions by the Kosovo authorities regarding
Church property.

For example, the Kosovo Anti-Corruption Agency,
which is leasing a building on a plot of land belonging
to the only functioning Orthodox Cathedral in Pristina,
Saint Nicholas, has not paid rent since November
2013. Arrears now amount to € 400,000 - a sum
that the debtors, the Anti-corruption Agency, are not
planning to pay. The numerous attempts by the Serbian
Orthodox Church to see justice prevail in the municipal
administration have led to naught. Neither have appeals
to the United States or the European Union. The Serbian
Orthodox Church is planning to take the case to court,
but even a positive verdict would not necessarily
be carried out, in the light of the pitiful state of the
judicial system.

Let me give another example. There was a decision
ya Kosovo court, where international judges work,
which confirmed the property rights of the Visoki
Decani Monastery, which, incidentally, is a UNESCO
World Heritage site. However, the municipality
leadership is not upholding the ruling, as it apparently
runs counter to the interests of the Albanian people.
The Kosovo authorities are ignoring the request of
the Serbian Orthodox Church to renovate a number of
religious buildings, including the Church of Christ the
Saviour in Pristina. The Kosovo Albanians are trying
to erect an economic blockade against the Serbian
Orthodox Church and deprive it of its property and
means of existence. Such steps prove that Pristina's
policy to build a multi-ethnic society in the province
has failed

The Kosovo Albanian Administration is creating
obstacles to Serbian pilgrims and IDPs visiting the
province. The situation should not go unheeded.
Inter alia, in the context of Pristina's considerations
of a repeat request to join UNESCO, there is also a
regrettable situation with the judiciary in Kosovo.
Kosovo Albanians judges are constantly replacing
foreign servants of lady justice, and they are subject to
political pressure. Often their verdicts are overturned
by higher bodies or are returned for further work. The
process is drawn out unjustifiably.

There are also serious concerns in the province with
upholding the rule of law and combating corruption.
The Kosovo Albanian authorities are not respecting
agreements on the freedom of movement of Serbian
document holders. Pristina considers such documents
as void, in particular those issued by the Serbian
municipalities in northern Kosovo, and ban their use
for moving around Kosovo by forcing people to obtain
Republic of Kosovo identification cards.

There has been slow progress in carrying out a full-
scale investigation of abuses by the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army and in bringing to justice all of those
perpetrators, irrespective of their current status. All the
legal obstacles to the start of the work of the Specialist
Chambers in The Hague have been eliminated. We trust
that soon the Security Council will receive information
on initial specific results of its work.

Curbing the spread of radicalism and terrorism
in Kosovo is still of relevance. The territory of the
province is being used for recruiting fighters to fight
in the Middle East alongside extremists and to prepare
them for terrorist acts in other countries. We note
the confrontational stance of our Western partners in
Kosovo towards Russia. How else can we qualify the
provocative statements made by representatives of
NATO urging the Kosovo authorities to be ready to
counter "the hybrid war", which apparently Russia
is conducting in order to expand its influence in the
Western Balkans. The pronouncements that Russia is
apparently seeking to redraw the borders in the Western
Balkans are absurd blatant lies and glaring attempts to
pit us against the people who are living in the region.
Let me remind the Council that in 1999 the United
States and its NATO allies conducted a genuine hot war
for which nobody has borne responsibility.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) Commander, Major
General Fungo, speaking in the European Parliament,
mentioned Russia as a main threat and challenge that
Kosovo is encountering, along with inter-ethnic tension,
religious extremism and problems with refugees and
migrants. Once again, no one has managed to submit
any concrete evidence in that connection. Today it
seems to have become trendy in some places to accuse
Russia without any evidence whatsoever. That is called
defamation. For a long time, the KFOR command in
Kosovo refused contact with representatives from
Russia. We know that recently that was resolved, as
Russian representatives were asked to go to the NATO
headquarters in Brussels for a meeting with the KFOR
command. That is certainly an effective format for
discussion that is not trivial

Avoiding contact with the people from a country
that is a permanent member of the Security Council
runs counter to the KFOR mandate, as stipulated in
resolution 1244 (1999). That practice is absolutely
unacceptable. We urgently call for an end to the
defamation of Russia and its foreign policy line,
including in the Western Balkans. Our policy in the
region is still based on respect for partners and their
interests. We note with regret that the gross imposition
of the NATO logic in the region is clearly leading to
the destabilization of an already fragile situation in
the Balkans. For example, Montenegro has joined the
Alliance, despite the opinion of people in the country,
who they did not even deign to ask. It took more than
two years to overcome the drawn out political crisis in
Macedonia that was caused by foreign interference, but
this was not Russia, but rather an attempt to overcome
the desire of the electorate.

Once again, even though Russia was accused,
Russia did not interfere. We see these as attempts to
undermine the traditional friendship links between
Russia and its Western Balkan countries. We are linked
by many centuries of friendship and ties to those people.
Imposing NATO policies and trying to draw those
countries into the alliance leads to an exacerbation of
the manifold political, ethnic, religious and inter-ethnic
issues in the Balkans, which are likely to lead to an
increase in the potential for conflict in the region.

I turn back to Kosovo. In the current situation,
we see no basis for raising the issue of revising the
quarterly review and the format for considering the
Kosovo issue in the Security Council. There is no
room for decreasing the level of the United Nations
presence in the province through UNMIK. The United
Nations is playing a key, irreplaceable role in Kosovo's
affairs, and UNMIK remains a central instrument for
international monitoring and for dealing with issues
on normalizing the situation - in line with resolution
1244 (1999), which is still fully in force. As for the idea
of closing UNMIK, we would like to underscore that
we are categorically against it. It is unacceptable for
the Security Council to be guided purely by financial
considerations in making decisions on the United
Nations presence in Kosovo. Indeed, it seems to
betray a desire to get rid of a structure that is able to
provide an objective picture of what is happening in the
province. We must not create a virtual reality and try to
put a positive spin on a situation that, de facto, since the
province separated from Serbia, has only deteriorated.

