Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak also on behalf of the Permanent Representatives
of Brazil, Canada, Jordan and Switzerland in our
respective capacities as Chairs of the country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for the Central African Republic, Guinea-
Bissau, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Burundi. We also
associate ourselves with the remarks made earlier this
morning by the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Wittig of Germany.

Mr. President, we welcome your initiative to hold
an open debate on this important topic, and would like
to take this opportunity to share lessons learned from
our experience on the ground. Our intervention has
three elements. First, we will present our views on the
conceptual and substantive aspects of institution-
building in a post-conflict context. Secondly, we will
offer suggestions on how the United Nations system
could more effectively contribute to that effort. Finally,
we will address the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the country-specific Chairs in
advising the Security Council.

In our experience, the process of institution-
building is a critical component of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Where State institutions are missing or
fragile, violence more easily spreads through
vulnerable societies, organized crime finds easy
purchase for illegal activities, and reconciliation and
recovery are delayed. The building, rebuilding and
strengthening of core State functions is the sine qua
non condition for overcoming conflict.

In such context, local capacity is too often
overwhelmed by daunting challenges. This is evident in
all five post-conflict situations on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, despite the best efforts and
commitment of the authorities concerned. One example
is the lack of administrative resources in Liberia or the
Central African Republic. There are only 91 magistrates
available to deliver public administration services in the
Central African Republic, and 13 magistrates in Liberia
with proper legal training. Burundi's justice system is
struggling to manage the 60 per cent of inmates
awaiting trial in overcrowded prisons. In Sierra Leone,
a dedicated national police force is hampered by the
critical lack of available transportation.

Institution-building is about ensuring the
sustainable, equitable and effective delivery of security
and basic services to a national population.
Functioning institutions not only protect citizens, but
also empower greater participation in political
decision-making, especially with respect to groups that
are traditionally marginalized at the national or local
levels. Critical examples include security forces that
uphold human rights, a justice system that offers
independent adjudication, transparent mechanisms for
political participation, well-managed public
administration, and effective strategies for spurring
economic recovery and social development. In most
post-conflict countries, it may also be important to deal
with the past through processes of transitional justice
and national reconciliation. Moreover, it is not enough
to focus only on central Government. Conflicts often
emerge from and disproportionately affect rural areas,
where the extension of basic services tends to lag.
It is also important to enhance the capacity of
institutions in charge of economic revitalization, public
administration and the provision of basic services.
These institutions are indispensable to promoting
poverty reduction, which is a powerful tool for
addressing some of the root causes of social strife and
build long-lasting peace. Social policies may likewise
have a positive impact in the political process.

While each post-conflict situation is different and
there are no one-size-fits-all blueprints, our experience
has yielded several useful lessons.

First, stable institutions cannot be imposed; they
must be trusted and accepted by citizens. They have to
be built and sustained by the individuals concerned.
International institution-building efforts have to
involve national actors at the outset in order to better
identify and employ available local capacity. In this
respect, civil society is a core pillar of institution-
building, and the participation of women is of
particular importance.

Secondly, institution- and State-building in post-
conflict situations require sustained support from the
international community. It is a matter of years,
possibly even decades. It is complex. It is costly. It
requires predictability of resources and the will of the
international community to remain engaged for a
prolonged period.

Thirdly, institution-building requires responsive
financing. The catalytic role of the Peacebuilding Fund
should be supported and supplemented by other
national and international mechanisms that allow a
similar or higher degree of speed and flexibility.

Fourthly, institution-building involves negotiating
competing objectives and a readiness to accept
imperfect outcomes. One constant challenge lies in
managing the dilemma between the slow pace of State
institution-building and popular expectations for rapid
improvement. Institution-building must go hand in
hand with the delivery of basic services that directly
impact the everyday lives of citizens.

Finally, when assessing the institutional
weaknesses of post-conflict countries, the international
community should adopt a comprehensive approach
and take into account the factors that hamper social and
economic development. In particular, roster-holders
should consider increasing the availability of experts in
social and economic policy, with enhanced emphasis

ll-21268
on South-South expertise and greater participation by
developing countries.

Allow me now to offer some suggestions on how
the United Nations system could more effectively
contribute to peace- and institution-building.

Starting with the role of the Security Council, the
five country-specific configuration Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission believe that institution-
building deserves greater and more in-depth attention.
As it requires both considerable time and resources,
institution-building should be addressed in the early
stages of peacebuilding processes. Likewise, when
considering mission mandates, the Council should take
institution-building into account in a manner that
retains a tight focus on core stabilization priorities and
relies on the comparative advantage of other actors.
The Council should also continue to mandate
integrated missions to deliver a comprehensive
approach to peace consolidation, including by serving
as a point of coordination with other actors in the
international community.

The scope and complexity of institution-building
often demands a wider and more sustained focus than
the Security Council is capable of providing alone.
Bilateral and multilateral partners and development
actors have a critical role to play. Of particular
importance are regional institutions and organizations
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the East African
Community. Aid coordination is also crucial for
avoiding conflicting strategies, overlapping activities,
critical gaps and inconsistent financing.

Within the United Nations system as a whole,
there is an enduring need to better define the
Organization's roles and responsibilities in key
peacebuilding sectors, including institution-building.
Doing so will enhance the overall efficiency of the
United Nations system and enable stronger support for
senior leaders in the field. In that context, relations
with the World Bank and other multilateral forums,
such as the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding, are of crucial importance.

Closer institutional coordination is required, as
cooperation with the United Nations remains too
dependent on personal relationships or ad hoc
arrangements in the field. Effective post-conflict
institution-building also requires a wide range of
specialized civilian expertise, particularly in the areas

ll-2l268
of justice, security-sector reform, governance,
economic recovery and social policies. Yet, both the
United Nations and the broader international
community still struggle with how to develop and
deploy such capacity in a timely and targeted manner.
In particular, more attention needs to be paid to
drawing on and building the pool of talent available in
affected countries. That should be the first priority for
institution-building efforts. Similarly, more work is
needed to tap latent expertise within the global South.

For those reasons, it is important to further
strengthen mechanisms for South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation between the North and the
South. It is also clear that the United Nations can, and
must, do more to provide fleld missions with the
expertise they need. That will require the United
Nations to both improve its own procedures and to
serve as a platform for drawing on the wider capacity
available within Member States. In that respect, the
Chairs look forward to the recommendations of the
review of international civilian capacities.

In the View of the Chairs, the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture could be better used to
foster and monitor institution-building efforts and to
improve coordination among the full range of relevant
actors. The Security Council should increasingly draw
on, and better define, the Peacebuilding Commission's
advisory role, especially in terms of supporting
institution-building efforts undertaken by
non-Secretariat entities, providing more sustained
attention to peacebuilding issues beyond the immediate
scope of stabilization efforts and addressing longer-
term issues that have implications stretching beyond
the period that the country is likely to be on the
Council's agenda.

With respect to the countries on the PBC's
agenda, the country-specific configurations strive to
improve coordination of institution-building efforts in
accordance with the peacebuilding priorities identified
with national authorities. The Security Council could
benefit from the experience and knowledge of the
country-specific configurations by inviting the Chairs
to brief the Council regularly on the progress of
institution-building and other peacebuilding efforts, by
consulting with the Chairs when renewing or amending
mission mandates and by considering the participation
of the Chairs in Council missions to countries on the
PBC's agenda.
For other post-conflict countries, the Security
Council could consider establishing regular coordination
mechanisms with other international and regional actors,
including the World Bank. A multi-tiered approach by
the PBC can play a useful role in this respect, as can
groups of friends of post-conflict countries.

