Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): I welcome the
presence of Ms. Cristina Fernandez, President of
Argentina and Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General.
At the outset, I congratulate the Republic of Argentina
for presiding over the work of the Security Council
for the month. At the same time, I extend thanks
and appreciation for the convening of this high-level
meeting of the Security Council to discuss cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security. Cooperation between the League
of Arab States and the United Nations, as is well
known, goes back to 1981, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 36/24. It is important to support
that cooperation now, given current developments in
the Middle East and the problems generated by that
situation, the continuation of which represents a threat
to international peace and security.
That requires improved cooperation between the
two organizations in extending humanitarian assistance
to address the suffering of refugees and those adversely
affected by war, conflict and natural disasters, including
in the area of peacebuilding and in efforts to assist
States in building capacity and infrastructure in the
post-crisis period. This is a delicate moment requiring

ongoing support in order to avoid the risk of relapsing
into further conflict.

In that connection, the League of Arab States has
issued numerous decisions calling on the Security
Council to assume its role in the maintenance of
international peace and security with regard to a
number of Middle East issues. In that respect, the
League of Arab States believes that one of the most
important pillars of international peace and security
is the Council's credibility and effectiveness and the
scrupulous, genuine and full implementation of the
resolutions adopted by the Council, many of which
relate to our region.

Those resolutions have not been implemented
for many years; some, such as those on the question
of Palestine, have languished for more than 50 years.
The continued lack of implementation of those
resolutions constitutes one of the main reasons of
regional and international tension and instability.
On the other hand, the inability of the Council to
adopt a resolution - despite full knowledge that the
events occurring in some regions, particularly in
the Middle East, threaten international peace and
security - highlights the need to end that controversial
trend evident among members of the Council and to
seriously consider decisions of regional organizations.
In that context, I note in particular cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations, in
terms of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

I reiterate that this important principle is entrenched
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which encourages regional organizations to address
matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to seek the peaceful settlement
of disputes in cooperation with the Security Council.

Frequently changing international situations
and developments and deepening regional and
international crises require strengthened cooperation
and the accelerated adoption and implementation by
the Security Council of decisions taken by regional
organizations. The various developments transpiring
in the Arab region must be reflected in a number of
pillars of international legitimacy, most important
among which are the agreements reached at the meeting
between the two organizations in Vienna in 2012. That
is a part of the periodic meetings held once every two
years to evaluate the achievements made and lay down
the parameters for cooperation, which is divided into
three parts: political, economic and socio-cultural.
Activities in that connection include preventing
the eruption of crises, and their management;
fostering cooperation; countering terrorism; and the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones and a zone
free ofweapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Those issues are inextricably linked with the work of
the Security Council given their direct relationship
with international peace and security.

We view today's meeting as important given that
it represents a point of contact between the Security
Council and regional organizations, including, of
course, the League of Arab States, in the light of the
developments under way in the Arab region, which
involve radical processes of transformation led by
Arab youth aspiring to build institutions based on good
governance, social equality and justice.

The Security Council meeting attended by the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States on
26 September 2012 (see S/PV.6841), at which the Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/20l2/20)
aimed at consolidating cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the United Nations in the
field of international peace and security, emphasized
the goals of cooperation between the two organizations.
It welcomed the intensifying cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the United Nations in the
wake of developments in the region reflecting the
legitimate aspirations of all peoples in the region for
freedom, justice and equality. It also emphasized the
need to strengthen cooperation on capacity-building
with the League of Arab States in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

At that same meeting, the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States put forward a number of
proposals aimed at consolidating the relationship
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. I would recall that the first and most important
of those proposals concerned the review and updating
of the 1989 agreement on cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States (General Assembly resolution 44/7), to keep up with priorities
and emerging and future challenges.

Secondly, the Secretary-General emphasized the
need to hold regular meetings, as well as meetings
required by events, between the Security Council and
the League of Arab States, represented by the presidency
of the Arab Summit Conference, the presidency of the
Council of Ministers of the League, and the Secretary-
General of the League.

Thirdly, he stressed that the status of the
cooperation meetings held between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States must be enhanced so
as to enable them to deliver programmes which are
effective, particularly with regard to preventing and
resolving disputes and peacekeeping, so that the League
can cooperate in an integrated manner with the United
Nations.

Fourthly, he noted that greater importance must be
attached to cooperation between the two organizations
in the field of humanitarian assistance as well as to
devoting greater attention to addressing and alleviating
the suffering of refugees and those adversely affected
by conflicts and natural disasters.

And fifthly, emphasis was placed on the need to
support the capacities of the League of Arab States
and increase its competence in the humanitarian and
political fields, taking into consideration the work of
the United Nations Development Programme.

Almost one year has passed since that meeting
between the Council and the League of Arab States.
The Secretary-General of the League sent a letter to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on 17 October
2012 containing suggestions on matters relating to
cooperation support. One of those suggestions involved
the setting up of a joint, high-level working group
between the United Nations and the League to evaluate
and update the cooperation machinery so as to make it
more relevant to current events. The Secretary-General
of the United Nations agreed to that in his letter to the
Secretary-General of the League dated 12 February
2013, suggesting that the working group could
complete its work and consider the three aspects of the
issue - political, economic and sociocultural - in the
course ofthree months as well as assess the effectiveness
of the cooperation machinery, including a review of the
1989 agreement. That is an important and positive step
towards supporting the work of the two organizations.

Emphasizing our interest in cooperation with
the United Nations in resolving the Syrian crisis and
beginning a transitional phase to stop the bloodshed
and achieve stability and security in Syria on the
basis of good governance and a democratic system,
the Secretary-General of the League held a number of
meetings at United Nations Headquarters on 22 April,
the first of which was with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations. He also held tripartite talks with
the Secretary-General and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi on
helping the Syrian parties to initiate a transitional
political process designed to create a new Syria where
all factions will enjoy freedom.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations
appealed to the Security Council to be united and to
emphasize its support for the efforts of Mr. Brahimi,
an appeal that was approved by the Secretary-General
of the League. We hope that this will pave the way for
"Geneva II".

Along those same lines, Iparticipated, in my capacity
as Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, in an informal high-level meeting
held under the sponsorship of Germany and Morocco
on 28 May 2013 to consider the issue of cooperation
between the two organizations. The meeting considered
political issues and the work of the Security Council and
regional organizations in addressing matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
finding peaceful solutions to conflicts, updating the
cooperation machinery, strengthening the capacities of
the League and drawing lessons from the experience
of the United Nations in the field of cooperation with
other regional and international organizations. During
the course of that meeting, I emphasized the need for
political will in connection with issues relevant to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I also stressed the importance of the activities
and programmes adopted in Vienna, to which I have
just referred, particularly since that series of political
undertakings and programmes addresses a number of
significant issues, such as preventing the eruption of
crises. I would like here to recall the ideas put forward
at that meeting.

First, there is a need to upgrade the level ofmeetings
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. Such meetings should devise
effective programmes, particularly as concerns the
eruption of crises and the maintenance of international
peace and security, so that the cooperation machinery
of the two organizations can work in concert. Increased
attention must be paid to cooperation between the two
organizations in the field of humanitarian assistance
and in connection with issues related to refugees and to
persons affected by war, conflict and natural disasters,
as well as in the areas ofpeacebuilding and in assisting

States in the post-conflict rebuilding of their civil
institutions and capacities.
I would like to add that a meeting was held in
Cairo, on 11 and 12 June, on sectoral cooperation
between the League and the United Nations with regard
to improving post-conflict civilian capacity-building,
with the participation of Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special
Adviser and Assistant Secretary-General for Civilian
Capacities.

The League of Arab States, in cooperation with the
United Nations, has decided to address this issue in the
framework of a comprehensive vision and plans to take
action on three integrated and parallel pillars. The first
pillar is the exchange of expertise, the identification of
needs and the creation of frameworks for the provision
of services to the States of the region. The second pillar
is interaction with the States of the region to motivate
them to build their capacities and identify their needs
so that they can assume the primary role in preventing
crises. The third and last pillar is the work of the
League of Arab States in cooperating with civil society
and its general organizations in the areas of security
and regional development in order to galvanize and
strengthen their role in the aftermath of conflict with
a view to assisting local communities, supporting the
rule of law and effective accountability, and ensuring
other urgent requirements to prevent the resurgence of
conflict.

We welcome the issuance of presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/12 by the Security Council, which
incorporates the means and ways of cooperation among
the Security Council and all regional organizations and
specifies the most important areas in light of current
international regional developments. For our part, the
League of Arab State will consider the statement to be
one the key documents on which we rely with a view
to improving and reinforcing cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the Security Council.

In conclusion, I sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for the continued cooperation between the
Security Council and the League of Arab States in the
promotion of peace, security and development in our
region and the world.

