Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to congratulate
South Africa on presiding over the Security Council for
the month of April and on organizing this debate. I
wish to convey to the Council fraternal greetings from
His Excellency President J. A. Kufuor, who was
prevented from coming to New York by pressing
matters of State and the forthcoming twelfth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, to be held in Accra.

Ghana appreciates the continued support of the
United Nations and the international community aimed
at the resolution of the conflicts in Africa, including
the deployment of two thirds of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, as well as the
commendable contributions of relief agencies towards
the alleviation of the plight of persons displaced by
conflicts. While there has been significant progress in
the resolution of some conflicts in Africa, the current
situation in other parts of the continent demands our
most urgent attention.

The role of the United Nations remains crucial in
Africa's quest for a new era of peace and stability.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, which
explicitly prescribes a role for regional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
dictates the need for a close and symbiotic relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union,
given the current situation on our continent.

In that connection, it is my delegation's view that,
if we are to ensure more effective resolution of
conflicts in Africa, there should be a calculated and
conscious strategy aimed at promoting the
interdependence of the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. That requires, among other things, full
implementation of the 10-year capacity-building
framework for cooperation concluded between the
Secretary-General and the African Union Commission
in November 2006.

The lack of resources, coupled with other factors,
has undermined the deployment of African Union
peacekeeping operations in Africa. Therefore, we urge
the United Nations Security Council and the
international community to step up their efforts to
address the critical resource gaps.

As recent reports of the Secretary-General have
shown, the cost of prevention is far less than the cost
of resolving conflicts. Therefore, the need to pursue a
strategy of prevention, which entails tackling the
underlying causes of conflict and instability, should
receive the priority attention of the international
community. To that end, we call upon the international
community, in particular the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, to actively support the
African Post-Conflict Reconstruction Policy
Framework, adopted in 2006, which focuses on
tackling the root causes of conflict and thereby
preventing the occurrence or recurrence of crises.

In that regard, we acknowledge the important
contribution of the Peacebuilding Commission, of
which Ghana is a current Vice-Chair, to the ongoing
efforts to rebuild Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau, aimed at ensuring sustainable peace in those
countries, which remain on the agendas of both the
Security Council and the Commission.

Africa's development blueprint, the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD),
reaffirms the commitment of African States to the
tenets of good governance and democracy, underpinned
by the promotion of economic and social justice and
scrupulous respect for human rights and the rule of
law, as prerequisites for durable peace and security.

Ghana is proud to be among the African countries
that have so far subscribed to the African Peer Review
Mechanism in the context of NEPAD - a process by
which the quality of national governance in our
country is subjected to external scrutiny. It is our firm
conviction that it is only through such constructive
processes that Africa will emerge stronger and more
resilient. We are optimistic that the goals of the African
renaissance, namely, peace, stability and prosperity,
will be attained sooner rather than later throughout the
entire continent of Africa.

