Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I am very grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his very
comprehensive update on the latest developments in
Kosovo and on the activities of United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The general situation in Kosovo has not
undergone substantial change. The positive tendencies
towards general stabilization in the province that have
been facilitated by the efforts of UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) were again challenged by a
number of discouraging factors. Despite all of the
international efforts made, inter-ethnic violence, lack
of security for national minorities, high levels of
organized crime and the abundance of illegal small
weapons are still among the main features of the
situation in Kosovo. Therefore, while acknowledging
the work one by UNMIK and KFOR, my delegation
thinks that there is still a long way to go to ensure full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

Ukraine welcomes the assumption of office on 15
January of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Haekkerup. We have taken
careful note of Mr. Haekkerup's major priorities for his
future activities in that key position, and we would like
to express our full support to him. In particular, my
delegation is satisfied with the very prudent approach
taken by the Special Representative with regard to such
a complex and sensitive issue as the Kosovo-wide
general elections. We share his view that before such
elections are held their legal framework should be
developed. It is also important to lay a clear-cut
foundation for future relations between the bodies to be
established and UNNIIK. We hope that the results of
work on these issues will be presented to the Council
before UNMIK proceeds further towards the holding of
elections.

My delegation also endorses the second priority
of the Head of UNMIK, that is, to make law
enforcement in Kosovo as effective as possible. That
will definitely facilitate the return of former Kosovo
inhabitants, primarily Kosovo Serbs. At the same time,
in our View, the problem of the return of national
minorities to the province is not limited solely to the
issue of security; it is also linked to securing their free
access to social services, education and health care, as
well as to settling the issue of property rights.
In the context of law enforcement, we welcome
the recent actions by UNMIK police throughout the
province to confiscate illegal weapons. We believe that
the additional regulation increasing the penalties for
possession of illegal weapons will also helpful. The
recent issuance by UNMIK of a regulation making
human trafficking a punishable crime is a timely step in
the right direction.

My delegation also agrees with the third priority
set forth by the new leadership of UNMIK: to foster a
dialogue with the Belgrade authorities. My country
strongly favours the establishment of an UNMIK office
in Belgrade, and a proper dialogue and partnership
relations between UNMIK and the Yugoslav
authorities. In our View, that would enhance the
effectiveness of the Mission and contribute to
strengthening the democratic changes in Yugoslavia.

In that light, we pay tribute to the constructive
role played by KFOR and UNMIK in providing the
necessary security conditions for the holding of
Serbian parliamentary elections in Kosovo on 23
December.

In that context, it is our hope that one of the first
problems to be solved through a closer dialogue
between UNMIK and KFOR, on the one hand, and the
Yugoslav Government, on the other, will be the
restoration of proper security conditions in the ground
safety zone. The security situation in the Presevo
Valley, which has been addressed by the Security
Council on several occasions, remains of serious
concern to us. Regrettably, the past month has
witnessed an increase in illegal and provocative
activities in the ground safety zone by the ethnic
Kosovo Albanian fighters, in clear defiance of all of
KFOR's efforts. We think that any delay to take
resolute action to disarm and disband those militants is
fraught with the worst consequences possible for
international peace efforts in Kosovo and far beyond.

We learned with deep concern of the
announcement made by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) this month that the
pieces of ammunition tips found at sites targeted by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Kosovo
during its military operation in 1999 contained
depleted uranium. My country welcomes all
precautionary measures undertaken by UNMIK and
KFOR to protect the civilian population in Kosovo
against any possible ill effects from the depleted
uranium. As a contributor of troops to KFOR and of
police and civilian personnel to UNMIK, and as the
country that suffered the largest radiological disaster in
the history of mankind, Ukraine stands for a
comprehensive and independent investigation into
these facts.

Finally, I want to mention one very special event
that took place in Kosovo on 9 January. On that day the
President of Ukraine, Leonid Kuchma, while paying a
working visit to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
together with the President of Poland, Aleksander
Kwasniewski, visited the location of the joint Polish-
Ukrainian peacekeeping battalion deployed by KFOR.
It was a very successful visit. Let me finally quote
President Kuchma's remarks after his meeting in
Belgrade with Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica:

"Through the working visit to Kosovo and
Belgrade, Ukraine has demonstrated its consistent
policy of respect for the territorial integrity of
Yugoslavia. This policy is based on the premise
that stability in the Balkans depends on stability
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which, in
its turn, is based on the preservation of its
territorial integrity. Ukraine believes that the
solution to the Kosovo problem should be sought
in the framework of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999)."

My delegation will continue to uphold this position in

the Security Council in pursuit of a final settlement of

the issue of Kosovo.

