Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too, of course, are grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his comprehensive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan, as well as his
presentation of the report on the situation there
(S/2010/127). We have listened attentively to the
comprehensive statement of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin.

We concur with the Secretary-General that the
main results of international efforts in Afghanistan
should be the effective achievement by the Afghan
authorities of sovereignty over the issues of the
security and economic development of the country and
their gradual assumption of basic responsibility for
those areas, with the help of the international
community and preserving the coordinating role of the
United Nations. It is precisely in that light that we are
considering a number of important upcoming events,
including the international conference in Kabul -
which will be the first high-level event organized by
the new Government of Afghanistan - and the
parliamentary elections scheduled for September.
Those elections should serve to further advance the
building of a democratic Afghanistan and its effective
Government institutions.

In the Security Council resolution currently being
drafted on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
a great deal of attention has been devoted to the
international community's tasks in the area of assisting
national reconciliation in Afghanistan. Today's
discussion confirms that this topic is on everyone's
agenda.

We support the ongoing processes in Afghanistan
concerning political settlement and reconciliation -
provided, of course, that they do not prejudice the
achievement of long-term stability in the country or

run counter to relevant Security Council decisions,
including the effective implementation of the sanctions
regime against the Taliban and Al-Qaida. Dialogue is
possible only with those who have laid down their
arms, recognized the Government and the Constitution
of Afghanistan and severed their links with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist organizations. It is fundamental that
these principles must guide Afghanistan in approaching
this very important issue. These fundamental principles
should also guide the United Nations Mission in the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.

I would like to take this opportunity, as other
colleagues have done, to welcome the appointment of
the new leadership of the United Nations Mission in
Afghanistan and to wish Mr. De Mistura and
Mr. Kobler every possible success in their activities.
They can count on the support of the Russian
Federation, including on issues of strengthening,
operating and staffing the Mission.

The situation with regard to the production and
illegal trafficking of narcotics is particularly alarming.
Regrettably, very little light was shed on this subject
during today's discussion, although the scale of the
drug threat in Afghanistan requires more decisive
action, a transition to a new level of international
cooperation. We assume that the contingents from the
NATO countries in Afghanistan will cooperate even
more actively with the Afghan Government on this
issue. It is essential that more energetic efforts be made
to suppress the flow of precursors, without which
heroin production is impossible.

In combating terrorism, drug trafficking and
organized crime, we must exploit more fully the
potential of regional organizations, which have proved
their effectiveness in this area. They include the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. Strengthening
counter-narcotic and counter-terrorism security along
Afghanistan's borders with other countries will not
only help reduce the financial resources fuelling
extremism but will also promote the rapid achievement
of stabilization both in Afghanistan and the region as a
whole.

Here I recall that the CSTO has significant
experience in combating those who traffic in narcotics
in Afghanistan. One of the more successful and
effective manifestations of practical cooperation in this
regard by CSTO member States with a broad range of
international partners is Operation Canal, which has
enjoyed the status of an ongoing CSTO regional
counter-narcotics operation since September 2008. It is
gratifying that the number of participating States has
grown every year.

New prospects for cooperation between the
United Nations and the CSTO in Afghanistan and a
number of other areas have been opened with the
signing today in Moscow by the Secretaries-General of
the United Nations and the CSTO of a declaration on
cooperation between the secretariats of these
organizations. As I already noted, Afghanistan is one of
the more promising avenues for cooperation between
the two organizations.

Russia supports the efforts of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan,
carried out on the basis of the Security Council's
mandate. Our practical contribution to that effort takes
the shape of agreements with NATO on the transit
through Russian territory of non-military cargo for
foreign military contingents in Afghanistan. Russia has
concluded agreements with a number of member States
of NATO on the transfer of military cargo through
Russian territory.

We share the concern of the United Nations about
the substantial increase in the number of civilian
victims over this past year. It is quite rightly pointed
out, including in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/127), that the activities of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida are driving this negative trend. That is yet
another demonstration of the fact that the main threat
to the security of Afghanistan and the region as a
whole remains the terrorist activities of Al-Qaida and
the Taliban.

The neutralization of their activities and the
stabilization of the security situation as a whole are of
fundamental importance in the context of the
preparation and conduct of the parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan. At the same time, more energetic
efforts are required from the international military
presence in Afghanistan to prevent civilian victims.

Russia, as Afghanistan's reliable partner, is
convinced that it is through joint coordination that we
will be able to achieve a sound political settlement in
that country, with a lead role being played by the
Afghan Government and Afghans themselves, of
course. The future of Afghanistan must be determined
by Afghans themselves. A possible option for such a
solution could be the restoration of Afghanistan's
neutrality. The historical evidence itself favours such a
solution, provided that it is chosen by the Afghan
people.

The Russian Federation will continue to
strengthen its cooperation with Afghanistan and with a
broad range of international partners for the successful
post-conflict reconstruction of the country and the
formation of viable State structures, including police,
law enforcement and anti-narcotics bodies.

