Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome your
presence, Mr. Minister, among us today to preside over
this meeting, which, given its importance, Peru decided
to include in the programme of its presidency. We also
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of

Colombia. We wish both Ministers an enjoyable stay in
New York.

We join the other members of the Security Council
in thanking the team represented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, for the very detailed briefing that
he just delivered.

As we have just heard, very recently the members
of the Council had the opportunity to visit Colombia.
That was a propitious occasion to get to know the
diverse actors of the political scene and the civil society
of the country, both in Bogota and the department of
Cauca, with whom we shared exchanges on the main
challenges that stand in the way of the reconciliation
process and the attainment and consolidation of peace
in Colombia.

We trust, as we noted during our visit, in the
political will of the Government and the entire political
elite of the country, which, under the leadership of His
Excellency Mr. Ivan Duque Marquez, will be inspired by
the smooth coordination of efforts, promoting policies
that take into account the true needs of the citizens and
the positive contributions of all the officially recognized
actors in the process, and that it will open the door wide
to all the other actors that have not joined that peace
process yet, whom we invite to heed President Duque's
call to release the hostages, lay down their arms and
agree on and support full and inclusive peace in the
great Latin American country of Colombia.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace in
Colombia continues to be the foundation on which the
future stability and tranquillity of the Colombian people
is based. As Special Representative Massieu noted, the
agreement is an example to countries around the world
that negotiated solutions are possible. In that regard, we
note with regret the climate of polarization that persists
around certain elements of the agreement, despite
the Government's commitment to establishing all the
mechanisms necessary to ensure its implementation,
such as its "peace with legality" policy.

We therefore urge the parties, especially the
political forces, to work together to facilitate the process
through inclusive dialogue based on mutual respect. In
that context, we strongly support President Duque's
request to the Security Council during its recent visit
to Colombia for the one-year renewal of the United
Nations Verification Mission. It is imperative that the
Mission continue the excellent work that it is carrying
out, which is widely recognized by all the Colombian
people, until the obstacles that continue to impede the
full and comprehensive implementation of the peace
agreement are completely eliminated.

We are pleased to note the positive progress made
by the Government in ensuring the social and economic
reintegration of former members of the Fuerza Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), engaged in carrying out various agro-
pastoral projects. We also hope that the objectives of the
reintegration process will be met within the established
deadlines and that the process will be accelerated by
providing security guarantees to former members
of the FARC-EP, fully aware of the many challenges
facing the implementation of the peace agreement.

We welcome the approval by Congress of the
national development plan, which will facilitate the
stabilization road map undertaken by the Government
on peace-related activities. We also note the spirit of
cooperation between the Government and indigenous
peoples, which is equally important for the peace
process in Colombia.

The existence of a legal framework that works
independently and autonomously is paramount for
transitional justice. In that regard, we welcome
the enactment of the statutory law of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. As we approach the local and
regional elections in October, the cooperation and
commitment of institutions, essential sectors of the
State and the people in general are indispensable to
preventing violence from hindering the elections.

Before concluding, I must express our concern over
the violent acts to which the social leaders, activists
and parties to the peace agreement are being subjected.
We call on the competent parties to take the measures
necessary to guarantee the complete safety and security
of those people and the affected areas through the
effective and active presence of Government officials.

Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates

its full support for the authorities and the people of
Colombia in the implementation of the peace agreement
and places its full trust in the team of the United
Nations Verification Mission to achieve the objectives
of that process. We also commend and thank Peru and
the United Kingdom for their successful leadership of
the visit to Colombia, the Verification Mission for the
excellent and professional manner in which it prepared
that visit and President Duque, his Government and all
the political and civil society actors for their hospitality
and full availability during the Security Council's visit.
The success of the peace process in Colombia will be a
major victory for all Colombians.

