Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): At the time of
its most recent renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
the Security Council emphasized two points: first, that
any reconfiguration of the Mission should be guided
by facts on the ground; and, secondly, that the Security
Council should act at any time to adjust MINUSTAH's
mandate if compelled by a change of conditions in Haiti
(see S/PV.7262). Both rely on the Council receiving
information that enables it to monitor continuously the
situation on the ground. We welcome the Secretary-
General's recent report (S/2015/157) and the briefing
from Special Representative Honore, both of which
build on the information gathered during the Council's
visit to Haiti earlier this year.

MINUSTAH must be fit for purpose. As the
situation on the ground evolves, the Mission must
adjust accordingly. We must ensure clarity of purpose
and have the resolve to consolidate the Mission as
and when the Haitian authorities are ready to assume
responsibility for Haiti's security. But, as the Council
contemplated last year, any reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH must be based on a rigorous assessment
of the needs on the ground. In that regard, and based on
its assessment, particularly from the January visit, we
must say that New Zealand is apprehensive about the
planned - and already committed - drawdown in the
Mission's military component.

That military component presently provides a
back-up if the national police force is unable to address
security concerns, even with the assistance of the
MINUSTAH police component. Until the number and
capacity of local police is increased, the ability of the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH to ensure the
safety and security of the Haitian people may be tested.
That is particularly so with respect to the electoral
period scheduled to last for several months later this
year. The Security Council must remain open minded,
flexible and ready to respond, if necessary, to changes
in the security environment.

We must also be responsive to the views of countries
on the Council's agenda. To that end, we acknowledge
President Martelly's letter to the Secretary-General
including, among other things, a request for a pause in
the recognition of MINUSTAH. We will reflect further
on the letter but do wish today to register that we are
encouraged by the progress made in strengthening
domestic institutions in Haiti, in particular the Haitian
National Police (HNP). We look forward to a time when
the HNP can assume full responsibility for security
and stability in Haiti. But there is much work still to
be done.

As acknowledged in the Secretary-General's
report, the HNP requires more officers and further
training. Given the ongoing challenges to law and order
and the urgent need to continue developing the HNP's
capacity, it is imperative that the full complement
of MINUSTAH's police personnel envisaged in the
Mission mandate be deployed as soon as possible. This
is a priority, particularly given the imminent reduction
in MINUSTAH troop numbers.

MINUSTAH will not be in Haiti forever. Haiti
must increasingly assume responsibility for its own
security and stability. An inclusive and representative
democracy is a precondition to achieving that goal.
It is therefore critical that Haiti should hold free and
fair elections and restore a functioning legislature. As
noted by other Council members, all of Haiti's political
actors must do everything possible to ensure that those
elections take place promptly, in stable conditions and
without violence. Everything must be done to avoid
further delays in the electoral process. We urge the
international community to stand ready to support that
electoral process.

Without a well-managed transition process,
MINUSTAH's achievements risk coming undone. We
commend the transition planning already under way and
urge that it continue in a spirit of genuine partnership
between MINUSTAH and the Haitian Government.
The needs of Haiti must be well understood, as they
inevitably change during the transition. Flexibility will
be required to ensure that that the people of Haiti can
develop their country in accordance with their own
priorities and, ultimately, that they have full ownership
of their destiny.

