Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We appreciate
this opportunity to contribute in the review of the
implementation of resolution 1460 (2003), as well as
the Council's earlier resolutions, 1261 (1999), 1314
(2000) and 1379 (2001). These texts, indeed, provide a
comprehensive framework for addressing the
protection of children affected by armed conflict, as
was stated in resolution 1460 (2003) - a framework
that must be rendered meaningful by means of periodic
review and follow-up. The Council debates of past
years have been instrumental in creating norms and
standards for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. Similarly, new review processes such
as this debate should focus on moving forward with the
implementation of these norms and standards - the
one area where we clearly continue to fall short of the
goals that we have set ourselves.

Despite positive developments, the Secretary-
General states in paragraph 49 of his report, "all parties
mentioned in my previous report continued to recruit or
use children" during the period under review and, in
paragraph 22, that, indeed, "the general situation for
children remains grave".

The Council supported the Secretary-General's
call for an era of application in its most recent
resolution on the subject, resolution 1460 (2003). A
series of concrete steps should now be taken so that we
can effectively enter this era. A first step would seem
to be to send the clear message that impunity for those
involved in child-related war crimes and abuse has to
come to an end. States are responsible for holding
accountable the perpetrators of violations of the rights
of children as contained, inter alia, in the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols
thereto, as well as the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols.

A number of violations, including the
conscription and enlistment of children under the age
of 15, have been classified as war crimes by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). If -
and only if - States fail to prosecute crimes such as
the killing and maiming of children, rape and other
grave sexual violence against children, the abduction of
children and the denial of humanitarian access to them,
everything necessary must be done to make sure that
persons responsible for such crimes will be brought
before the ICC, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity.
We thus fully subscribe to the recommendation in
the Secretary-General's report concerning the need for
proactive advocacy and public information on the role
of the ICC.

As in other areas, application and implementation
prove to be an almost intractable challenge which
requires the sustained resolve and involvement of the
relevant players within the United Nations system.
Children affected by armed conflict deserve and
require such sustained resolve and involvement. As has
become clear both from the report and the debate so
far, effective monitoring and, where necessary, follow-
up action, will be crucial to advance the era of
application. Clear and improved coordination among
the players in New York and in the field will be
necessary if an effective system of monitoring and
reporting is to be established. Given its primary role in
the area of international peace and security, a special
responsibility falls on the Security Council for setting
such up an effective system of monitoring and follow-
up action. There must be institutional clarity. That
means that there must be no doubt who does what and
who is responsible for coordination.

The Council needs to address the issue of
children affected by armed conflict more
comprehensively in its daily work, in particular
through situation-specific resolutions. In the period
covered by the present report, of a total of 54 country-
specific resolutions, only nine resolutions, covering
five conflict areas, dealt with children and armed
conflict. Both the Council and the Secretary-General -
whose reports form the basis of action by the
Council - could ensure full coverage of the issue by,
for instance, designating focal points in charge of the
issue.

At the same time, of course, monitoring must not
be limited to country situations on the agenda of the
Council, but, rather, must apply to children worldwide.
We believe that the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict can
play a continued central advocacy role in this respect. I
would like at this juncture to thank the Special
Representative for all the work he has done again over
the past year.

The monitoring of compliance with Council
resolutions and the application of the relevant
standards can be effective only if it is supplemented by
specific measures in cases where non-compliance
persists. Again, the Council has an obvious central role
to play in this respect, and we welcome the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General
regarding targeted measures against those responsible
for recruiting children or other crimes against children.

The existing legal framework for the protection
of children affected by armed conflict has rightly been
praised. But we must now recognize that all norms and
standards are only as good and useful as their
application. In our View, the current report clearly
reveals that implementation has been insufficient and
that much needs to be done in order to reach the level
that, in theory, we should already have attained.

Establishing clear structures within the United
Nations system is a first step and a prerequisite for
such progress, and we hope that the still-outstanding
assessment of the system-wide response to the
challenges in the area of children and armed conflict
will lead to clarity on the role of United Nations
players.

Given that significant advances in practice are
urgently needed, we very much hope that the Council
will adopt a strong and clear resolution that can form
the basis for the effective improvement of the situation
of children affected by armed conflict worldwide -
one that, in particular, enables the United Nations
system to take effective action in this respect.

