I wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing and for highlighting the significant challenges currently facing Iraq. Indeed, Iraq faces a severe economic crisis. Economic reform will be critical in ensuring Iraq's future peace and prosperity and allowing Iraq to build back stronger from the coronavirus disease pandemic. We took note of the steps described by the Special Representative, and we underline the need for fast action from the Council of Representatives to ensure that economic reform delivers for the Iraqi people. The international community stands alongside Iraq during these difficult times. At Iraq's invitation, the United Kingdom hosted the inaugural meeting of the Iraq Economic Contact Group in London earlier this year to deepen support for vital economic reform. We welcome the fact that the follow-up meeting is going to be taken forward by the European Union and Germany. We also think that regional economic integration is key to economic development and stability. We therefore welcome Iraq's commitment to deepen trilateral coordination and cooperation with both Egypt and Jordan. The United Kingdom remains supportive of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi and welcomes his commitment to holding free and fair elections in 2021, with the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I think we should consider carefully how the United Nations can support the Government of Iraq's intention to hold credible elections in order to rebuild public trust and democracy and to promote participation. The United Kingdom is encouraged by improvements in the relationship between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government, including the agreement for the Sinjar district in Ninawa governorate. That agreement offers the prospect of return for thousands of Yazidis. It is vital that all armed groups cooperate with its implementation and that both the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan region of Iraq help to restore services and economic livelihoods. We welcome Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert's facilitation of dialogue on the Sinjar agreement and encourage continued United Nations support to help normalize the situation there. We urge Baghdad and Erbil to reach an agreement on a long-term solution regarding resource- and revenue-sharing. We remain concerned about the security situation in Iraq. It is clear that Da'esh continues to pose a threat to the peace and security of Iraq. The United Kingdom, like other members of the global coalition against Da'esh, is committed to supporting Iraq and addressing that threat. We also underline the need for dialogue and cooperation between Iraq and Turkey to combat terrorism and ensure regional security and protect civilians. It is unacceptable that militia attacks continue in Iraq, including in Baghdad and in Erbil. Thy have claimed Iraqi and international lives for too long and continue to pose a risk to Iraqis and diplomatic and military personnel. We acknowledge the efforts of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi to strengthen security measures so that Iraqi citizens and foreign personnel can live and work safely, but we urge the Iraqi Government to continue to make progress in this area. We believe the Security Council to be united in our concern over the number of killings of members of civil society and political and human rights activists, and we call on the Government of Iraq to do all it can to prevent such killings and bring those who perpetrate them to justice. Finally, we commend Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi's commitment to compensate the families of the victims of violence against protesters. However, justice for victims is critical. We call on the Government of Iraq to ensure credible investigations into the violence and to ensure that those responsible are held to account. The Special Representative touched on the issue today in her comments, but the Iraqi Government's commitment to resolving the file on Kuwait and third- country nationals pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013) is to be commended. We note the repatriation of human remains from the Government of Iraq to the Government of Kuwait that took place on 16 September. We welcome the continued bilateral Iraqi-Kuwaiti dialogue and cooperation, and we are grateful to Council members for their cooperation on the press statement that will be issued on the matter today. I believe that the Council is united in its hope to see Iraq's political leaders, with the support of UNAMI, take forward significant reforms to address Iraq's challenging economic and security situation, deliver credible and transparent elections in 2021 and, ultimately, secure stability and prosperity for the people of Iraq.
