Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset, Sir, I
wish you all the best in your month of the presidency. I
also want to thank United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees Grandi for his compelling, but concerning,
remarks this morning.

We meet today at a crucial time for global
displacement, as the number of people forcibly
displaced is at an all-time high since the Second World
War and, sadly, the trajectory is only upwards. Today
I want to share the story ofjust one of the 65 million
people currently displaced around the world. It is the
story of a mother from Rakhine state faced with the
hardest decision of her life: to flee into the unknown
or face the violence engulfing the province that she
calls home. She told ajournalist last month:

"We were happy, but now we are in this chaos; they
are killing people and burning houses, and people
are unable to stay".

Faced with such brutality, she had no choice but to
flee with her husband and children, risking the journey
to Cox's Bazar. She said:

"When we got in the boat, we were scared, as water

were getting in. I was scared that it would sink.

People were crying."

Her husband went missing as they fled. "I don't
know if he is dead or alive", she said.
Together with her children, she eventually
reached safety, and I pay tribute to Bangladesh for
the humanitarian assistance provided to her and to so
many others.

But that family's story has been repeated and
repeated and repeated over the past months. Only
two days ago, a boat carrying refugees to Bangladesh
capsized, Claiming the lives of at least four people. It a
story that will only keep being told until the conflict
pushing them away is fundamentally addressed and
they are allowed to return home.

As Filippo rightly said, whether in Burma, in Syria
or anywhere else in the world, the Council has a unique
role to play in maintaining the peace and security that
would have stopped that family and so many others like
them from having to flee their home. We have a special
responsibility also to hold to account those who do not
respect international humanitarian law or refugee law
and those who fuel displacement.

Simply put, the stark number ofpeople in need today
tells us that what we doing is not working. Refugees are
spending longer and longer displaced, often in poverty,
with a dwindling hope of return. A new global approach
is now needed to tackle protracted crises, and a more
comprehensive response is required to help the growing
number of people currently displaced.

That is why the United Kingdom strongly supports
the aims of the comprehensive refugee response
framework. It focuses on long-term, sustainable
solutions. These help build the self-reliance of refugees
and ease pressure on countries such as Kenya, Uganda
or Lebanon, which have generously welcomed and
hosted so many. The framework means delivering
jobs, education and better services to refugees and
host communities, while also better coordinating the
international response.

The United Kingdom actively supports this
approach where the new refugee response framework
is being rolled out. We are also already delivering
the sort of long-term response to refugees' needs that
the framework recommends, including through job
compacts to provide tens of thousands of refugees with
the opportunity to work in countries such as Jordan or
Ethiopia, as well as innovative education programmes
and support for host communities and refugees alike.

To make these approaches work, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has a vital role to play in dialogue with
Governments, partnerships with other actors, and
giving advice and support where needed. In Jordan, we
welcome the cash assistance that it is giving to refugees
to meet basic food needs. In Turkey, we support the
assistance that it is providing to refugees to prepare for
the oncoming winter, and in the response to the crisis in
Burma, it also has a role to play in the returns process,
in cooperation with the Bangladeshi authorities.

But to deliver all this and more, it is clear that
UNHCR, like all the other parts of the United Nations,
will have to reform, and I welcome High Commissioner
Grandi's commitment to this. UNHCR has a central
role working with other agencies in reforming the
humanitarian system. It is important that UNHCR
continue to work better and more collaboratively with
partners on the ground, including with development
actors. We want to see improved transparency,
increased accountability to beneficiaries, more
multi-year programming and a continued scale-up in
the use of cash.

In the face of an unprecedented need, it is clear
that we cannot just do business as usual. We need a
new approach, and we look forward to working with
colleagues from the Security Council, UNHCR and
elsewhere to achieve that new approach.

