Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Chairperson of the independent international fact-
finding mission on Myanmar for that compelling,
shocking and moving briefing.

As I said on behalf of the nine Council members
that called for this meeting, the briefing we heard today
concerns allegations of the gravest crimes against
international law: genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. On this day in 1945, the United
Nations came into being. We agree with the Chairperson:
What is the United Nations for, and what is the Security
Council for, if they cannot deal with some of the worst
things that a Government can do to its own people?
The Security Council has a solemn responsibility to
consider those matters and decide how to proceed.
Despite the objections of some Council members today,
we believe that it is right that this meeting is taking
place, and I will include in my remarks what should
happen, in our view, after this meeting. I want to draw
out two points in the mission's report (A/HRC/39/64)
and Mr. Darusman's briefing today.

First, I will address the situation in Rakhine, which
is an enduring catastrophe. Human rights violations
against the people of Rakhine, ethnic Rakhine as
well as Rohingya, continue to this day. The Rohingya
in particular continue to face daily intimidation;
restrictions on their freedom of movement, access
to markets, education and health care; continued
discrimination; and denial of their right to citizenship.

As the Chairperson said, the Rohingya Muslims
who are left behind in Rakhine are not safe, and cannot
be safe. And the Rohingya who are in the camps
in Bangladesh cannot go home until those matters
are addressed. Although the Burmese authorities
have previously claimed that 81 out of the 88
recommendations of the Annan Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State have been implemented, there is very
little evidence that sincere efforts have been made to
address the acute deprivation of human rights, which
lies at the root cause of that crisis.

Although we previously welcomed the signing of the
memorandum of understanding among the Government,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme, those United Nations agencies continue
to be denied access to large parts of Rakhine. The
conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified
repatriation are manifestly not in place. Any calls for
immediate repatriation in the current circumstances are
deeply irresponsible. We first need to see the Burmese
Government cooperate fully with the United Nations
and make genuine progress to change the situation, in
line with the Annan Commission recommendations.

In the meantime, the United Kingdom commends
the Government and the people of Bangladesh for
continuing to show great generosity, host the refugee
population and cooperate in good faith with the Burmese
Government. The needs of the refugees continue to be
great, including protection, legal status and assistance,
and we call on the international community to intensify
its support for the United Nations joint response plan.

Secondly, Rakhine is the most egregious example
of the conduct of the Burmese military, but it is not
the only one. The report makes clear that the Burmese
military is conducting human rights violations across
the country against other ethnic communities, most
notably in Kachin and Shan states. Accountability is
vital to get justice for the Rohingya and others who
have suffered. It is necessary to give the Rohingya
confidence that they can return to Myanmar/Burma.
But, fundamentally, it is necessary in order to prevent
the Burmese military from committing those same
crimes again and again against the people of Myanmar.

It is vital that the Council act to uphold the Charter
of the United Nations, and I take very seriously what
the Chairperson said about the need to send a signal
from the Council to other countries around the world,
the Governments of which may be tempted to take a
leaf out of the Burmese military's horrific playbook
and execute such crimes on their own people.

Myanmar/Burma has established a domestic
commission of inquiry. We note the Fact-Finding
Mission's conclusion that that commission cannot
provide a real avenue for accountability. We note also the
six generals, whom the report mentions, with command
responsibility, starting with the Senior General. We
note, too, that previous commissions of inquiries
have been whitewashed and they have preserved the
military's long-standing impunity. The Government
has repeatedly denied the crimes described to us today,
and it has locked up journalists who have exposed
Government wrongdoing, most notably the two Reuters
journalists, Wa Lone and Kyaw Soc 00. I repeat the
United Kingdom's call for their immediate release.

If there is to be any faith in this commission of
inquiry - this latest commission of inquiry - it should
be independent, report transparently on its progress,
operate according to international standards, as the
fact-finding mission itself did, and cooperate with other
bodies gathering evidence, such as the fact-finding
mission and the ongoing independent mechanism
that the Human Rights Council voted earlier this
month to establish. We have repeatedly asked the
Burmese Government to work closely with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the findings of
the commission of inquiry should lead to an independent
judicial process, where all, including the military, are
equal before the law. Otherwise, if there is not going to
be domestic accountability in Burma, then the United
Kingdom believes that we must consider all options,
including a referral to the International Criminal Court
or an ad hoc tribunal.

I never thought. in my diplomatic career, that
I would hear a briefing to the Security Council as
compelling, but detailing such awful treatment of
a people, as we have heard today. The crimes that
we have heard echo those committed in Rwanda and
Srebrenica approximately 20 years ago. The Security
Council acted in those two situations. It acted too late
to prevent them, which is to our lasting shame, but it
did act to ensure that accountability was brought to
bear on those responsible.

As the Chairperson said, national sovereignty is not
a license to commit crimes against humanity. It is not a
license to wreak such havoc on the livelihoods and lives
of one's own people. The United Kingdom now plans to
work with our partners to press for progress in creating
the conditions so that the refugees can return, but also
so that we can have accountability that genuinely ends
the Burmese military's impunity. In the face of the
acts we heard described today, we believe that this is
a responsibility that the Security Council owes not just
to the Rohingya or the peoples of Burma, but to people
everywhere around the world.
