Mr. Soares (Portugal) (interpretation from French):
I wish first of all, Sir, to express my delegation's
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council. Your presence is logical not only because
Gabon holds the presidency of the Council for this month,
but also as a reflection of the role that your country, your
President and you yourself have played in the resolute
search for a solution to the problems of the Central African
Republic.

(spoke in English)

The Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) in the
Central African Republic is a good example of what Africa
can do to prevent conflicts and to stabilize crises. The
activities of MISAB, however, require complementary
support from the international community. In this regard we
commend France for the vital assistance it has been
providing thus far. But the United Nations will have to
consider soon how best to capitalize on these efforts so as
not to jeopardize the success so far achieved.

Portugal would like again to pay tribute to the
African mediation initiative and to the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and to reaffirm its support for the
International Monitoring Committee and for MISAB and
its troop-contributing States - Burkina Faso, Chad,
Gabon and Mali - in their very important role in the
ongoing process of national reconciliation in that country.
In that same context, we would like to praise the efforts
of the Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee and of President Bongo of Gabon, who have
been playing an important role in the resolution of the
crisis and in the monitoring of the implementation of the
Bangui Agreements. As I said before, Mr. President, your
presence here today is a reflection of the important role
played by your country in this process.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains precarious. The disruption of the current volatile
security, social and economic conditions would have
serious repercussions for the region as a whole.
Therefore, Portugal welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations regarding the concepts for a future
United Nations presence after the withdrawal of MISAB
forces on 16 March. We agree in general terms with the
Secretary-Generals evaluation of the still-fragile peace
process and the international environment in that
subregion of Africa. We also share the View expressed in
the Secretary-General's report that the parties concerned
should fulfil, as soon as possible, all the provisions of the
Bangui Agreements, and that substantial reform should be
undertaken to revitalize the country's economy and to
improve the living conditions of the population.

Given the progress already achieved, which should
not be compromised, as well as the enormous tasks that
lie ahead for the full implementation of the Bangui
Agreements and long-term stability in the Central African
Republic, Portugal agrees that there is a need to establish
a peacekeeping operation in that country as a major
preventive measure, as referred to by the Secretary-
General. In this context, Portugal supports the draft
resolution before us today.

