Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
having convened this high-level meeting on Iraq. We
are particularly honoured by your personal presiding
over the debate and by the presence of the Secretary-
General and Foreign Minister Zebari.

The adoption of three resolutions ending the
restrictions imposed on Iraq under Chapter VII of the
Charter, some dating back 20 years, and the important
message of support contained in the presidential
statement adopted this morning (S/PRST/2010/27)
confirm Iraq's recovery of its place in the community
of nations, rejecting the threats to peace that
characterized the previous regime.

The road to this point has not been easy.
Mexico's membership of the Security Council in 2002-
2003 and that which shall conclude in a few days
reflect our deepest commitment to the primacy of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Iraq is a clear example of that. At
the time, like a large majority of United Nations
Member States, Mexico condemned the former Iraq
regime's failure to comply with its international
disarmament obligations.

In 2002, when tensions over Iraq came to a head,
we supported two-stage Security Council action, in
which the first stage established a revised inspection
regime on the basis of which a decision would be
adopted to determine whether non-compliance was a
threat to international peace and security. Mexico
always advocated the need for multilateral efforts to
reach a comprehensive, peaceful and definitive
solution to the issue. In 2003, after the military
intervention began, it became obvious that we had to
deal with the humanitarian situation and reconstruction
in Iraq, appealing to our sense of collective
responsibility.

The disagreements that prevented the Security
Council from pursuing peaceful disarmament in Iraq
did not invalidate the path of multilateralism. What
happened next showed that the world could not manage
without the United Nations. We therefore stressed the
importance of the Security Council respecting the
territorial integrity of Iraq, preserving the fundamental
right of the Iraqi people to its natural resources,
especially oil, and their inalienable right to decide their
own future. We also showed that the United Nations
had the obligation to promote the protection of the
Iraqi people's human, political, civil, economic and
social rights, and to contribute to their economic
development. All those principles are reflected in the
texts we adopted today.

Mexico welcomes the gradual departure of the
international forces from Iraq. It is nevertheless
imperative that the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) continue to assist in consolidating
reconstruction efforts, promote development, ensure
the dignified and safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and strengthen the protection of
ethnic and religious minorities, as well as the most
vulnerable groups within the country.

Iraq has succeeded in holding free, plural and
inclusive elections, which have been a triumph for its
people and for democracy as a whole. That momentum
must not be lost, and work must continue towards
forming a Government that represents all sectors of
society and that can consolidate national reconciliation.

In the area of security, although the situation on
the ground today is fundamentally different from that
of the past, numerous indiscriminate attacks on the
civilian population, Iraqi and foreign armed forces and
United Nations staff continue to be reported. It is
essential that the Iraqi armed forces be able to confront
this significant challenge before the final departure of
all international forces, while guaranteeing respect for
human rights. Finding solutions to the internal border
disputes, the status of Kirkuk and the pending issues
with Kuwait is also essential and must be taken into
account if peace is to be achieved throughout the
country.

Iraq was a test of the Security Council and the
United Nations itself. Today, this dark page of history
has been turned. The consolidation of efforts under
way, with the support of UNAMI and the international
community, will be key to strengthening the standing
of our Organization.

