Mrs. Telalian (Greece): At the outset, I too wish
to thank the Presidents of the two Tribunals, Judge
Fausto Pocar and Erik Mose, as well as Prosecutors
Carla Del Ponte and Hassan Jallow, for their reports
and detailed presentations this morning. We appreciate
their continuous efforts to bring to justice those most
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and to promote national
reconciliation and peace in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we are pleased
that, since the submission of the last report, the
Tribunal has made important progress as regards the
major completion strategy issues. That progress is
evidenced in the increasing number of judgments
rendered by the Trial Chambers and the Appeals
Chamber, and in cases involving the transfer of
intermediate- and lower-level accused to national
courts in the former Yugoslavia.

In our view, it is important that the Prosecutor has
the power to assess whether the trials are conducted on
the basis of international standards of fair trial. In that
respect, we wish to emphasize the need for the
international community to continue its support for
developing domestic judicial and prison capacity in the
region, in order to ensure that local institutions are able
to fulfil their essential function in accordance with
international standards of due process.

We appreciate the intensive work carried out by
the working group on speeding up trials and the
important recommendations it has elaborated to
enhance the efficiency of the Tribunal's proceedings by
making use of existing rules. In our view, the trials of
multiple accused will save considerable time and
courtroom space. We also agree with the Prosecutor
that further refinement of the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence in order to improve pre-trial processes and
speed up the presentation of evidence at trial would
result in better use of valuable court time.

The past six months have indeed been difficult
for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We commend the President of the Tribunal
for ordering a full internal inquiry in the death of
Slobodan Milosevic, as he did in the death of Milan
Babic. It would be useful if the results of those
inquiries were to be further examined.

In that respect, it is important that following the
end of the Milosevic trial, the judges of the
International Tribunal have taken into account lessons
to be learned in order to improve the management of
future trials. It is equally important that the judges are
determined to implement concrete measures to ensure
that future trials are conducted expeditiously while
respecting due-process considerations.

We also encourage the Tribunal to implement the
recommendations made by the Swedish auditor
concerning improving detention conditions.

We welcome the progress of trials at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
number of judgments issued by it. We support the
request made by Judge Mose, President of the
Tribunal, to extend the term of office of the Tribunal's
current permanent judges to 31 December 2008.

Concerning the cases to be transferred by the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal to national jurisdictions, we
emphasize the vital importance of capacity building,
compliance with international standards of fair trial
and respect for human rights.

It is encouraging that the two International
Tribunals are doing everything within their power to
keep up as much as possible with the timeframes of
their completion strategies while upholding norms of
due process. However, the failure to arrest indictees at
large is a serious obstacle to the effective
implementation of the completion strategies. Once
more, we wish to emphasize that it is the legal
obligation of all States in the regions, and of
international organizations, to fully cooperate with the
Tribunals in order to bring to justice all remaining
fugitives, notably Ratko Mladic, Radovan Karadzic
and Felicien Kabuga. We also express our concern
about the remarks made by the Prosecutor of the ICTY
concerning the cooperation provided by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

Finally, we urge all States and international
organizations to closely cooperate with the two
International Tribunals and to support their difficult
mission to put an end to impunity and establish the rule
of law, and thus support national reconciliation in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

