Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert
for her briefing and for the valuable work she, together
with her team of professionals, is doing at the helm of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.

First, with regard to the political aspect, we
acknowledge the recent progress made in terms of the
appointment of the Ministers of Defence, the Interior
and Justice, thereby achieving an almost complete
Cabinet. However, we regret that no woman has been
selected for any of those posts, despite the fact that
there were two women candidates for the Ministry
of Education. In the same vein, we also welcome the
agreement on the establishment of the Kurdish Regional
Government. We applaud the appointment of three
women to ministerial posts and, for the first time, of a
woman to the presidency of the regional parliament. We
believe that those significant advances on the political
front will allow the authorities to finally implement
their Government plan aimed at promoting the stability,
development and security of the Iraqi people.

We hope that efforts to improve the relations
between the federal Government and the Kurdish
Regional Government will continue and that the two
will be able to definitively iron out their differences
with regard to oil revenues and security-related
arrangements, including the abolition of customs
control points. Similarly, we welcome the initiative to
take measures to attract investment to the country as
this is a fundamental tool for boosting economic growth
and job creation and, consequently, the population's
quality of life.

Concerning the security aspect, we understand that
the resurgence of terrorism in Iraq poses an obvious
threat to the peace and security of that country and the
region. Therefore, we find the vibrant anti-terrorism
campaign rolled out by the national authorities
commendable but believe that greater regional and
international cooperation is necessary in order to
combat terrorism and prevent it from regaining its
past momentum.

As for the humanitarian aspect, we would like to
appeal to the national and local authorities alike to work
in a coordinated manner and to improve the bureaucratic
processes for allowing humanitarian organizations to
deliver in a timely manner the aid required by millions
of people who remain displaced. In addition, we would
like to highlight the commendable work of the Mine
Action Coordination Centre in mitigating the dangers
of explosive remnants of war in Iraq. We also applaud
the integration of women in demining activities, and
the fact that there is an equal representation of men and
women in the composition of the teams.

With regard to unresolved matters with Kuwait,
we are pleased to note the steps taken as a result of
the investigations following the excavations carried out
in Samawah district last March. We acknowledge the
efforts of the members of the Tripartite Mechanism to
move forward on the search for prisoners and missing
persons reported by Kuwait and the return of human
remains, assets and the national archives.

In conclusion, we are concerned that tensions
among certain countries, including in the region, are
setting Iraq up as a stage for clashes between those
countries. Accordingly, we encourage those countries
to reflect on their position and make concrete efforts
to defuse the tensions and restore the desired stability.
