The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

Guatemala would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his statement. We regret
that we Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, was not able
to participate to present his report.

Like the rest of the Council members who have
spoken today, Guatemala celebrates the recent
achievements in Somalia, which draw the country
ever closer to the longed-for for peace and stability.
I am pleased to say that in both the political process
and in the security strategy, Somalia has surpassed all
expectations.

With regard to the political process, Guatemala
welcomes the new President of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We recognize the timely
nomination of Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon as Prime
Minister. Both individuals represent the new era in
Somalia. We expect the new authorities to establish
as soon as possible a Government that is inclusive,
transparent and responsible in financial management.
We also expect the timely composition of the Cabinet,
with equitable gender representation in its core. In turn,
the Security Council and the international community
should maintain their strong support for Somalia, and
we reiterate that the end of the transition is not the end
of the peace process. Likewise, we recognize that the
Government of Somalia needs to take ownership of
the national agenda, and that we need to listen to and
assimilate its new priorities.

We look forward to receiving shortly the strategic
review of United Nations efforts in Somalia, which
we trust will take into account the new circumstances
emerging in Somalia and present options for enhancing
United Nations system coordination on the ground. It
is essential that the United Nations work in a spirit of
cooperation and synergy.

Regarding the security strategy, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has implemented its
mandate in an exemplary manner. Together with the
Somali National Security Forces, it has achieved what
few predicted possible in the short-term - the recovery
of the port of Kismayo. We recognize the extraordinary
efforts of AMISOM, and we pay tribute to the troops
that have made the ultimate sacrifice for peace in
Somalia.

We appreciate the information contained in the
fourth progress report of the Chairman of the African
Union Commission (S/2012/764, enclosure), which,
among other things, requests the technical renewal
of AMISOM's mandate, with a few adjustments for
its effective implementation, until 22 February 2013.
We believe that these additional components will
strengthen the logistical package approved in resolution
2036 (2012). Our delegation supports the renewal of
the mandate and will participate constructively in the
negotiations ofa draft resolution in the coming days.

We also look forward to the strategic review
of AMISOM. in January 2013. In our judgment, the
assessment must take into account the recent movement
of Al-Shabaab to the north of the country. It needs to
ensure security in the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab
and should be accompanied by the strengthening of the
Somali National Security Forces.

Like the African Union in its report, we are
concerned over the financial situation of AMISOM,
in particular for the second half of 2013. It is essential
that the Mission have the resources necessary to carry
out its mandate. We call on all countries in a position
to do so to contribute generously to this objective and
to improve the predictability and sustainability of
AMISOM. funding.

We recognize the adoption of the national security
and stabilization plan. We believe it of great importance
that the people of Somalia, in particular outside of
Mogadishu, feel the change in their daily lives and that
local administrations be established and successfully
deliver basic services.

The restructuring and reform of the Somali
National Security Forces is of the utmost importance.
Likewise, the increased number of defections of
combatants affiliated with Al-Shabaab represents a
positive step and a glimmer of hope for the youth of
Somalia. Moreover, the protection of civilians and the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance must
continue to be top priorities.

The reconstruction of Somalia, in terms of both
its infrastructure and its social fabric, as well as the
protection of its natural resources, represent critical
challenges. The fight against piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia continue to pose a threat. In
the past year, we have seen the transformation of that
country, and Guatemala will continue to support all its
efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

