Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic
of Serbia, and to thank him for his statement. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2009/149). We are also grateful to Mr. Skender
Hyseni for his statement.

A definitive solution to the issue of Kosovo is
essential in order to achieve stability in the Balkan
region.

My delegation is pleased that the report of the
Secretary-General reports on progress made in the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the consequent
reconfiguration of UNMIK under resolution 1244
(1999). We believe it important that the reconfiguration
of UNMIK and the activation of EULEX - especially
the transfer of police, justice and customs functions -
have taken place successfully and without major
incidents. The cooperation and coordination of both
missions is a good example of cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union.

Although the security environment in Kosovo has
remained stable, tensions, including incidents of
violence between communities in the region, remain
cause for concern. Therefore it is important that,
despite continuing difficulties on the ground, UNMIK
should be able to appropriately carry out the mandate
conferred upon it by the Security Council. We call on
all parties to fully cooperate with the mission.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) is the
legal framework for the search for a solution to the
situation of Kosovo, and the United Nations should be
the competent forum in which to achieve a definitive,
long-term resolution. Mexico has been a firm and
constant promoter of the principles of justice and
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as of the International Court of Justice
as the jurisdictional body, par excellence for peacefully
settling differences arising from interpretations of
international law. In that context, we await the Court's
advisory opinion on Kosovo requested by the General
Assembly during its sixty-third session.

We express our hope that peace can be
safeguarded and stability consolidated so that Kosovo
and the Balkans region in general can move towards a
more stable, more prosperous future as an integral part
of Europe.
Although there are positive developments in the
area of the rule of law, it should be applied uniformly
throughout Kosovo, in particular with regard to access
to justice without discrimination based on ethnicity or
location. Those principles should be the basis of a fair
and inclusive justice system that properly addresses
civil and penal issues, as well as police activities.

Moreover, other measures should be taken in
areas such as secure conditions of return for refugees
and internally displaced persons, the processes of
reconciliation and the integration of communities,
protection of heritage and the promotion of socio-
economic development.

Mexico believes it essential that the Security
Council continue supporting UNMIK in order to
facilitate dialogue between parties on issues of mutual
interest, bearing in mind regional stability and in
coordination with the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the NATO force in Kosovo.

For its part, UNMIK should strengthen the
mechanisms for settling disputes between parties with
a view to guaranteeing the political, economic and
social development of the people of Kosovo, stressing
in particular respect for the human rights of minorities.

