Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
multidimensional peacekeeping. I am pleased to align
this statement with that made earlier today by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Given the emphasis on the evolving nature of
peacekeeping missions in discussions in various United
Nations bodies in recent years, the current discussion
is most pertinent. It is particularly appreciated as
it allows countries with long traditions of United
Nations peacekeeping, such as Fiji, to contribute to
the discussion at the United Nations body tasked with
creating, implementing and overseeing the mandates
of the peacekeeping missions. We stand ever ready to
serve the noble purpose of maintaining international
peace and security.

Successive reports of the Secretary-General on
peacekeeping have highlighted the unprecedented
scale in terms of configuration and demand. Concepts
relating to peacekeeping have evolved, with a more
concerted effort in recent years on the United Nations
community's responsibility to protect in situations of
conflict affecting international peace and security.

Work by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Services on
peacebuilding strategies for peacekeepers, as well
as the guidance given by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on strategies for complex
peacekeeping operations and on peacebuilding issues,
recognize that peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
interlinked stages of a process. That process moves
regions and countries in conflict from being dependent
on the United Nations community for security to taking
control of their own development priorities. That has
been and continues to be the fundamental principle on
which Fiji's tradition of United Nations peacekeeping
has been based - that we are part of a larger process,
not an isolated mission that is an end unto itself.
What, then, do today's conflicts require of a
United Nations response? What does multidimensional
peacekeeping require of us? Some 65 years of United
Nations peacekeeping provide a rich store of experience
to learn from, and we must utilize our shared experience
to prepare for the future of multidimensional
peacekeeping.

From our perspective, a clear understanding of each
situation is required, as no two conflict situations are the
same. The roots of the conflict - be they ideological,
economic or deriving from the lack of adequate State
structures to provide for the citizenry - must guide
our responses to it. This requires us to be clear in our
mandates with regard to exit strategies for peacekeeping
missions and transitions to other types of United
Nations presences. Planning for handover to national
authorities at the end of an effort of the international
community, starting with peacekeeping and integrating
peacebuilding efforts, must begin at the time of the
conception of the mission. That said, the integral
role of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders should be
acknowledged and incorporated into the training of all
peacekeepers. Transition must be coordinated with all
stakeholders.

Clear and detailed planning is required to ensure
that the peacekeeping-peacebuilding transition is
seamless in order to avoid any regression into conflict.
That requires the involvement of local communities in
trust-building exercises and the involvement of women
at all levels of society in remaking their communities.
It also involves well-planned and realistic strategies
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, as well as assistance to national
authorities.

Resolution 2086 (2013), adopted in the course
of today's debate, has the unanimous support of all
members of the Security Council. We therefore trust
that it will provide a useful reference point in future
discussions on mandates of peacekeeping missions
and their implementation, as well as guidance for
the peacekeeping community as a whole. I take this
opportunity to assure the Council that Fiji will continue
its proud tradition of United Nations peacekeeping, and
that it expects to continue to play a positive role as
United Nations peacekeeping evolves.

