Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Let me thank the
United States presidency of the Security Council for the
month of July for organizing today's debate. Given the
alarming trends regarding journalist deaths in conflict-
related zones this is a timely debate, indeed. I would
also like thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing, and the journalists for their moving
testimonies.

In addition to the following comments, Lithuania
associates itself with the statement to be made on behalf
of the European Union.

We depend on the media to satisfy our right to the
freedom of information and freedom of opinion. The
work that journalists, media professionals and bloggers
do upholding that freedom is fundamental. In conflict
zones in particular, they are the world's eyes and ears
for countless victims whose suffering and death would
otherwise go barely noticed. We should not and must
not fail those who are doing this essential work.

Yet, 2012 was the second-worst year on record for
journalists, with a 49 per cent increase in deaths from
the year 2011. More than half of the victims were killed
in situations of which the Security Council is seized.
Combat-related crossfire was responsible for more than
one-third of journalist fatalities worldwide in 2012,
which is about twice the historical average. Internet
journalists were hit harder than ever, and the number
of freelancer deaths has also surpassed the historical
average. Sadly, impunity reigns as far as journalist
deaths are concerned. As noted earlier by the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Carroll, journalistss killers
walk free in nine out often cases.

The international community must act in support
of the relevant provisions regarding the protection of
journalists contained in international humanitarian law.
We shouuld also keep in mind that the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court defines intentional
attacks against civilians as a war crime. Lithuania
calls on all States to ensure the security and safety of
civilians, including journalists, to end impunity and to
pursue accountability for the crimes committed against
civilian populations.

In 2011, as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chair-in-Office, the
Lithuanian Foreign Minister brought the issue of the
safety and security of journalists to the top of OSCE
agenda. As noted by our Chair-in-Office,

"Physical violence directed atjournalists is a gross
and fundamental violation of human rights. It is
totally unacceptable. Violence against journalists
rightfully draws our attention and our anger".

He made those comments as he and the OSCE
representative on the freedom of the media spearheaded
the publication of the OSCE Safety of Journalists
Guidebook. Our experience with the OSCE has
strengthened our belief in the importance of regional
organizations in addressing media freedom, the safety
of journalists and promoting accountability, as regional
efforts facilitate translating global commitments into
actions on the ground.

My delegation encourages the Council to continue
to address the issue of the safety and security of
journalists in line with the provisions of resolution 1738
(2006), both in the thematic debates on the protection
of civilians and in country-specific situations, as well
as through reporting requirements for peacekeeping
missions. We would also welcome the inclusion by
the Secretary-General of the issue of the protection of
journalists in armed conflicts in his regular reports on
the protection of civilians and other relevant reports.

In today's world, where millions of civilians are
stranded in conflict, threatened, abused and persecuted,
and where the world's attention may be their last hope
for survival, strengthening the international response
to attacks on journalists and tackling impunity for
such attacks are essential, as is the lead of the Security
Council on the matter.
