Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for briefing the Council on his latest trip to East Africa.
His visit and his report today help highlight three
critical situations facing the international community.

On the Sudan, the United States remains deeply
committed to ending Violence in Darfur through a
political settlement, providing critical humanitarian aid
to vulnerable populations and supporting the rapid
deployment of the United Nations-African Union
hybrid peacekeeping operation, as authorized in
resolution 1769 (2007). We further support a peaceful,
unified and democratic Sudan within the framework of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and we call for
full implementation of all aspects of that Agreement.
Secretary Rice travelled to Addis Ababa this week to
lead a Sudan ministerial meeting with representatives
from the Sudan, neighbouring African countries and
the African Union and United Nations Special
Representatives for Sudan.

A Viable political process and the deployment of
a robust United Nations-African Union hybrid
peacekeeping force are critical to improving the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. We urge all groups to
support an accelerated political process led by the
United Nations and the African Union and a lasting
ceasefire on the ground. We encourage all the rebel
movements to set aside their differences and join
together to better represent the people of Darfur. We
call on all invited individuals and movements to attend
the next round of negotiations. We urge the inclusion in
the peace talks of traditional leaders from Darfur,
women's groups, local non-governmental organizations
and leaders from internally displaced persons camps.
The participation of local society is absolutely vital to
the success of the talks.

We call on the Government of the Sudan and the
United Nations to rapidly advance of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) deployment. In this context, we urge the
Government of the Sudan to approve without delay the
full list of troop-contributing countries chosen by the
United Nations and the African Union, and to meet its
commitment to accept peacekeepers into Darfur and to
provide them with the necessary visas, flight
clearances and access to land and water, in order that
they may successfully carry out their mission.

The United States is extremely disappointed by
the Sudanese Government's expulsion from South
Darfur of the head of the Nyala office of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Wael
al-Haj-Ibrahim. We welcome recent discussions
between the Government of the Sudan and Under-
Secretary-General Holmes on the extension of the
moratorium on humanitarian restrictions. The
moratorium is critical to reducing obstacles faced by
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
operating in Darfur.

As for Somalia, the United States is also deeply
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation there. The increase in violence in the capital
has resulted in thousands of additional internally
displaced persons (IDPs), including the estimated
230,000 displaced persons that Mr. Holmes witnessed
along a 15-kilometre stretch of road outside
Mogadishu.

We take note that Under-Secretary-General
Holmes met with newly appointed Prime Minister Nur
Hassan Hussein and welcome the Prime Minister's
commitment to placing humanitarian response high on
his agenda.
We applaud the United Nations and NGO efforts
to operate in very dangerous circumstances in Somalia.
We are concerned that these efforts remain hampered
by insecurity, roadblocks and inter-clan conflict, and
we reiterate our call on all parties to facilitate access
for the delivery of life-saving humanitarian aid to those
in need.

Ultimately, the return of lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, including an end to the long-
standing humanitarian emergency, can only be
achieved through a comprehensive political solution
based on the Transitional Federal Charter. The United
States continues to support the deployment of the
African Union Mission in Somalia to achieve this
objective. We also reiterate the need for robust
contingency planning by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to prepare for the possible
transition to a United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Somalia.

Finally, on Ethiopia, we would like to join others
in drawing attention to the humanitarian situation in
the Ogaden. We urge the Ethiopian Government to
open commercial trade routes to the Somali Region to
prevent the humanitarian crisis from deepening, and we
call on the Government to continue to work with the
international community to ensure access to
populations in need of humanitarian assistance.

