Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
ofthe European Union (EU) and its member States. The
Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Liechtenstein align
themselves with this statement.

Conflict resolution for the Middle East, followed
by post-crisis management, is one of the most difficult
tasks international diplomacy currently faces. The EU
fully supports the United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council, as the key actor for upholding
respect for, and compliance with, international
law, such as United Nations and Security Council
resolutions relevant to the situation in the Middle East.
Only if all sides comply with their obligations under
international law, including adherence to all resolutions
of the Security Council, can credible peace take root.
Otherwise sustainable peace is a stake.

A key challenge to peace and security in the
Middle East is terrorism fuelled by radicalization and
violent extremism. Even if Da'esh has been territorially
defeated in Syria and Iraq, it continues to pose a
serious threat. Terrorist threats also exist elsewhere,
including in Yemen and Gaza. In fact, while there is
a concentration of such activity in the Middle East
region, terrorism can strike in all parts of the world.

Another element to consider is the lack of trust
among key parties and the absence of a political horizon
for many citizens. Many countries in the Middle East
are witnessing an erosion of the social contract, which
puts serious strain on social cohesion and territorial
integrity. That has led to the fragmentation of society
and the multiplication of subnational armed forces and
armed actors with narrow interests. Without trust and
inclusiveness, no political solution can be successful.

Let me explain how we see all those factors in
relation to the situation across the Middle East.

The EU is extremely concerned about the measures
taken by Iran since the beginning of July that are
inconsistent with its nuclear-related commitments under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We
call upon Iran to reverse those steps immediately, refrain
from any further steps that could lead to escalation and
come back into compliance with its obligations. We
recall our firm commitments under the agreement,
including with regard to the lifting of sanctions for the
benefit of the Iranian people. In that regard, we regret
the re-imposition of sanctions by the United States,
following its withdrawal from the JCPOA.

Our support for the JCPOA, endorsed unanimously
by resolution 2231 (2015), goes hand in hand with
our efforts to promote stability in the region. We
remain committed to the preservation and full
implementation of the JCPOA - a key element of
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, which
is in the security interests of all. We are determined
to work with the international community to achieve
those goals. We are also gravely concerned about Iran's
ballistic missile activity and transfer of missiles and
relevant technologies to State and non-State actors
in the region. We call upon Iran to refrain from any
activity that is inconsistent with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The EU supports a balanced and comprehensive
approach with Iran, including dialogue, with a View
to addressing all issues of concern, being critical
when there are active divergences and cooperative
when there is mutual interest. We are determined to
continue pursuing efforts to enable the continuation
of legitimate trade with Iran, including through the
initiative by France, Germany and the United Kingdom
to operationalize the special-purpose vehicle INSTEX,
which is registered as a private entity and will support
European economic operators engaged in legitimate
trade with Iran, in accordance with EU law and
resolution 2231 (2015).

The freedom and security of maritime navigation
in the Gulf is currently at stake. The European Union
always supports the freedom of navigation, which is
essential to all our economies. Everybody must fully
respect international law, including, notably, the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which is
rightly recognized widely as the constitution of the
oceans, reflecting customary international law. The EU
has called upon all actors in the Gulf region to exercise
restraint. Prompt de-escalation is necessary to minimize
the risk of miscalculation, which remains high.

Also with respect to Iran, de-escalation and
restraint are of fundamental importance. In recent
high-level meetings in Iran, Kuwait and other countries
in the region, we underlined our concerns about the
prevailing situation and, in turn, our partners have
expressed their own determination to work to promote
calm and stability.

The EU continues to insist on full respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law in
Yemen. That includes respecting and protecting civilian
lives, as well as respecting the work of humanitarian
aid workers. Furthermore, the European Union
remains fully committed to the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. The
EU urges all parties to cease violence and engage in
dialogue immediately, in particular by fulfilling their
commitments to the United Nations-led process in an
inclusive and sustainable political process.
The same must be said of the Syrian conflict and
the protracted violent repression against the civilian
population in Syria, which has continued to take
innocent lives for more than eight years. Successive
ceasefire agreements have been violated. The EU has
repeatedly expressed its grave concerns about the
escalation of violence in Idlib, caused primarily by the
Syrian regime and Russia, which threatens the safety
and security of 3 million people. The EU reiterates
its call for a durable ceasefire to be ensured under the
terms agreed upon in the Sochi memorandum, as well as
for the need to ensure unhindered, safe and sustainable
humanitarian access.

The EU insists that there can be no military
solution and that only a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) can bring about sustainable
peace and stability. The EU fully supports the work
of the United Nations Special Envoy, including
efforts in support of the creation of a balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee that would allow for
progress in the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva towards a
credible, negotiated, Syrian-owned political solution to
the conflict.

The European Union stresses that, with a view
to finding sustainable solutions, it is also key to pave
the way for free and fair elections, to support Syrian
civil society, including women and their equitable and
meaningful engagement in the political process, and to
identify measures to build confidence among parties
to the conflict, including on the issue of detainees and
missing persons.

The EU will be ready to assist in the reconstruction
of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and
inclusive political transition, negotiated by the Syrian
parties to the conflict, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique' (S/2013/522, annex), is firmly under way.

The European Union considers accountability
and justice as prerequisites for sustainable peace
in the region and, given the lack of jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, will continue to
support the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria and the Independent
Commission of Inquiry. We will continue to provide
funding for the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in order to identify and hold
accountable the perpetrators of chemical attacks in
Syria. Promoting accountability and justice is a key
element of reconciliation in post-crisis management,
not just in Syria but also in Iraq, where we support
the evidence-gathering work being carried out by
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh.

With regard to the Middle East peace process, let
me begin by reaffirming the EU's commitment to ajust
and comprehensive resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict through a two-State solution and an agreement
that ends the occupation that began in 1967, ending all
claims and fulfilling the aspirations of both parties,
including Israeli and Palestinian security needs and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty,
on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions
and internationally agreed parameters. The EU's firm
and united position on those resolutions and parameters
has been set out in detail on numerous occasions. We
reaffirm our readiness to work with both parties and our
partners in the region and the international community
towards the resumption of meaningful negotiations to
resolve all final-status issues and to achieve ajust and
lasting peace.

Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal under international
law and constitute a significant obstacle to peace, as
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). The ongoing
Israeli settlement policy threatens the prospects for a
two-State solution.

Recent and increasing violence in Gaza, including
the firing of rockets into Israel, and violence in the
West Bank remind us that restoring a political horizon
for peace between Israelis and Palestinians is essential
to reduce violence and contain extremism in the region.
In the light of recent tensions, which threaten to
exacerbate the risk to the whole region, the EU recalls
the special significance of the holy sites in Jerusalem
and calls for the upholding ofthe status quo put in place
in 1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
line with previous understandings and with respect to
Jordan's special role.

With regard to Lebanon, the EU stresses the
importance for progress on the structural and economic
reform commitments undertaken at the Conference
for Economic Development and Reform through
Enterprises in Paris, as well as reforms related to the
security sector, as pledged at the Rome II meeting, in
March 2018. Moreover, the EU is a strong supporter of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and reiterates its crucial role in maintaining peace and
stability in the south of Lebanon as well as in the region.
As such, the EU emphasizes the importance of UNIFIL
being able to deliver its mandate in full. The EU also
insists on full respect for, and the implementation of,
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) by all parties,
including the call for the disarmament of all armed
groups in Lebanon.

On counter-terrorism, the European Union
maintains its firm commitment to assisting and working
closely together with our partners in the region.
Besides Da'esh, the reappearance of Al-Qaida in the
region continues to provide fertile ground for violent
extremism and radicalization leading to terrorism, as
do other terrorist organizations sanctioned by the EU,
including Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad.

The regular counter-terrorism dialogues with our
regional partners, including Israel, Egypt and Jordan,
provide the framework for enhanced joint efforts aimed
at diminishing terrorist propaganda from the Internet,
halting resources financing terrorism and ensuring due
accountability for terrorist atrocities, which constitute
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We are pleased that the Global Coalition
Against Da'esh is pursuing these objectives.

Another key challenge to bringing about peace
and security in the Middle East is the lack of trust
and the need to create conditions for peace among
the population. Strengthening democracy, the rule of
law and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms is an essential strategy for building trust
among different groups in societies and between the
Government and its citizens. It is important to act
against any form of incitement to hatred and violence,
including by using the education system to promote
mutual tolerance and peaceful coexistence.

This analysis leads to the conclusion that
sustainable solutions to the conflicts in the Middle East
can be found only through multilateral cooperation:
by policy and actions coordinated by the international
community, some of which are translated into
international law; or, in other words, by means of a
rules-based international order to which the parties on
the ground and international actors commit themselves.

I would like to underscore that international law
includes international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Only a few days ago, we celebrated 70
years of the Geneva Conventions. The EU's support
for international law is one of the key building blocks
of the Union's Common Foreign and Security Policy.
Our clear policy is in favour of the full implementation
of international humanitarian law at all times,
everywhere-in Syria, Yemen and, equally, in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

Our commitment to the fight against terrorism and
our work with partners on the ground to build confidence
exemplify our commitment to the multilateral approach.
Many actions have been agreed at the international or
multilateral level, of which I have mentioned several.
Most are led by the United Nations. The EU, for its
part, will continue to support peace and security in the
Middle East, including through the United Nations.

The lack of implementation of agreed policies and
of enforcement of international law is the real challenge
to bringing about peace and security in the Middle East.
It has almost become fashionable simply not to agree
on a course of action or follow agreements. Narrow
interests often prevail over the international need
for compromise and mutual gain. The international
community must therefore seek methods to make agreed
policies implementable and to ensure full respect for
international law.

