Mr. Laborde (spoke in French): The terrorist
threat currently appears in at least three different
forms - first, through the organizations on the
Council's list that control territory, as in Syria, Iraq,
Somalia, Libya, Nigeria and Mali; secondly, by making
a deadly reality of a violent ideology that inspires
terrorist attacks around the world; and lastly, as a
real threat to vulnerable States and to global peace
and security, as was put very well by the Deputy
Secretary-General, whom I thank for his extremely
clear comments in that regard and for his presence here
today. As regards the third form of the threat, terrorist
groups take every opportunity afforded by local and
regional conflicts that weaken State structures and the
rule of law - and, by extension, human rights - to
expand their terrorist activities, including by taking
control of vast territories.

The conflicts Ijust referred to are specifically found
in the geographical areas where the vast majority of
United Nations peacekeeping missions are deployed. In
fact, it could be estimated that two thirds of the officers
and soldiers participating in peacekeeping operations
currently operate in the areas affected by terrorism. In
such circumstances, it should be noted that it is not only
the citizens ofthe countries concerned who are affected
by asymmetric threats, but, unfortunately, United
Nations personnel as well. The attacks of yesterday
and the day before, and those perpetrated in October in
Mali, are just some of the most recent examples.

As long as terrorists and their organizations
continue to spread fear and horror by such attacks, the
residents of those countries and United Nations staff
and compounds will be among their targets. The close
relationship oflocal or regional conflicts with terrorism.
violent extremism and - I thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for mentioning
it - organized crime is today an unprecedented threat
to international peace and security. Let us never forget
those three components: terrorism, violent extremism
and organized crime. That relationship puts United
Nations peacekeeping missions in a situation of new
and growing vulnerability.

The Security Council set up the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in a very
interesting manner as a special political mission tasked
with addressing specific terrorism-related threats
to peace and security. That element brings a special
perspective to our debate. CTED and the peacekeeping
operations are partners in the Security Council, and
their respective mandates, while completely different,
are mutually reinforcing. I insist on the fact that their
mandates are distinct because it could be dangerous to
conflate them.

Under the guidance of the Committee, the main
task of CTED is to conduct independent assessments
of Member States' capacity to fight terrorism, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), which remains
valid, although it was adopted after the 2001 attacks in
New York. Subsequent Council resolutions on counter-
terrorism ~ such as resolution 1624 (2005), which
addresses the prohibition of incitement to commit
terrorist acts, as well as acts of terrorism motivated by
intolerance or extremism, or, more recently, resolution
2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters and the fight
against violent extremism - are clear illustrations of
the links and the working capacities.

On the one hand, we are perfectly aware that the two
mandates - one that focuses on peacekeeping and the
other on the fight against terrorism - are not similar,
but they are complementary. Ultimately, that approach
of complementarity will improve the protection
of civilians in the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. On the other hand, it is clear
that the United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions are deployed on the ground.
I refer to the special political missions, whose leader
is here with us today - Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs - because that
element should not be neglected in today's debate.

Therefore, both types of operations - peacekeeping
operations and special political missions - are on the
front line and thus must strengthen the institutional
capacity of the forces of order, including border
control, which is a major problem in lawless areas.
They must also strengthen criminal justice capacities
so as to bolster the rule of law, as the Secretary General
of the International Organization of la Francophonie
mentioned, and the authorities and services that are
essential to combating terrorism and organized crime
and, equally, to promoting institutional development.
Thus, given their vast experience in fragile countries,
where State structures are challenged, peacekeeping
operations and special political missions are in a unique
position to assist such countries in strengthening their
operational capacity under the rule of law. In addition,
they can provide special support, day by day, to the
States most affected by terrorism.

For more than a decade now, CTED has been
building a set of best practices in the fight against
terrorism, according to the principles of the rule of law.
Those best practices, which have been adopted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, have been identified by
a consistent methodology and ongoing dialogue with
Member States and with more than 50 international and
regional organizations, particularly the International
Organization ofla Francophonie. The Secretary General
of that organization mentioned that I participated in its
meeting in June, and I will gladly talk about this issue
at its next summit, which will be held in a few days.

The United Nations system is also at the centre
of the issue, particularly the Council and its Counter-
Terrorism Committee, whose political leadership must
be commended. We need that leadership in our actions,
including this year under the chairmanship of the
Ambassador of Egypt, who is present here today and
with whome have a very close relationship. I thank the
Ambassador for his chairmanship and the way in which
he steers our work with all the political guidance that
is required.

These best practices are based on specific Security
Council resolutions and - we too often forget - the
19 international legal counter-terrorism instruments.
That is the international cooperation in criminal
matters. We should never forget that because it is the
basis on which work on the rule of law is conducted
at the global level. If we want the rule of law to be our
priority, then let us speed up the systems of international
cooperation in criminal matters. CTED, in conjunction
with UNODC, is quite ready to assist the Council in
that regard. Thanks to such cooperation, we were able
to integrate the principles of the rule of law and the
elements required for the protection of human rights in
our work.
Moreover, CTED has conducted more than 100
evaluation visits in the Member States, including
follow-up visits. Following those visits, we provided
recommendations and identified best practices, which
have been approved by all parties concerned and by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The Committee
and its Executive Directorate have a Security Council
mandate to assist States to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. I must mention the coordination efforts
carried out by the Secretary-General's Task Force
headed by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, I will speak about that
issue a bit later.

Robust information-sharing already exists, but
we must do more for the mutual reinforcement of the
two mandates, to assess operational capacity and best
practices, on one hand, and peacekeeping operations,
on the other. This is what the Deputy Secretary-
General referred to when he spoke of the One United
Nations approach. It means that coordination and
information-sharing with other United Nations
counter-terrorism organizations, including in the office
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
represented here by its Chair, Mr. Feltman, and the
team itself. That team encompasses all the entities that
comprise the Task Force, particularly the UNODC,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
that assists the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, which is chaired by
our colleague from New Zealand. Such bodies must all
work together to support peacekeeping operations.

I must not forget the guiding principles on foreign
terrorist fighters adopted in Madrid. 1 thank the Spanish
Secretary of State, who organized that meeting last year
very well. The meeting provided key reference points
for enhancing institutional cooperation, including on
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

The Deputy Secretary-General spoke of the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. I am also pleased to refer to the high-level
action group on that topic, which is chaired by the
Secretary-General and held its first meeting last week.
I should also mention our excellent cooperation with
the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions
in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Our
regular and comprehensive exchange of information
with that Office has led to a fruitful integration of
our collective knowledge and has been reflected in
activities of importance to both sides - the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and CTED - and ensures
that we implement a common strategy in our work.

In conclusion, allow me to contribute to this debate
by suggesting to the Council three points of reflection
in the framework of the larger debate on peace and
security and asymmetric threats.

First, CTED can continue to offer our expertise
in the realm of counter-terrorism, particularly in our
assessments ofthe needs and capacities of States to deal
with counter-terrorism. We share good practices, as
well as our recommendations with respect to technical
assistance, so that the United Nations can work together
in the realm of peacekeeping operations.

Secondly. in following our recommendations
ountries and missions require increased technical
assistance because the recommendations may be
sound but they need to be implemented on the ground.
I would wish to see a more significant approach to
security, criminal justice, international cooperation,
particularly through the effective implementation of the
aforementioned international instruments, including
those relating directly or indirectly to the fight against
terrorism, as well as through the promotion of best
practices, in order to strengthen the capacity of States
and regions. That is a clear need. Perhaps we are
pushing against an open door, but it needs to be said.

Thirdly, how can we ensure such capacity-
building through our peacekeeping operations, if
they request it? We need close coordination and
better exchange of information among the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate, the Special Envoys
and Representatives of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, without
forgetting the cooperation bodies, such as the Center
on Global Counterterrorism Cooperation, and the
specialized organizations, particularly those on the
ground, such as the International Organization of
la Francophonie, represented here by its Secretary-
General, and the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Council, the European Union, and so on. We must work
in a coordinated way so that, at the end of the day, we
can ensure that we work together with other bodies
through bilateral assistance. That is because bilateral
assistance, which is so important in the areas that we are
discussing, must be executed in a coordinated manner.

I cannot close without thanking you, Mr. President,
both as the representative and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal and you personally, for having
convened this debate and enabling the consistency and
coherence of our actions in all areas of our work. We
will continue to bear in mind what Albert Camus said in
his acceptance speech for the Nobel Prize in literature,
namely, that we know very well that we will not go far
with respect to the hopes of our societies but at least we
will conserve our societies and our values. That is what
we must continue to do together while focusing on the
common values of the United Nations.

