Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Presidents of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and the Prosecutors of the ICTY, the ICTR and the
Residual Mechanism for their respective briefings on
the activities of the two Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (S/2013/460) and the report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2013/463)
indicate that both Tribunals are making progress
towards the achievement of their mandate, albeit by
modifying procedures, but nevertheless by upholding
the fundamental principle of due process. We note that
the ICTR has concluded all cases at the trial level and
referred cases to Rwandan courts, is preparing to hand
down a new appeals judgement before the end of the
year and is conducting pending appeal cases so as to
finish the majority of them in 2014 and a final one in
July 2015. The ICTY, for its part, seeks to uphold the
time lines, in spite of being understaffed by appeals
judges and the burden of new arrests.

Togo remains confident that the recent appointment
of Judge Mandiaye Niang of Senegal and the
appointment on 18 November as Permanent Judge of
my fellow countryman Mr. Koffi Kumelio Afande,
who will be sworn in on 12 December, will contribute
to bolstering the number of judges and will help the
Appeals Chamber in upholding timelines.

We regret the negative impact of the attrition of
qualified staff on the Tribunals' completion strategy
and on the transition to the Residual Mechanism. We
hope that the relevant United Nations bodies will take
the necessary measures to mitigate the impact of this
state of affairs. Togo supports any measure, including
the referral of cases to national courts, to ensure that
the closure of the Tribunals is not seen as signalling
impunity for those not yet arrested or prosecuted.
Monitoring mechanisms must be set up to guarantee
due process in those national juridictions.

Togo urges the various bodies of the two Tribunals
to coordinate their efforts, in cooperation with States
and international institutions, in order to facilitate the
execution of their mandate. That is why we welcome
the measures being implemented by the Office of the
Prosecutor to strengthen national capacities in criminal
prosecution as a fundamental element of national
reconciliation in concerned countries. Togo also
encourages the two Tribunals to pursue their efforts
to meet the needs of victims and witnesses who find
themselves in difficulty after having testified before
the Tribunals, especially since many of those witnesses
suffered losses and experienced suffering during the
conflicts.

My country also deplores the problems that
have arisen in relocating individuals who have been
acquitted or served their sentence, but arfe still denied
of their freedom for lack of a host country. Our Council
should explore appropriate ways to support the strategy
designed by the ICTY along those lines, which was
considered with the Registrar of the ICTR during the
interactive dialogue of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals on 20 November. At that time,
it was unanimously acknowledged the fact that those
individuals continue to be deprived of their freedom
constitutes a serious humanitarian issue.

Allow me, in passing, to warmly congratulate
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and his team on the
effective and deft way in which Guatemala led the
work of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals during the past two years.

When acquitted individuals are not relocated, any
inaction on the part of the Council affects the credibility
of the United Nations in ensuring international justice
in accordance with the rule of law or the primacy of
law. The Security Council could invite the Secretary-
General to submit a report on the role that is or
could be played by United Nations entities and make
recommendations to guide the Council.

Togo welcomes the substantive, multifaceted
assistance provided by all the sections of the Registrar
of the two Tribunals to the Residual Mechanism until
the latter can fully carry out the administrative and
judicial activities. The experience of the Arusha branch
of the Residual Mechanism, which is carrying out the
bulk of the judicial and prosecution functions, will be
used to better organize the ongoing transfer of functions
to The Hague branch, which was launched on 1 July.

With regard to the staff of the Residual Mechanism,
we have two hopes - first, that greater geographical
representation within the limits of the Mechanism's
reduced staffwill strengthen capacity in the represented
regions, and secondly, that women's representation
should go beyond the number of women recruited
and lead to their being given positions of greater
responsibility.

In conclusion, Togo would encourage both
Tribunals to further increase awareness with regard to
their legacy through various social networks, as well as
academic and professional circles.

