Mr. Danforth (United States of America): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. This is a
very substantial upgrade. I wish you well in the coming
month and thank you for your very kind words
addressed to me.

The resolution that the Security Council has
adopted today is important in many respects. First, it
extends the United Nations mission in Burundi,
showing that we, as Member States of the United
Nations, are in this process for the long haul. Secondly,
the resolution forcefully condemns the violence that
continues to plague Burundi, particularly the Gatumba
massacre. It also states that those responsible for that
Violence must be brought to justice. Thirdly, it
recognizes the important contributions made by other
African nations - including Uganda, South Africa and
the United Republic of Tanzania - to bring peace and
stability to that troubled region. This is a
comprehensive and forceful resolution.

Some of my colleagues have expressed concern
that the resolution lacks language concerning the
precise forum in which the perpetrators of violence in
Burundi may be brought to justice. The United States
strongly encourages Burundi to take further steps to
establish its truth and reconciliation commission, as
agreed to by signatories to the Arusha accords, as an
important step towards ending impunity.

Moreover, I would like to reiterate that it is the
policy of the Government of the United States to
ensure that United States persons, including members
of the armed forces of the United States of America
participating in United States peace operations, are
protected from criminal prosecutions or other assertion
of jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), including through the inclusion of express
provisions providing such protection. United States
persons are not participating in the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB). Consequently we do
not believe such express provisions are necessary in
this case. In addition, consistent with the statement that
the United States made upon the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 58/318, expenses resulting from
the provision of any cooperation or support to the ICC
would be on a reimbursable basis. In this particular
case the United States supports the resolution based on
the understanding that it in no way directs, encourages
or authorizes ONUB to cooperate with or support the
ICC. Moreover, the United States supports the
resolution based on the understanding that it does not
change the existing mandate of ONUB regarding the
investigation of violations of humanitarian law.

I would like to make a simple request of the
Security Council and of other United Nations Member
States. Let us put aside our differences on the ICC and
focus on the positive result we have achieved here
today in the specific context of the ongoing United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Burundi. It is a
good day for Burundi and for the prospects of peace
and national reconciliation there. It is a good day for
the United Nations in reaffirming its role in that effort.

