Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to convey my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative during your presidency to organize
this open debate on water, peace and security. We
also thank your delegation for the useful concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). I would also like to acknowledge
the insightful remarks made earlier by the Secretary-
General and other briefers.

Water is a resource that is limited supply but for
which demand continues to grow. On the one hand,
global warming continues to threaten the supply of
fresh water, while, on the other, the steady increase
in the global population is continually escalating the
demand for water. It is therefore not difficult to see
where our next existential challenge will come from.
But meeting that challenge is not just about addressing
questions of supply and demand; more fundamentally,
it is a challenge of sharing the resource.

As water scarcity worsens with the world's growing
population, there will be an increased need for sharing
the available source of fresh water. However, the
question of access to water is not just related to our
survival; it is intricately related to food security and
to development. Asian and African States, in particular
sub-Saharan States, all are witnessing growth in
population, extreme vulnerability to climate change and
an ever-increasing hunger for development. Therefore,
the countries of those regions are likely to be the first
to face the challenge of sharing transboundary waters
in a pressing way. In the face of water scarcity, the
ability of countries to cooperate and peaceably share
available water resources will be critical to their peace,
security and development. What is alarming, however,
is that the regions most likely to be affected by acute
water scarcity are the ones facing political turmoil and
conflicts, some of which have remained unresolved
for decades.

Throughout history, access to water has either been
a source of conflict or of cooperation among people.
Today, too, water scarcity can lead to either of the two
paths. Essential for human survival - as, indeed, for
progress - countries will be prepared to fight for
access to adequate water. Only the will and ability of
States to develop mutual understanding on the sharing
of transboundary waters can prevent violence and
conflict. Therefore, if we at the United Nations wish
to maintain international peace and security, we must
strive to find ways to ensure two things: one, that
Member States remain willing to share water resources
peaceably and cooperatively; and, two, that Member
States' willingness to resolve such issues are not
constrained by any lack of capacity.

The first of those aspects is often more critical. The
international community must assume responsibility to
develop, nurture and protect normative frameworks at
the multilateral and bilateral levels to ensure that States
remain willing to resolve water issues cooperatively.
It must promote bilateral and regional agreements
on waterways and, once they are developed, ensure
that they are not undermined through unilateral or
coercive measures. The Indus Water Treaty of 1960 -
between Pakistan and India and with the World Bank
as guarantor - is an example and model of what can be
achieved through bilateral agreements. The Secretary-
General also cited it earlier as an example of positive
cooperation. But the Treaty is also an equally good
case study of what could go wrong if such agreements
are not honoured or if they are threatened by one of
the States parties to be abrogated altogether. The
international community must remain vigilant to any
sign ofunwillingness to maintain cooperation and must
be willing act to avert any conflict.

On the second aspect, Member States' ability to
cooperate depends upon a number of factors, which may
be technical, financial or political. There are several
international institutions that can address the technical
or financial needs for developing and sustaining
cooperation on water sharing among States. However,
the only international body that can enhance Member
States' political ability to cooperate is the Security
Council. It is the responsibility of the Council to
resolve international conflicts and disputes, especially
long-standing, prolonged conflicts, in particular in
Asia and Africa. Unburdened by conflicts of the
past, new challenges can almost always be addressed
cooperatively.

Before I conclude, I want to caution and warn against
any use of water as an instrument of war. Pakistan
denounces any such practice, real or threatened, as
we believe it to be inconsistent with the precepts of
international humanitarian law. Access to water is a
fundamental right that must be protected at all times.

Finally, our debate today must send a strong message
to the world that we are committed to maintaining
cooperation in the face of water scarcity; that we will
respect and protect our existing understandings and
build where they are yet to be reached; and that we will
not allow this challenge to put international peace and
security at risk.

