I would like to congratulate the Republic of Estonia on the holding of this important open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a topic that has become a priority in the maintenance of international peace and security. My delegation has followed with great interest the statements made by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Prize Laureate and Member of the Elders, who have given a comprehensive overview of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, especially during this difficult period of pandemic. By adopting resolution 1265 (1999) a little more than 20 years ago, the Security Council took the full measure of the importance of the protection of civilians for the credibility and success of peacekeeping operations. That awareness has been translated into concrete action through, inter alia, the inclusion of explicit provisions on the protection of civilians in the mandates of several peace operations, the deployment of protection of civilians advisers in certain peace missions and the development of a guide on the implementation of protection of civilians mandates for use by United Nations police, and now through response and resilience measures to combat the health crisis. While there is no doubt that this mechanism has made significant progress, it must be noted, as the Secretary-General's most recent report on this issue (S/2020/366) clearly demonstrates, that civilians continue to be subjected to abuses by non-State armed groups and regular armies alike. Indeed, in 2019, the United Nations registered more than 20,000 civilians killed or wounded in attacks in 10 countries, while an alarming number of people remain missing in connection with armed conflicts, including 139,000 cases of missing persons submitted to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) alone. As a result, during the period under review, millions of civilians were forced to leave their homes due to conflict, adding to the 70.8 million people worldwide already displaced by conflict or violence at the beginning of the year in question. In the same year, the World Health Organization (WHO) registered 1,000 security breaches in health facilities, not including the millions of victims of sexual violence. These scourges amply demonstrate the degree of vulnerability of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation takes this opportunity to pay solemn homage to all those killed and to express sympathy to the millions of other victims that are still suffering. The already troubling fate of civilians in conflict zones has no doubt deteriorated in the global context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) because of its disruptive effect on the conduct of security and humanitarian operations. It is against that bleak backdrop that Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on 23 March launched an appeal for an "immediate global ceasefire... to help create corridors for life-saving aid, to open precious windows for diplomacy, to bring hope to places among the most vulnerable to COVID-19". Strongly committed to the ideals of peace, justice and the rule of law, Senegal unreservedly supports that appeal and therefore joins the Secretary-General in urging all parties to conflicts worldwide - State and non-State alike - to unconditionally enforce them. In addition to that ambitious appeal, we must pursue efforts to commit State and non-State actors to respecting humanitarian and human rights standards and to include the obligation to protect civilians in peace and ceasefire agreements. Indeed, in the absence of a ceasefire, strict respect for international humanitarian law by all parties to conflicts remains the best - if not the only - alternative to ensure that vulnerable populations receive basic protections and humanitarian services. That is why I welcome the call to action to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law and principled humanitarian action, launched by France and Germany in September 2019 and endorsed by 43 Member States. Given today's challenges, that call is more than justified and it is our collective duty to heed it. Its success must include the effective protection of civilians and all medical and humanitarian personnel working in the field, as well as their equipment and facilities. That also requires, as recommended by the Secretary-General in this year's report, that all parties to conflict set out to train their combatants - armed forces and non-State armed groups alike - to respect international humanitarian law and international human rights law. In that regard, it is essential that the United Nations and its partners, such as the ICRC, get involved by providing said parties with the technical assistance and logistical support they need. It is clear that these measures to ensure respect for international humanitarian law are only preventive provisions that can be violated. It is therefore essential that they be complemented by other measures to ensure full accountability for those who violate them. In addition to simply affirming the non-negotiable principle of respect for the law, strengthening law enforcement requires creating the conditions to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable. That, in turn, requires the establishment of complementary legal instruments at the national, regional and international levels, as well as mechanisms and procedures for the detection and prosecution of international humanitarian law violations. With the committed legal cooperation of all countries, such a deterrent arsenal would help to put an end to impunity. It would allow us to become aware of violations of humanitarian law and to systematically conduct the investigations necessary to find and arrest the perpetrators in order to bring them before the competent courts. These fundamental provisions must also be applied to those who perpetrate attacks on peacekeepers, who also often pay a heavy price in the implementation of the protection of civilians mandate. I pay my respects to all the Blue Helmets who, like Captain Mbaye Diagne, have given their lives to protect civilians. I am pleased to note that in two days, the Secretariat will honour them on the occasion of the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, which is enshrined in its annual agenda. In general, States today are responding to COVID-19 with border closures and containment. Although that effectively curbs the spread of the disease, this autarkic approach can only have short-term success as it is economically unsustainable. A more resilient stance should therefore be adopted for the medium and long terms so as to enable both the resumption of economic activity and control of the disease. We cannot do so through aresponse that lacks global solidarity and international coordination. We must keep in mind that as long as the coronavirus persists anywhere, the risk of a global resurgence remains very real. In that connection, Senegal, through its President, Mr. Macky Sall, has called for the cancellation of debt in order to allow developing countries, particularly in Africa, to devote their limited resources to national COVID-19 response plans and to strengthen their resilience. We also note and commend the establishment of a COVID-19 fund by financial institutions, launched at the very beginning of the pandemic, as an embodiment of the same spirit of solidarity. With regard to the coordination of response activities, it is important to reaffirm the central role of the WHO in addressing health issues at the global level. The WHO must continue to urge States to work in synergy through dedicated structures and mechanisms at national, community and regional levels. For its part, Senegal, with the valuable support of the WHO, developed a national preparedness and response plan in mid-January and is participating actively in efforts undertaken within the framework of the Economic Community of West African States and the West African Health Organization, as well as the African Union's Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. This resilient stance also applies to United Nations peacekeeping operations, and all stakeholders must integrate it into the current and post-COVID-19 contexts so as to enable peace missions to continue to fully carry out their mandates in an environment of a global health crisis and its inevitable subsequent recession. In that vein, the Secretariat and the missions, in conjunction with troop- and police- contributing countries and host countries, must continue - now more than ever - to develop temporary strategies and guidelines that take this health dimension into account in the preparation and training of contingents, in the procedures for their deployment or repatriation and in the conduct of operations in the field. Troop- and police-contributing countries, for their part, must take ownership of the relevant new provisions by training and equipping their personnel accordingly. In the field, missions must plan and conduct their operations in such a way as to continue to implement their mandates without exposing personnel. Moreover, the cooperation of host countries is critical to protecting mission personnel and maintaining their operational capacity. In conclusion, my delegation believes that in the absence of a ceasefire, strict and permanent respect for humanitarian law remains the best way to protect civilians. To that end, I call for the strengthening of prevention mechanisms and the systematic application of the principle of accountability for perpetrators of humanitarian crimes. My delegation also remains convinced that the challenges related to COVID-19 require resilience and international solidarity.
