Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Nearly half a century has passed since the majority of
African countries saw the day when Africans regained
responsibility for their own affairs. Much progress has
been made since then. Infant mortality rates have
steeply declined since the 1950s, even if they have not
fallen as much or as rapidly as before. Life expectancy
has also advanced, even if the advances made require
further efforts and have started to be undermined by
HIV/AIDS. Africa has seen the rate of school
attendance at the primary, secondary and university
levels rise considerably, surpassing the international
rates of increase at the three levels. The literacy rate
for sub-Saharan Africa has almost doubled over the last
thirty years, even if there is still much to be done.

But the continent's share of the gross world
product has fallen radically despite the fact that the
portion of the world's people living in Africa has
almost doubled over the last half century. Africa's per
capita gross domestic product has stagnated despite a
half century of efforts. Several reasons explain those
disappointing economic results. But conflicts are the
most obvious cause. Africa is tragic proof of the
colossal costs of conflicts left unchecked.

(spoke in English)

Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra
Leone, Somalia and Sudan are all tragic stories of
"de-development", caused at least in part by conflict.
And Zimbabwe must be on our watch list. In fact,
conflict affects directly or indirectly half the countries
in sub-Saharan Africa. Conflict is responsible for more
death and displacement than famine or flood. Only
HIV/AIDS, itself worsened by conflict, is exacting a
worse cost. One African in five lives daily with conflict
or civil war. Civilian casualties increase year by year
and now far outstrip those in any other region of the
world. About 19 million refugees and internally
displaced persons live in Africa. They are both the
cause and an effect of conflict.
These statistics are distressing and the effects of
these conflicts on Africa are devastating. But the
indirect effects are equally striking: health and
education systems disrupted, diseases such as
HIV/AIDS out of control, agriculture abandoned,
economic growth stalled, investment delayed, and the
promotion and protection of human rights, democratic
development and good governance undermined.

Countries caught in conflict daily lose ground to
the rest of the world, contributing to the
marginalization of Africa as a whole. In this distressing
context, it is especially encouraging that African
leaders have themselves said "Enough" and have
summoned the political will and the policy resources to
launch the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD), a strategy by Africans for Africans. In
NEPAD, African leaders both forthrightly acknowledge
the extent of the problems affecting Africa and their
corrosive effects on the nations and people of Africa,
and squarely state their determination to act.

By NEPAD, African leaders undertake to
strengthen mechanisms for conflict prevention,
management and resolution at the regional and
continental levels and to ensure that these mechanisms
are used. The NEPAD document is one of leadership
and vision. It makes clear that the economic and social
marginalization of Africa is inimical to global stability.
Such marginalization diminishes and endangers us all.
NEPAD puts the onus on Africans to act to end that
marginalization. But it also issues a call to others for
partnership, and Canada supports that call fully.

At the Genoa Summit last July, the G-8 welcomed
NEPAD. G-8 leaders indicated support for the key
themes of NEPAD and established a group of personal
representatives to develop a G-8 response. I am happy
to tell you that the leader of that group of G-8 personal
representatives is my predecessor, Bob Fowler, who
was the Permanent Representative of Canada to the
United Nations and is well known to many people in
this room.

Under the chairmanship of Canada this year,
NEPAD will be a principal focus of discussion at the
June 2002 G-8 summit in Kananaskis, Alberta. G-8
leaders will also appropriately respond to the tragic
events of 11 September, without, however, displacing
Africa from their agenda. At Kananaskis G-8 leaders
will adopt a concrete plan of action to respond to the
invitation of African leaders to partnership in an
African owned and led development process.
The goal is to put a new partnership in place that
will unlock much greater resources, public and private,
over time. In its December budget, the Government of
Canada committed $500 million Canadian - over
$300 million United States 4 in support of the G-8
Africa initiative. On Friday of this week, Prime
Minister Chretien will come to New York and will
address African issues before the global business
leaders who will be here for the World Economic
Forum.

As for the United Nations and the Security
Council, much effort has been expended on Africa, and
much of it successfully, despite the criticism one hears
in this forum, sometimes legitimate and sometimes
exaggerated.

Much has been done both to prevent and to
respond to crises in Africa. Action is better than
reaction, and prevention is worth the proverbial "pound
of cure". We would urge all Council members to
support the innovative suggestion that an informal
working group of the Council be established to discuss
prevention issues on a regular basis and, especially, to
consider early warning cases referred to it. The use of
both Council missions and inter-agency fact-finding
missions has proven its value, and we welcome the
Council's commitment to these tools.

The great risks and the exorbitant costs 4 human
and financial - of taking action after violent conflict
has erupted are perhaps the best incentives for acting to
prevent conflict in the first place. When prevention
fails, our duty to protect civilians begins. Nowhere is
this more pressing than in Africa.

The Secretary-General's two reports on the
protection of civilians and the Council's two
resolutions, 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) on this same
subject warrant intense follow-up by the Council. The
challenge is to transform the intentions found in these
resolutions, as well as in 1261 (1999) on children and
1325 (2000), the ground-breaking resolution on women
and peace and security, and the mini-recommendations
made by the Secretary-General into a programme of
action and, ultimately, a record of achievement. I think
it is appropriate that I underline in this Council the
importance that Canada attaches to protecting civilians
in armed conflict.

Mr. President, you urged us to be brief, and so if
my presentation from here on in becomes a bit
disjointed, it is because I am reading only some of it
for the record.
In most contemporary conflicts, combatants have
had an appalling record on the abuse of civilians. In
this context, the Council has rightly given United
Nations forces in Sierra Leone an explicit mandate to
protect civilians. It should make protection of civilians
a standard feature of peace operation mandates. The
Council should ask itself why it is authorizing such
mandates if it is not to protect the ordinary people who
are being abused.

I would also like to underline the importance of
addressing the situation of war-affected children. They
are not just victims of today's conflicts; they are also
important participants.

More broadly, we need collectively to address
effectively the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Last summer the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms made a positive, if
insufficient, step forward. We need now to implement
that Programme of Action, incomplete though it is,
establish procedures for the destruction of surpluses,
negotiate a legally binding instrument on marking,
control or prohibit exports to non-State actors and,
through disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) and related programmes, mop up as many
existing weapons as possible and put as many
combatants as possible back to work. Further, the
Council should take steps to penalize transport firms,
especially air transport firms, that flout Council
decisions on weapons transfers. There is plenty of
evidence available to the Council from the Angola and
other sanctions reports to show who the violators are.
Countries that harbour these violators ought to be
brought to this Chamber before the Council to explain
why they are still doing that. The acid test for the
protection-of-civilians agenda has always been whether
the commitments would be honoured or the
recommendations by the Secretary-General adopted.
We therefore welcome the Secretariat's intention to
revisit its own performance, and we would encourage
the Council to do likewise.

I would like to say a word about economics. We
need to get at the economic fuel that fires so many
conflicts, and that economic fuel is natural resources.
In Africa, to paraphrase Klausowitz, war has become
economics pursued through other means. Whatever the
original causes of these conflicts, it is economics that
perpetuates them and blocks peace. To a citizen of a
country like Canada, to which natural resources have
brought so much evident benefit, it is especially
distressing that African resource wealth should be a
curse for so many Africans - not a blessing - and a
cause of violence and despair. We fully support the
efforts being made by this Council and by the
international community at large to end these abuses.

Regional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) itself,
have critical roles to play. Canada has been a member
of the Friends of the OAU group, who have supported
the OAU restructuring process. One area of particular
interest mentioned by others is that of regional security,
and in particular the OAU Conflict Prevention
Mechanism.

This Conflict Prevention Mechanism provides a
foundation for the kind of security architecture found
in some other regions, which permit them to address
with confidence and among equals the security
problems they face. This Mechanism provides real
value added, as demonstrated by a supportive President
Bouteflika in his reaching a peace accord between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. We are particularly pleased to see
that this Mechanism is to be preserved intact in the
transition from the OAU to the African Union.

The most solemn duty of Governments is to
protect their own citizens. The most basic
responsibility of the United Nations is to help those
Governments help their people. Let us pledge to work
together to acquit our common duty to restore peace
and stability throughout Africa. Let the long-suffering
people of Africa make progress. They deserve the
opportunity to go further and to raise their standard of
living further to global norms. It is possible. It is
necessary. And it is urgent.

