Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me start by
welcoming the Prime Minister of Djibouti, Mr. Dileita
Mohamed Dileita, and his delegation to the Security
Council. I should also like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting in a timely manner in response
to a request by a Member State, which, under Article
35 of the Charter of the United Nations, may bring any
dispute to the attention of the Security Council. We
appreciate the statements and explanations that have
been given by the representatives of Djibouti and
Eritrea. We also thank Mr. Honwana for the briefing he
has given us.

The recent clash between Eritrea and Djibouti
along their shared border deeply concerns us, as it is a
breach of international peace and security. Above all,
we are also very troubled at the prospect of a further
aggravation of the already volatile situation in the Horn
of Africa. It may be that neither side has the intention
to allow the situation to slide into full-fledged
conflagration. Notwithstanding their intentions, the
situation could in fact develop in an unanticipated
direction due to the chain of action-and-reaction and
perception-and-misperception, and spiral towards
wider confrontation. The resort to military force is
unacceptable. We view this situation as very serious
and warranting our continued vigilance.

We strongly encourage the parties to resort to
peaceful dispute settlement mechanisms, in accordance
with Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which urges that parties seek diplomatic and judicial
approaches to dispute settlement, as well as the resort
to regional agencies or other peaceful means of their
choice.

Security and the sense of security are holistic and
indivisible. Obviously, there is urgency to develop a
sense of mutual security, both bilaterally and
regionally, as one country's security cannot be
achieved at the cost of another country's insecurity.
Both Djibouti and Eritrea need to feel safe for security
to be preserved.

We call upon both parties to move forward to
resolve this dispute expeditiously in accordance with
international law, including the acceptance of third-
party mediation as necessary. We are cognizant of the
importance of finding a mutually acceptable solution to
the border conflict for both countries and recognize
that their bilateral relations have been peaceful in the

past. There is therefore still hope for a solution and all
appropriate avenues should be pursued.

We appreciate and commend the role played by
the African Union and the Arab League, as well as by
third countries, as they assist in the conflict resolution
and dispute settlement processes.

Ultimately, peace and stability along the border
must be maintained. That quest for peace is even more
critical in the light of the volatility in the Horn of
Africa and the strategic value of the Bab-el-Mandeb
Strait.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
sentiments expressed in the Council's presidential
statement of 12 June 2008.

