Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing, as
well as Executive Director Fedotov for highlighting the
pivotal role of counter-narcotics efforts for the stability
and prosperity of Afghanistan and the entire region.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union.

"Cautious optimism" is the term used in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/462) to sum up
his overall assessment of the current situation in
Afghanistan. We fully subscribe to that assessment.
Significant progress has been made since the
International Conference on Afghanistan held in Bonn
last December. Whilethe transition is progressing, with
75 per cent of Afghans already living in areas under the
Afghan security lead, the transformation decade, which
we agreed upon in Bonn, is taking shape.

In the political field, the recent Heart of Asia
ministerial conference held in Kabul was a strong
demonstration of Afghan ownership and regional
cooperation based on trust, confidence and shared
values. Afghanistan is no longer perceived as a mere
source of instability but is assuming its role at the
heart of a regional process, which is now embarking
on a set of concrete confidence-building measures. As
expressed by the German Foreign Minister in Kabul,
Germany will continue to support that process as an
observer, offering our specific expertise in the areas
of regional infrastructure and chambers of commerce.

While strengthening ties with the region,
Afghanistan has also consolidated its partnerships at the
global level though a number ofcooperation agreements,
including with my own country. The message is clear:
Afghanistan is not going to be abandoned in 2014. The
international community stands by its commitments.

In the area ofsecurity, that message was underscored
at the NATO Summit held in Chicago in May, where
partners committed to sustain and support Afghan
security forces beyond 2014. However, against the
backdrop of the military drawdown and its economic
implications, sustaining the gains Ijust described will
remain a major challenge.

Commitments in the security field need to
be accompanied by a framework of long-term
governance and development cooperation that leads
to an economically self-sustained Afghanistan. The
upcoming Tokyo conference will provide us with
an opportunity to take bold steps in that regard. We
commend the excellent work by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
supporting the preparatory process in Kabul.

Mutual accountability will be key in Tokyo. While
we stand ready to extend our cooperation beyond
2014, we expect clear commitments from the Afghan
Government towards better governance, anti-corruption
and human rights, as well as safeguarding the democratic
achievements beyond 2014. President Karzai's recent
speech in the Afghan Parliament contains strong
messages in this regard that will need to be followed
up within the Afghan Government and Administration.

For the very same reason, we fully subscribe
to Mr. Fedotov's analysis that without progress in
governance, development and law enforcement, progress
in our counter-narcotics efforts also will be limited. We
therefore support the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) comprehensive approach, which
complements poppy-eradication programmes with
targeted investments in law enforcement, criminal
justice and livelihoods. We have been continuously
funding UNODC's activities in those areas and will
continue to do so.

When discussing Afghanistan's future beyond
2014, we cannot but underline the key role that the
United Nations will need to play, based on its unique
legitimacy and experience. When it extended UNAMA's
mandate in March (see S/PV.6738), the Council
expressed its full support for the United Nations good
offices in supporting Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation, building Afghan institutions and
supporting the Afghan electoral process, ensuring
coherence among donors, and supporting the regional
process. In that context, we commend UNAMA's
efforts to search for even more efficient ways to operate
while ensuring that it maintains sufficient geographical
coverage and is able to perform its role as mandated by
the Council. The renewed deployment of international
staff to UNAMA's Kunduz office and the significant
security improvements at the office in Mazar-e-Sharif
are welcome developments in that regard.

Our cautious optimism is grounded in the
international community's ability to maintain a
long-term partnership with Afghanistan. The United
Nations will need to play a pivotal role in that regard.
Let me assure the Council that Germany remains
committed to a strong UNAMA that is able to live up to
the high expectations placed upon it.

