Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ms. Sandra Honore, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her briefing today,
and to join others in offering our condolences on the
passing of General Jaborandy, who served the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
with distinction. We welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/667) and appreciate the
valuable contribution that MINUSTAH has made to
stability and progress in Haiti.

My statement today will focus on three key points:
the collective achievement in stabilizing Haiti, the
expected drawdown of MINUSTAH forces by the end
of 2016 and the need for early planning for a successor
presence of the United Nations. As I said in our last
discussion in March (see S/PV.7147), MINUSTAH has
successfully delivered for the Council. I commend
the efforts of all of its peacekeepers in collectively
achieving the Mission's objectives, so that we are now
contemplating MINUSTAH's final mandate. We should
pause to reflect on what an achievement that has been
for Haiti and for the United Nations.

In January, the Council had an opportunity to
see at first hand the contribution of MINUSTAH. It
was also a chance to see the positive steps that Haiti
is taking to ensure its own development and security.
One such step was the recent holding of the first
round of legislative elections and the scheduling of the
presidential election. In the Secretary-General's words,
there are encouraging signs that the political leaders of
Haiti have embarked on a positive path. We agree with
that sentiment and encourage all levels of Government
to continue taking steps along that path over the next
six months. The failure to hold elections in 2014,
together with the dissolution of Haiti's Parliament,
led to uncertainty among Haiti's people. So we also
welcome the formation of the Provisional Electoral
Council, the publication of an electoral decree and the
announcement of the electoral calendar.

We are pleased that the Secretary-General's most
recent report on MINUSTAH makes a positive overall
assessment of the security situation in Haiti and
confirms that important progress has been achieved.
For example, and as you have just told us now Sandra,
the recent polls in August were notably calmer than the
previous electoral cycle. As noted by the Secretary-
General, this was testament to the increased capacity
of Haiti's institutions to take on greater responsibility
in leading the country's democratic processes. There
has been no increase of insecurity or violence in the
departments from which the military component
withdrew.

Similarly, the statistics on the performance of the
Haitian National Police, which is demonstrating an
increasing ability to operate without MINUSTAH's
support, are impressive. For example, demands
for MINUSTAH crowd-control support to the
10 departmental units for crowd control have
dramatically fallen from 146 incidents to 18 over the
past two reporting periods. We do of course recognize,
however, that there is more to be done in increasing police
numbers and expertise. These enhanced capabilities
can be seen as successes for both MINUSTAH and
the Haitian National Police, but the real victory is for
the people of Haiti. Their peace of mind and hope for
a more stable and secure future grow with every step
their national institutions take forward.

But the final success of MINUSTAH will be to
build on these achievements by planning a smooth
transition to a successor United Nations presence. The
Council has always been clear that the main role of
MINUSTAH is to help Haiti take back responsibility
for its security. And while MINUSTAH undoubtedly
still has a stabilization role to play in Haiti during the
electoral period, I think we can agree that it is right
that the Mission continues to consolidate, increasingly
focusing on bespoke areas where it can offer the
greatest support to a stable Haiti. This is precisely why
transition planning needs to start early to ensure that
Haiti has the support it needs post-MINUSTAH. By
starting the planning early, we can provide the United
Nations and the new Haitian Government the time they
need to prepare for a smooth transition.

With an electoral process finally under way, Haiti
now has the opportunity to put behind it the uncertainty
of the past few years and start planning for a future
where it has full responsibility for its own security.

