Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We are honoured by the
presence among us of the Foreign Minister of Malaysia
this morning. We value the remarks by the Secretary-
General and the briefing by his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict.

During the year under review, existing challenges
of child recruitment and abuse were exacerbated
by the mass abduction of children from schools and
communities. Those horrendous and barbarous acts
were committed by non-State actors, who use such
tactics to terrorize societies. It is our hope that the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2225 (2015)
will help address the worrying trend of abductions of
children in situations of armed conflict.

Peacekeeping missions, where so mandated, can
play an important role. To effectively accomplish
that, they must receive the necessary training and
the requisite resources. As one of the largest troop-
contributing countries, Pakistan welcomes focused
pre-deployment and in-mission training in that regard.

It is also important that persistent perpetrators of
violence against children be identified and brought to
justice through national judicial systems. To that end,
investigative and prosecution capacities should be
strengthened at all levels.

The year 2014 was a grim one for the hapless
children of occupied Palestine. The 50-day military
invasion of Gaza left 550 Palestinian children dead and
more than 4,000 injured. Images of children killed on
a beach in Gaza are still fresh in our minds. Yet they
have conveniently been described as "accidental" by an
Israeli inquiry. The international community could not
stop that massacre, and with no accountability in sight,
its non-recurrence cannot be guaranteed. Pakistan
is concerned about the selective approach to the
listing adopted for this year's report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409).
It amounts to condoning the grave crimes committed
against Palestinian children. Such an approach not only
damages the credibility ofthe mandate, it also sets a bad
precedent for the future. The international community
must not shy away from listing those involved in grave
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict.

The recruitment and use of children in conflict is a
horrendous crime. The Security Council's efforts over
the past 16 years have produced significant results.
The commendable work done by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, which Malaysia
currently chairs, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General's Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
have also greatly helped. Thousands of children have
been demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated into
society. Yet the job is far from accomplished. We have
to redouble our efforts to fully achieve its goals by the
target date of 2016.

The scourge of child recruitment and other grave
crimes against children cannot be fully countered
without addressing the root causes of armed conflict.
Conflict resolution and conflict prevention must
receive due attention from the Security Council and the
international community. We welcome the focus of the
report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations on this aspect.

Finally, we would like to stress once again that
the legal parameters of the mandate of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict established by
Security Council resolutions must be fully respected.
Our focus must remain on situations of armed conflict.
In that context, we want to state for the record that
references to Pakistan in the report are not within the
purview of the established mandate.

