Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to offer our sincere condolences to the Government
of France in the wake of the barbaric terrorist attacks
in Paris. Ukraine condemns those deadly and brutal
actions and our people are in solidarity with the people
of France.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
convening this important and timely debate. Ukraine
fully shares the common vision that sustainable
development cannot be realized without peace and
security, and that peace and security are at risk without
sustainable development. But despite intensified efforts
in the areas of conflict prevention and strengthening
the relevant normative frameworks at the regional and
global levels, there is a clear gap between discourse and
practice. Today, more than 60 million people around the
world have been displaced by wars and do not enjoy the
standards of living and social protection that peaceful
and safe societies should provide. In recent years we
have witnessed a surge in violent conflicts and an ever-
growing need for urgent humanitarian assistance.

While Ukraine subscribes to the idea that conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts must be nationally
driven and owned, the transnational nature of security
threats today often makes it difficult for States to
protect themselves when acting entirely on their own.
An effective and efficient collective security system
capable of addressing the root causes of such threats,
with the United Nations and the Security Council at
its centre, is essential. Our interconnected security
and development challenges require a more integrated
approach to conflict prevention that can strengthen
coherence between political, security, development,
human rights and rule of law activities.

Moreover, the complexity of the emergencies that
the Security Council deals with demands consideration
ofthe relevant economic, political and social dimensions
of conflict. In that regard, Ukraine believes that
recognition of the need for the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Secretary-General to coordinate their activities
within their respective mandates under the Charter of
the United Nations, as stated in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), is even
more relevant today.

It is critically important to identify the root causes
of conflicts at an early stage. In today's world it is not
only internal socioeconomic development challenges
and external competition for natural resources that can
lay a foundation for the eruption of conflicts. We believe
they can also be caused by neglect of the Charter's
purposes and principles, the precepts of international
law and the essential tenets of territorial integrity and
respect for other countries' sovereignty. In that context,
the Russian aggression in Ukraine is yet another piece
of proof that the Council should play a more proactive
role in conflict prevention.

We believe firmly that sustainable development
cannot be achieved in places where explosions are heard
and civilians are killed. It cannot be achieved in places
where aggressive ideologies reign that advocate one
nation's suppression by another and where key human
rights and freedoms are violated. As a result of Russia's
treacherous annexation of Ukrainian Crimea and its
aggression in Ukraine's Donbas region, more than
8,000 people have been killed. Critical infrastructure
has been ruined and Ukraine has been deprived of
about one-fifth of its economic potential. That external
aggression has led to the emergence of a new form
of poverty - a sudden or unexpected kind - that is
affecting the lives of more than 1.5 million internally
displaced persons in Ukraine. Every day of the war
in Donbas costs us around $5 million that we could
be investing in sustainable development. And the
internally displaced persons crisis is one of the most
pressing problems for the whole region, not just for
Ukraine.

Ukraine aspires to peace and prosperity and,
together with its partner States, has been making
every possible effort to settle the conflict by peaceful
diplomatic means. Once we have put an end to the
military aggression, established peace and restored
Ukraine's full sovereignty over the Donbas region and
Crimea, we will focus on returning millions of people
to a normal life and restoring our economic and social
infrastructure on a basis of sustainable development.
Ukraine stands ready to accomplish this difficult task
and calls on its international partners to cooperate with
it to that end.

We welcome the Security Council's commitment to
enhancing dialogue and fostering more unity among its
members. Ukraine believes that improving the quality
of interaction on conflict prevention will boost the
effectiveness of the Council's work. I would like to
emphasize that preventive diplomacy is our common
goal. If we wish to achieve sustainable development,
it is crucial that all Member States recommit to the
principle of conflict prevention. We must stay united
in our peacebuilding efforts. A system-wide effort
and the support of the entire membership are critical
to effectively addressing the interdependence between
peace, security and development. Ukraine is committed
to making its contribution to achieving sustainable
peace for development, including as one of the newly
elected non-permanent members of the Security
Council for the period from 2016 to 2017.

