Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank Ambassador
Rosemary DiCarlo for the initiative to convene this
very important meeting. Impartial media work plays an
important role in increasing the understanding among
peoples and nations, and it is of great importance for
humankind.

Today, an armed group killed Mr. Mohammad
Jamous in southern Lebanon as he was returning home.
He was accompanied by his 17 year-old daughter.
This armed terrorist group is receiving military and
financial support from States and Governments that are
assisting terrorist groups in my country. Lamentably,
this honourable man died even as we participate in this
very important meeting.

The Syrian Government has been working to treat
the media openly throughout the events occurring
in Syria. We have adopted a reformed media law to
promote the work of the media and guarantee greater
freedom and transparency. The Syrian Government is
working to ensure that the truth and facts emerge. We
worked with United Nations Special Envoy Kofi Annan
to establish his six-point plan, including its fifth point
on media access and work. The Syrian Government
periodically gave Mr. Annan a list of the names of
journalists who have access to Syria. Those journalists
numbered 160 in the Arab and foreign media, from
25 March 2012 to 21 April 2013. According to the
Ministry of Information, access has been given to
300 members of the media from around the world, and
we have enabled all of them to work freely.

The Syrian Government attaches particular
importance to the security and safety of journalists. We
have urged them not to enter Syrian territory illegally,
as that would expose them to danger. We have also
urged them to avoid areas where armed terrorist groups,
including Al-Nusra, gather.

Unfortunately, terrorist groups have targeted
foreign journalists as well as Syrians. They have been
killed, assassinated and abducted. Mr. Richard Engel,
for instance, was himself abducted by a terrorist group.
We had hoped that Mr. Engel would reveal the identity
of those hostage-takers, which might have helped
the Council to understand in greater detail what is
happening in Syria. Two French journalists are still
being held captive by terrorist groups. Unfortunately,
we have lost other journalists, including Gilles J acquier,
who was assassinated by terrorist groups.

The Syrian Government has striven to cooperate
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
in seeking to ensure the freedom of these abducted
journalists, as well as the return to their home countries
of the remains ofjournalists who have been killed.
Some journalists are infiltrating Syrian territory
through common borders with neighbouring countries.
This is illegal and is being carried out with terrorist
assistance. Accordingly, some of those journalists have
been exposed to danger or have been arrested then
freed to return home. On behalf of my Government,
I have sent official letters to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council containing
information about some journalists who have illegally
entered Syrian territory. In those letters, we confirm
that thosejournalists alone bear the legal responsibility
for any consequences ensuing from their illegal
accessing of Syrian territory.

Some Governments are seeking to promote their
geopolitical objectives, destroy the Syrian State and
undermine its infrastructure and national institutions. A
Vigorous media campaign has been mobilized to incite
violence and terrorist, spread lies, distort the situation
and fuel divisions within Syria. This is a flagrant
violation of resolution 1624 (2005). The Council cannot
be unaware that that resolution was adopted with the
aim of ending incitement to terrorism.

In that context, Syrian media were placed on a
targeted list in an effort to muzzle them. Journalists and
media professionals have been threatened to prevent
them from carrying out their task of disseminating the
truth. When those efforts failed, some media officials
were abducted and assassinated. Furthermore, a number
media institutions were the targets of terrorist attacks
and destroyed, including the offices of a satellite
channel, which were attacked on 27 June 2012, their
premises looted, four security guards killed and three
journalists executed in cold blood. Other buildings
were targeted on 6 August 2012 with explosives.

We arrested the perpetrator of that terrorist attack,
who has admitted that he received his instructions from
Saudi Arabia. The toll ofthe attack was nine journalists
killed. Twenty-three Syrian and 39 foreign journalists
have been abducted by a terrorist group.

This media war has not stopped there. It has been
carried on by an embargo imposed on the Syrian
media through a resolution adopted by the League of
Arab States on 2 June 2012 to stop the broadcasting of
certain satellite channels on Nilesat, Arabsat, and the
European Hotbird channel.

Despite the ferocious campaign against Syria, many
courageous, honourable and professional journalists
have contributed to raising public awareness of the
reality of the situation in Syria and exposed terrorist
attacks perpetrated by extremist groups, including
foreign extremists and mercenaries who came to Syria
to spread chaos and destruction at the behest of certain
countries that are known to all.

The Taliban movement in Pakistan has announced
that hundreds of these elements have participated
in clashes against Syrian forces at the request of so-
called Arab friends, who have also provided help in
Afghanistan. Many honourable journalists have taken
noble positions and have resigned from the chain that is
promoting division and inciting hatred and carnage in
Syria, Egypt and in other countries. These resignations
have played a very important role in revealing the
destructive approach adopted by some media that have
failed to respect the values and objectives of noble
media workers.

