Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his detailed
briefing and for his and his team's tireless efforts.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is becoming
bogged down, the situation on the ground in Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continues to
deteriorate, and we are seeing evidence that this conflict,
the subject of many Security Council resolutions, will
have a positive outcome only if we ensure that those
same resolutions and international law are respected
following a negotiated process between the parties.

A peace can be comprehensive, just and lasting
only if it meets the legitimate aspirations of each of
the parties to achieve their national destiny in peace
and security, within a stabilized region. The goal that
the international community must work towards is
unquestionably the coexistence of two States, with
the city of Jerusalem as the future capital of both, in
accordance with the internationally agreed parameters.
In Belgium's View, that is the only way to provide the
necessary response to the Israelis' desire to live in
security in a State that is recognized by all and the
Palestinians' legitimate aspirations for a sovereign,
democratic and viable State. That possibility can be
supported by economic measures, and here I want to
remind the Council that the European Union is the
world's largest donor to the Palestinian people. But
economic measures cannot replace a political solution.
The Palestinian economy cannot fully take off until
the occupation ends and Palestinians have free access
to their land and resources, freedom of movement and
access throughout their territory and the ability to
integrate into a regional market.

The continuing settlement policy is a flagrant
violation of international law and the Council's
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Settlement activity, which is accompanied by
expropriations, demolitions and people's displacement,
undermines respect for Palestinians' basic rights. It
also fundamentally compromises the two-State solution
that we support, and it will soon be irrevocable. The
recent publication of several requests for offers of
tender to enable more than 800 housing units to be
built in settlements in East Jerusalem is a new example
of that policy, and Belgium firmly denounces and
condemns such developments. In that context, we are
also extremely concerned about the increase in tensions
and violence between Israeli settlers and Palestinians.
Any resort to violence, regardless of who commits it, is
unacceptable, and impunity must not prevail. Belgium
appeals to the parties to avoid any kind of provocation.
We are particularly concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Hebron and East Jerusalem, including in
the Old City. We want to remind the parties of the
obligation to respect international law, which applies
to all, and of Israel's responsibility, as the occupying
Power, to ensure the protection of Palestinians in
Hebron, Jerusalem and all of the occupied territories.

The recent escalation of violence in Gaza is also
damaging the prospects for a lasting and stable peace.
We would like to remind the parties of their obligation
to respect international humanitarian law, including
the principles of proportionality and distinction, and to
ensure the protection of civilians. If the trends in Gaza
are to be reversed, it will be crucial to invest in both
the humanitarian and political arenas. We urge all the
parties to ensure free access to humanitarian actors. On
the political front, only lifting the blockade and fully
opening the crossing points, while keeping Israel's
legitimate security concerns in mind, can constitute
an appropriate solution. Restoring that territory to
the control of the Palestinian Authority is also key.
We reiterate our call to all the parties to engage
constructively in intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

Lastly, we reiterate our request to be provided with
a written report as part of this briefing, in accordance
with the usual practice ofthe Council, based on the note
by the President contained in document S/2017/507, at
least twice a year.

In conclusion, Belgium calls on all parties to the
conflict to work towards a solution in accordance with
international law, with a view to achieving a just and
lasting peace and a stable regional environment.

