Ms. Cordova Sorl'a (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to welcome you,
Madam President, and to commend the work that the
Swedish delegation has been doing as President of the
Security Council. I also want to welcome the presence
of Mr. Eugene Philip Rhuggenaath, Prime Minister of
Curacao of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim of the International
Indigenous Peoples' Forum on Climate Change for
their briefings.

Climate change is one of the most important global
challenges of our time. We want to emphasize the fact
that developing countries, despite historically being
the ones that contribute the least to climate change,
continue to suffer the most from its adverse effects and
from the increasing frequency and intensity of natural
disasters. According to the Sustainable Development
Goals Report 2017, between 1990 and 2015 more than
1.6 million people died due to the effects of climate
change. Moreover, between 2000 and 2013, an average
of 211 million people were affected due to increasingly
extreme natural disasters.

Climate change threatens not only prospects for
sustainable development, but also the very existence
and survival of the countries, societies and ecosystems
of Mother Earth. We deplore the fact that some of the
most highly industrialized countries have not taken any
responsibility for the problems generated by climate
change. Climate change has become an escape valve to
avoid discussing basic issues such as how the model
of capitalist development, excessive consumption
and wasteful production causes or exacerbates the
problems of environmental degradation and depletion
of resources, thereby impeding the sustainable
development of our peoples. In some countries, climate
change is an existential threat, while in others it means
the loss of biodiversity, an increase in endangered
species or the loss of food security. This shortage of
natural resources like water can lead to increased
social tension. Moreover, as the sea level rises, the
conditions in many coastal areas and small islands can
progressively deteriorate until they become simply
uninhabitable or even disappear.

All those factors could make the population
vulnerable to social conflicts or forced to leave their
homes; we would then be faced with the displacement
of hundreds of thousands of people as climate migrants,
possibly generating new conflicts or aggravating
existing ones. The adverse effects of climate change
have a series of consequences, both direct and indirect,
for the effective enjoyment of human rights, including
the right to life, the right to adequate food, the right
to adequate housing, the right to safe drinking water
and sanitation, the right to development and the right
to peace.

The challenges facing the Security Council in the
fulfilment of its mandate are indeed many and complex,
but we believe that those that truly jeopardize the
efforts of the Council and our Organization to prevent
the breach of international peace and security are
linked to the insufficient application ofthe mechanisms
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations.
We are convinced that it is essential to maintain the
focus on the powers and mandates of each organ,
carrying out the coordination tasks that allow for the
best alternatives to face the problems emerging from
conflicts, thereby avoiding the unnecessary duplication
of work and, above all, overlap and interference in the
specific mandates of the other organs.

We agree that climate change can generate possible
causes of conflict and social tension. Nevertheless, we
believe that the Security Council is not the appropriate
organ or venue to address that issue. We are convinced
that the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change are the main international and intergovernmental
platforms for confronting, mitigating and adapting to
climate change and its effects.
If we intend to address this sensitive and delicate
situation, we must essentially analyse the problem's
underlying causes. In that regard, Bolivia regrets that
the most industrialized countries, instead ofconfronting
causes such as the allegedly civilizing model, which is
based on a voracious financial architecture in which the
wealth of the majority is concentrated in the hands of
a few, continue to promote policies of war with yearly
increases to its enormous budget. We are convinced
that the military machinery of the most powerful
countries on the planet has been busy destroying
entire towns and innocent civilizations with the sole
desire of appropriating oil, gas or strategic minerals.
The high humanitarian cost of these policies of war
and appropriation of natural resources goes hand in
hand with the military expenses they represent, at the
expense of the population and perpetuating the cycle of
poverty, need and confrontation.

In that sense, we echo the statement made by
President Evo Morales during his speech during the
high-level segment of the General Assembly in 2017,
when he said:

"Inequality is immoral. If 800 million people
suffer from hunger, it is not because there is a lack
of food. If millions of children die from infection,
it is not because there is a lack of medicine If
there are poor people in the world, it is not because
there are no resources Due to war, terrorism
and other conflicts, we are experiencing the worst
humanitarian crisis". (A/72/PV6, p. 15)

We call on these so-called developed countries to
assume their responsibilities in the framework of the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
through financing, technology transfer and capacity-
building in mitigation and adaptation to climate change.
As a result of the appropriation and exploitation of the
natural resources of many of our countries, today we
cannot consider ourselves industrialized.

