Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation too would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling this
meeting of the Security Council to hear a briefing by
Judge Claude Jorda, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
We welcome the presence of Judge Jorda in the
Council Chamber, and we thank him for his
comprehensive and enlightening briefing on the work
of the Tribunal and, particularly, on the various
proposals relating to the future operation of the
Tribunal.

We agree that it is timely for the Council to take
stock of the work of the Tribunal, and are therefore
grateful for the in-depth analysis of the work of the
Tribunal presented to the Council; I am confident that
it will facilitate the Council's arriving at appropriate
decisions on the various proposals and
recommendations presented to it.

While we are gratified that the Tribunal has now
become a fully operational international criminal court,
we are nevertheless concerned at the long delays faced
by the Tribunal. We therefore welcome this in-depth
consideration of the work of the Tribunal, and look
forward to participating actively in the Council's
decision-making process on this issue. We appreciate
the extensive nature of the proposals, which are all
intended to ensure the effective functioning of the
Tribunal. We are particularly grateful for the pros-and-
cons analysis to which each proposal is subjected,
which clearly will help Council members to make the
right decisions.

Clearly, because of their many implications, the
proposals will have to be closely examined by Council
members. We welcome your proposal, Mr. President,
that a Security Council expert group be set up to assist
Council members in their consideration of the solutions
recommended in part III of the report submitted by
Judge Jorda. With respect to the consideration of those
recommendations, my delegation is in favour of a
simplified and pragmatic approach that will lead to
expediting the trial process but that will not sacrifice,
or compromise on, its quality. We are prepared to
support any approach that will ensure that justice is
done.

The meting out of justice to persons who have
been indicted for war crimes, genocide and other
crimes against humanity is vitally important for the
international community, not just for the sake of
affirming our common humanity and civilizational
values, but also because of the pragmatic political need
to correct past wrongs through the legal process,
thereby contributing concretely to the healing and
reconciliation process. This is particularly imperative
in respect of the Balkan region, whose peoples were
traumatized by the upheavals of the recent past in the
wake of the genocidal policies of the Belgrade regime.

Notwithstanding those heinous policies and
crimes, the Tribunal must be commended for the high
professionalism of its conduct and for the fact that
persons are indicted and put on trial as individuals, not
as nationals of a particular State. We are confident that
the Tribunal and all of its officers will continue to be
guided by the principle of strict impartiality. It should
not be unduly perturbed by unfair and unjustified
criticisms levelled against it. The reason why many of
the indictees come from a particular ethnic group is
obvious to anyone who has followed developments in
the Balkans; it is no mystery.

My delegation will not pronounce itself on the
various proposals at this stage. Suffice it to say that we
find that many of them have a lot of merit and that they
deserve the serious attention and consideration of the
Council. We are particularly attracted to the proposals
relating to ad [item judges, to the creation of an
additional trial chamber and to partially delegated pre-
trial management. We will look at them in the context
of all their implications, particularly the legal and
financial implications. We will be constructive in our
approach.

