The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Mihnea Ioan Motoc, Permanent Representative of
Romania to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of July
2004. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Motoc
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International

Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States, between 1 January and

31 December 1994

Letter dated 21 May 2004 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2004/420)

Letter dated 30 April 2004 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31
December 1994 addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2004/341)

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2004/420, which
contains a letter dated 21 May 2004 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, and document S/2004/34l, which contains
a letter dated 30 April 2004 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council takes note of the
letter dated 21 May 2004 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
(ICTY) addressed to the President of the Security
Council (5/2004/420).
"The Security Council also takes note of the
letter dated 30 April 2004 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1
January and 31 December 1994 (ICTR) addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2004/34l).

"The Security Council thanks the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the ICTY and the ICTR for
these assessments requested by its resolution
1534 (2004), as supplemented by their oral
reports at the 4999th meeting of the Security
Council on 29 June 2004.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the ICTY and the ICTR and welcomes the
efforts of both Tribunals to carry out their
Completion Strategies. The Council strongly
encourages the Tribunals to undertake every
effort to ensure that they remain on track to meet
the target dates of the Completion Strategies.

"The Security Council stresses that the full
cooperation of all States with the Tribunals is not
only a mandatory obligation of all States under its
resolutions 827 (1993) and 955 (1994) and the
statutes of the Tribunals, but also is an essential
element in realizing the Completion Strategies. In
this regard the Council takes careful note of the
assessments presented with respect to the level of
cooperation by the authorities of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Republika Srpska within
Bosnia and Herzegovina with the ICTY. We
welcome as well the commitments made by the
new government in Serbia regarding cooperation
with the ICTY. The Council takes note of
developments in Croatian and Rwandan
cooperation with the ICTY and ICTR respectively.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
all States, especially Serbia and Montenegro,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and on the
Republika Srpska within Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to intensify cooperation with and
render all necessary assistance to the ICTY,
particularly to bring Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic, as well as Ante Gotovina and all other
such indictees, to the ICTY.
"The Security Council reiterates its call on
all States, especially Rwanda, Kenya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Republic of the Congo, to intensify cooperation
with and render all necessary assistance to the
ICTR, including on investigations of the
Rwandan Patriotic Army and efforts to bring
Felicien Kabuga and all other such indictees to
the ICTR.

"The Security Council notes with concern
that the shortfall in financial contributions from
Member States is having a disruptive effect on
the work of the Tribunals and urges Member
States to fulfil their commitments in a timely
manner.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the referral of cases involving
lower and intermediate rank accused to
competent national jurisdictions in achieving the
Completion Strategies, and recalls the provisions
of its resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004),
including the call for assistance to ensure the
success of this effort.

"The Security Council also notes the
concerns expressed by the President of the ICTY
on the effect the expiry of the terms of Permanent
Judges may have on case management and takes
note of the letter of 15 July 2004 from the Acting
Legal Counsel bringing forward an invitation to
Member States to submit nominations for
Permanent Judges of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia before 13 September 2004.

"The Security Council encourages further
dialogue between the Tribunals and its Working
Group on matters of mutual concern.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I wish to invite
members of the Security Council to the consultations
room to hear a briefing by the Secretary-General. I
would like to remind members that the Secretary-
General will begin his briefing promptly at 10.30 am.
The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.

