Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank and commend you, Mr. President, and your
team for guiding the work of the Security Council in
December. We welcome the convening of this open
wrap-up meeting, which we believe to be a vital tool of
the Council that must be maintained in future.

I shall begin by referring to the sanctions
committees and reiterating what we have pointed out
on previous occasions concerning the need to reduce
the gap between the work carried out in New York and
situations on the ground. In that regard, on 5 December
an informal meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote
d'Ivoire was held, allowing exchanges of opinions on
the Chair's recommendations regarding the visit made
to the country in November. Such visits should become
a regular practice, as should the recommendations and
proposals emerging therefrom to improve cooperation
between the Council and the country subject to
sanctions. It should be emphasized that sanctions
regimes are the exception and represent a means rather
than an end in itself.

We welcome the j oint closed consultations involving
countries and the sanctions committees on their behalf,
such as those held on 9 December with respect to the
Central African Republic. That new format allows
us to take up related agenda items and thereby avoid
unnecessary duplication and repetition.

Considering the insecurity prevailing in the
countries of Central Africa, many of which are facing
near-term elections, we also welcome the 10 December
consultations on the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the Lord's Resistance Army.
Furthermore, with respect to Liberia, the Council has
ended the year by addressing that situation in a timely
manner through resolutions 2188 (2014) and 2190
(2014), in a specific case in which the Ebola crisis
revealed yet again the fragility of the security and
health sectors in Liberia. An analysis of the situation
in Liberia reveals yet again the importance of better
evaluating and analysing the process for the drawdown
and withdrawal of operations and missions established
by the Council so that development and inclusion
indices may be taken into account, thereby providing a
more solid foundation for a smooth transition from the
United Nations country teams and other development
agencies. The same applies to many other situations on
the agenda of the Security Council.

Chile believes that the role the Security Council
assigns to international justice mechanisms is
fundamental. We thank the members of the Council for
their active participation and cooperation and for the
flexibility they have showed in extending the mandates
of the judges and prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, whose work has
contributed to the development of a particular area of
international penal law and the fight against impunity.

We would also like to highlight the unique
perspective that the Chadian presidency has brought to
the issue of terrorism in its open debate on the theme
"Threats to international peace and security: terrorism
and cross-border crime" (see S/PV.7351). The degree
of interest in the topic was clear from the participation
of authorities from our capitals to attend the meeting.
On that occasion, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2195 (2014) on the link between terrorism
and cross-border time, in support of the strategy
for addressing that matter undertaken by this organ
throughout 2014.

With regard to the Middle East, the briefing given
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator (see S/PV.7342) focused again on the protection of civilians,
painting a landscape of death and despair. We welcome
the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2191
(2014), extending the mandate of resolution 2165
(2014) for 12 months, The resolution represents relief
for millions of Syrians living in remote areas who will
now receive humanitarian assistance. Its unanimous
adoption is worthy of note because it represents the
spirit of constructive work that should prevail in order
for the Council to fulfil its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations. However, we know all
too well that so long as there is no political solution
to the conflict, there can be no end to this complex
emergency. In that regard, we should not overlook the
repeated message of the Secretary-General and other
United Nations authorities, and in particular of the
Argentine delegation - the flow of arms from abroad
into the conflict zone must stop.

Regarding the issues on which the Council should
conduct attentive follow-up in the future, we note first
the situation in the Middle East, including the peace
process. We hope that this organ will prove equal to
the task of addressing the current challenges and that
it will send a united message that addresses the root
causes of the conflict and seeks a broad solution that
incorporates the political, security and development
aspects of the crisis and that implements the two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders. To
that end, we must make use of all existing channels, in
particular the Quartet.

Furthermore, we believe that with the steps it
has taken to address the situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the Council has assumed
the responsibilities assigned to it under the Charter.

To conclude, while expressing our gratitude for the
wishes for success offered by delegations in advance
of our assumption of the presidency next month, we
wish to acknowledge the contributions made from their
diverse viewpoints of the non-permanent members
whose terms in the Security Council are drawing to a
close: Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea and Rwanda. It has been an honour for Chile to
work with them. We also take this opportunity to wish
every success to the delegations of Spain, Venezuela,
New Zealand, Malaysia and Angola, which will join
the Council in 2015. We look forward to working
constructively with all of them.

