Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia, as one of the
sponsors of resolution 1701 (2006), voted in favour of
it because we believe that it provides an important
basis for a full cessation of hostilities, for ending the
suffering of civilians in Lebanon and Israel, and for
starting the process of a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Lebanese crisis. We consider the
resolution to be the first step in addressing fully and
urgently all causes that have led to the current crisis.

We are convinced that there is no military
solution to the Lebanese crisis, just as there is no
military solution to the Middle East conflict in general.
In that regard, we urge all parties to abide by the
resolution and immediately to stop the hostilities and
violence and to reach an agreement on a permanent
ceasefire. In our view, a lasting solution can be reached
only through peaceful negotiations and the full
implementation of all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

We support the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Lebanon. To that end, we
believe that they can be best achieved through the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), enabling the Government of Lebanon to
assume full control over all its territory. That also
means taking appropriate measures against the illegal
movement of arms and people across its borders and
against illegal attacks on the territory of neighbouring
States. The international community should assist the
Lebanese Government to achieve that goal.

In that regard, we believe that it is necessary to
take all steps to expeditiously enhance the strength and
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in order to allow it to cope
efficiently and effectively with the tasks envisaged by
the resolution. Slovakia is ready to contribute to
enhancing UNIFIL's capacities.
Finally, it is of the utmost importance for the
international community to take immediate steps to
address the extremely difficult humanitarian situation
of thousands of refugees and internally displaced
persons and to assist in their return home.

In conclusion, we would like to underline that
this resolution cannot be a substitute for agreement by
the parties on the basic principles of a long-term and
lasting solution. In that respect, we call once again on
all parties to extend their full cooperation in achieving
a sustainable and lasting solution to the Lebanese
cr1s1s.

