Mr. Di Rupo (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank President Obama and all
the members of the Security Council.

My country, Belgium, grasped very early on the
scope of the threat posed by the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and the need to have a collective
response to it. That is why my Government began to
enhance exchanges among the countries most concerned
in the European Union and made contact with countries
outside of Europe, in particular in the Middle East, on
this issue.

In Belgium itself, specific preventive measures were
taken, as were measures to pursue those responsible for
the threat. The attack against the Jewish Museum in
Brussels, as just mentioned by Mr. Van Rompuy, which
took place 24 May and during the course of which four
people were brazenly killed in cold blood, strengthened
our resolve.

The tools to fight the scourge of radicalism exist. We
must make full use of our national intelligence services,
Europol, INTERPOL, the Schengen instruments and
the bodies and entities of the United Nations. Some
priorities include punishing - without faltering - acts
of terrorism, those who enable terrorism in any way
and those who spread hate; protecting our populations
and those who could be seduced or have been seduced
by these murderous ideologies and who can be cured
of it; ensuring those who cannot or will not be cured
can cause no harm; and, finally, entrenching and
strengthening our democratic values, the rule of law,
tolerance and non-discrimination.

Along with decisively suppressing any acts of

terrorism, we must also attack some of the root causes
of extremism: instances of oppression, injustice,
double standards and growing inequality. We must take
on board the lessons of our previous interventions in
various areas around the world. We must ask ourselves
how have we helped populations after our military
interventions, especially those populations who have
lived through previous interventions that were extremely
violent. Did we deploy the necessary measures to foster
their prosperity, education and balanced peace?

The fight against terrorism is also a fight for
values. It is a fight that concerns the entire international
community. We therefore welcome, and I welcome on
behalf of my country, the resolution adopted today in
the Council (resolution 2178 (2014)), which we fully
support and which we joined in sponsoring.

