The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Indonesia and Portugal, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia) and Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) took seats at the
Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the question of East Timor,
document 5/1999/513. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/ 1999/520, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/ 1999/520) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of

Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1236 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.

