Mr. Duale (Somalia): Mr. President, I would like
to seize this opportunity to thank you for allowing me
to brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Somalia. Some of this briefing has already been done.

I would also express our profound appreciation to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for the valuable support they have offered to the
Somali people during this very difficult time in our
history. I also wish to thank Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his comprehensive briefing; Mr. Raisedon Zenenga,
Director of the Africa II Division of the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations; and
Mr. Efthimios Mitropoulos, the Secretary-General of
the International Maritime Organization (IMO), who
has briefed us and requested assistance in order to
further his organization's anti-piracy efforts in
Somalia.

As has been mentioned, there have been a number
of significant political developments in the search for
peace in Somalia, not only by the Somalis, but also by
the international community, the African Union (AU),
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative.

The Somali Government has signed a peace
agreement with opposition groups, which was jointly
agreed to by the High-Level Committee and the Joint
Security Committee, and agreed to the terms of
reference of those Committees. Concrete steps have
already been taken, some of which have been
mentioned by our briefers, as stipulated in the
agreement between the two parties. This development
shows that the leadership of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) has clearly demonstrated its
commitment to reconciliation between the Government
of Somalia and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia, and that it will continue to do so.

However, we believe that the greatest challenge
to peace and stability in Somalia is not simply a

political problem, but also a lack of security. The
Transitional Federal Government does not have the
capacity to defend and control the entire country, as its
security apparatus lacks adequate equipment and
training and has no financial resources in place.

The position of the Transitional Federal
Government was exacerbated by inadequate financial
support from the international community to strengthen
security in the country and recruit new forces. That is
why Somalia's challenges show the link between
humanitarian efforts and improvement in the security
situation in the country. We, therefore, strongly urge
the international community to provide humanitarian
assistance to Somalia to address these challenges, as
well as to help strengthen security in the country.

The other challenge, as stated earlier in this
meeting, is the issue of piracy. The Transitional Federal
Government would like once again to convey its
sincere gratitude to those Member States and regional
and international organizations that are assisting it in
combating the scourge of piracy off Somalia's coast. A
detailed statement on this matter has already been
given by the Secretary-General of the International
Maritime Organization (IMO).

The Transitional Federal Government renews its
request for the help of the Security Council in securing
the international and territorial waters off the coast of
Somalia for the safe conduct of shipping and
navigation.

We urge and welcome the renewal for one year of
the authorization provided to those cooperating with
the TFG, as stipulated in paragraph 7 of Security
Council resolution 1816 (2008), as well as other
assistance that the Security Council may deem
necessary to provide. We also wish to appeal both to
the Security Council and to other nations and
international organizations to support such anti-piracy
efforts and to get involved as far as possible in
securing our waters.

Similarly, I humbly remind the Security Council
of a statement made previously by His Excellency
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa upon the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1838 (2008).
The Ambassador said,
"we would like to put it on record that the threat
to international peace and security in Somalia
originates in the conflict [and] the conflict in

08-6107]
Somalia cannot be countered solely through
maritime security actions. Piracy is part of the
larger problem ...". (S/PV.5987, pp. 2-3)

In this connection, we fully agree with our South
African colleague that piracy is only one of many
security challenges we face in Somalia, and the
Council should seek to address the threat of peace and
security in Somalia in a comprehensive way.

As the people of Somalia tackle the challenges
they confront, they will need sympathetic
understanding and the support of the international
community. The search for peace and prosperity in
Somalia will not be smooth; nor will full peace be
achieved quickly. We know that all too well. Recently,
the Somali Government faced a constitutional crisis, as
mentioned by previous speakers.

I can assure the Council, however, that the
leadership of the Transitional Federal Government will
overcome the current constitutional crisis by exercising
leadership and wisdom at this critical time. But, we
strongly urge countries, both in the region and
worldwide, to allow political space for the leadership
of the TFG to overcome the constitutional crisis. We
urge the Council to do the same.

Similarly, the task in Somalia is not so much one
involving a proliferation of initiatives led by the
various interlocutors. The main task lies in helping the
Somali Government and opposition groups that have
agreed to implement the Djibouti agreement to devise
institutions that are trusted and legitimate and that
command the allegiance of the population of Somalia.
That is the goal of the Somali Government, and I think
it is still a reasonable aspiration for the international
community and the Somali people.

Therefore, we urge the countries in the region and
organizations, such as the Intergovernmental Authority
of Development, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, United Nations agencies and Member
States to work with the leadership of, and in
coordination with, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, as the
main interlocutor, in support of the peace process.

In conclusion, it is not enough to observe, as has
been done in the past, a policy of "wait and see".
Somalia needs a serious sponsor, as has been
mentioned, to push the peace forward. We rely on the
Security Council and the United Nations Secretariat to

08-6107]

identify and make possible urgent steps to implement
the proposals made by the Secretary-General, as early
as possible, because we are facing a lot of challenges,
insecurity and a humanitarian disaster.

It is my sincere hope that the international
community and the Security Council will respond
positively this time in a more proactive way and in a
timely fashion to our appeal for the urgent and
immediate deployment of a United Nations
stabilization force, a multinational force and, at a later
date, when it is more convenient, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

