Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the United Kingdom in
convening today's meeting. We wish to thank Secretary
of State Hammond for presiding over today's meeting
and welcome the presence of Prime Minister Sharmake
of the Federal Republic of Somalia.

China listened carefully to the briefings by Prime
Minister Sharmarke of Somalia; Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General; Mr. Nicholas
Kay, Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
and Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

Somalia is entering a period of historic
opportunities for State-rebuilding. The Federal
Government of Somalia, with the support of the
international community, is fully implementing Vision
2016, actively promoting the federalization of the
country and striving to promote social reconciliation,
speed up development and improve people's livelihood.
China welcomes such efforts. Meanwhile, the security
and humanitarian situation in Somalia remains fragile,
and peaceful rebuilding will be a long journey. The
international community should continue to support
Somalia and help the Somali people emerge from the
shadow of conflict as soon as possible so as to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development. I wish to
emphasize the following three points.

First, in order to steadily advance the peace
process in Somalia, China calls upon the international
community to follow the principle of Somali leadership
and ownership, actively help the Federal Government
of Somalia to improve its governance capability, speed
up institution-building at the local level and promote
social reconciliation. We hope that all parties in
Somalia will proceed from their overarching interest in
the future of the nation and its people, and that they will
settle their differences appropriately through dialogue
and consultations so as tojointly maintain the country's
peace and stability.

Secondly, with a view to fully consolidating
security and stability in Somalia, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Army have worked closely together since the beginning
of the year and achieved good results in combating
terrorism. China highly appreciates the contribution of
the African Union and the countries of the region to
the maintenance of security and stability in Somalia,
and welcomes today's adoption of resolution 2245
(2015), establishing the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia. We hope that the resolution will be fully
implemented so as to provide sustained and stable
logistical support to AMISOM. and the Somali National
Army.

Thirdly, with respect to speeding up economic
and social development in Somalia, only through
development can the root causes of conflict be
removed and people's fundamental interests and rights
safeguarded. Somalia is rich in natural resources, with
great potential for development. The international
community should strengthen its input into the
infrastructure and agricultural sectors of Somalia
in order to enhance its capacities for sustainable
development. In so doing, the international community
should remain in close consultation with the Federal
Government of Somalia and respect its opinions.

China has been a firm supporter of the peace
process in Somalia. China has long supported Somalia
and AMISOM. within its abilities. Within the framework
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China has
trained a large number of personnel to rebuild the State
in Somalia. Despite the terrorist attack on the Chinese
Embassy in Somalia last July, which caused huge
losses in human life and property, China's presence
and ongoing activities in Somalia have remained
steadfast, fully demonstrating the unswerving support
of the Chinese Government for the peace process and
State-rebuilding in Somalia. China is prepared to work
with the international community to play a constructive
role in the speedy revitalization of Somalia.

China and Africa, as part ofa community ofcommon

destiny and interests, have been through thick and thin
together. In December, the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation will hold a summit in Johannesburg, South
Africa, that will be the second summit of the Forum and
the first to be held on the African continent. Since the
inception ofthe Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, 15
years ago, through the efforts of both sides, pragmatic
cooperation between China and Africa has grown by
leaps and bounds and brought tangible benefits to the
peoples of Africa and China. The theme of the Forum's
upcoming summit is "China and Africa Joining Hands
for Win-Win Cooperation and Common Development".
China is ready to take that opportunity to work with all
the countries of Africa, including Somalia, to enhance
mutually beneficial cooperation in such key areas as
industrialization, modernization of agriculture, health
care, personnel and cultural exchanges, peace and
security. We are ready to join hands with Africa to
make the summit a historic gathering for enhancing
solidarity and cooperation between China and Africa.

