Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
thanks the Foreign Minister of Jordan for presiding
over this meeting earlier. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his perceptive briefing to the Council.

The Middle East is the cradle of human civilization.
Today, sadly, it appears to have become the cradle of
chaos - riven by conflict and regional rivalry, afflicted
by terrorism and extremism and enduring massive
human suffering. Unless this chaos, within and across
borders, is contained and controlled, it will endanger
global peace, security and prosperity.

Each of the several conflicts in the Middle East
needs to be addressed simultaneously - if separately,
with long-term vision rather than short-term or partisan
perspectives. The proximate causes of each conflict are
different, yet there are some common threads: the failure
of Governments and governance to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the peoples concerned, unresolved issues
and the consequences of outside interventions, as well
as acts of omission by the international community.

In many ways - political, historic and
emotional - Palestine and the plight of its people
remain the root cause of the conflict and chaos that
now rages across the Middle East. Sadly, today the
prospect of a just solution to that perennial problem
is further away than at any other time. The recent
pronouncements by Israel have appalled even its closest
friends. Even if words can be retracted, the continued
spread ofillegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian lands,
the blockade of Gaza, the provocations around the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the continued imprisonment of
Palestinians pose ever-growing obstacles to a two-
State solution. Such actions are effectively foreclosing
the prospect of an independent, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-l967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Security Council bears the responsibility to
act with vigour and unanimity to enforce its resolutions
demanding a just and durable settlement. The Council
should adopt a draft resolution establishing the
parameters of the Palestinian State, set a timeline for
ending the occupation and launch a new peace process
to take negotiations forward.

Wittingly or otherwise, the long conflict in and
around Iraq has exacerbated ethnic and sectarian fault
lines and given new life to Al-Qaida and birth to an
even more abhorrent terrorist entity, namely, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) - or Daesh - which
now rampages across Iraq and Syria and is gaining
adherents beyond, in Libya and elsewhere. In the cases
of Libya and Syria, the road to hell has been paved with
good intentions. The tragic outcomes are self-evident.
The Arab Spring has turned into a cold and forbidding
winter.

In Libya, tribal and regional rivalries have
combined with extremist militants, including ISIS
affiliates, to generate conditions of chaos. The Security
Council must ensure action by those in a position to
contribute to restoring peace and order in Libya.

In Syria, a Hobbesian war ofall against all rages, with
cruelty and human suffering of a magnitude that calls
into question the very humanity of the perpetrators. The
situation in the Palestinian refugee camp in Yarmouk
defies description. ISIS must be defeated. But for peace
and order to be restored, a political solution will need
to be negotiated between those willing to make mutual
accommodations. The Geneva process, United Nations
mediation, the Russian initiative and all other avenues
should be utilized to evolve a political solution to that
difficult conflict. The first priority should be to end the
massive human suffering of the Syrian people.

In Yemen, the parameters of international
legitimacy are much clearer. A rebel group, with the
aid of dissident leaders, has occupied large parts of
the country and forced out the legitimate Government,
including the country's President. That situation,
created by illegal force, cannot be allowed to stand,
much less be accepted as the basis for negotiating a
settlement of the crisis.

Pakistan welcomed the adoption of resolution
2216 (2015) and called for its full and effective
implementation. We believe that the restoration of the
Government of President Hadi will be an important
step towards establishing peace in Yemen. The Council
has called on the rebels to cease hostilities and vacate
the areas they have occupied. That ought to be ensured.
That said, there is an urgent need for finding a peaceful
negotiated solution to the crisis through dialogue.

Several ofthe conflicts that have erupted across the
Middle East reflect the exacerbation offault lines within
the Muslim countries concerned. The Islamic world
must not allow those fissures to tear apart the divinely
prescribed unity of the Ummah - the community of
all Muslims. Pakistan stands ready to do all it can to
promote peace and reconciliation within the world of
Islam.

Finally, Pakistan's unwavering solidarity with the
people ofPalestine is manifested by its support over the
decades. We urge the Council to act and take the lead
on that issue. The resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
will also help address the new conflicts that engulf the
Middle East. Urgency is essential.

