Mr. Klein: First, an administrative matter. A
corrigendum is being issued regarding paragraph 9 of
the Secretary-General's report, document S/2001/571.
Paragraph 9 should read, "The Croat Minister of
Interior"- not the "Minister of the Interior of
Croatia".

I wish to thank all members of the Security
Council for your collective, warm and supportive
comments. I am blessed to have a mission of unusually
talented people who are outstanding representatives of
your countries, and I will pass on your messages of
support to them, because they are ultimately
responsible for whatever success we have had.

With regard to your questions, I will try to answer
them in seriatim fashion. Each of you has a folder
which we have given you. In it are the mandate
implementation plan, which lays out very logically and
very chronologically the 57 different targets that have
to be met by us in order to complete our mandate by
the end of the year 2002, green being "done", yellow
"in progress" and red "still needing to be done". We
also have in the folder a brochure which covers the
State Border Service and gives you some feel for the
data on the illegal migration that is taking place
through Bosnia and Herzegovina into Europe itself. We
estimate some 10 per cent. Thirdly, we are a United
Nations family in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
have just produced this folder which lays out data for
all the organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, from
UNMIBH to the World Food Programme 4 again,
staffed by representatives of your countries - that I
think are doing such good work.

With regard to restructuring and transition, if we
indeed look towards December of 2002, what I hope to
do by next July is to be able to tell you exactly where
we are and how close we are to the termination of the
Mission. But we need now, already, to think seriously
about what it transitions to. In my last United Nations
mission, as Transitional Administrator in Eastern
Slavonia, we transitioned into a police mission, which
was then mandated over to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We have
an OSCE option; we have a European Union option.
These all have to be looked at in terms of which way
you want to go. Recently, the High Representative put
a plan on the table that basically subsumed UNMIBH
and other international organizations under his
purview. I think we pointed out to him that the United
Nations is a paramount organization that is not
subsumed under any regional construct and that,
indeed, the authority of the Council is ultimately the
one that drives the agenda. But this is a serious issue
that has to be looked at because we have to see how we
take five organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
bring them logically down to two so that there is, in a
sense, a civilian pillar and a military pillar. I think this
is very important.

With regard to the issue of crowd control, we do
have a dilemma, because the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the Multinational Specialized Unit (MSU),
which is the police element of SFOR, have exactly the
same rules of engagement - the same ROE, as we say.
So there is no one out there who can really engage on
the civilian side. What we need to do in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to train a multi-ethnic national police
structure that can take on the role of dealing with
civilian riots, where we and the nations do not want
SFOR involved in those kinds of civilian activities. An
armed police support group of some kind - and I may
come back to the Council with something along those
lines - where we could train a battalion or so, 500 to
700 local personnel to take on that role, is especially
important as SFOR draws down and we complete the
termination of the mission of the International Police
Task Force (IPTF).

I think that it is worth noting what Ambassador
Zivalj said. As we speak we have 25 police officers -
Bosniacs, Croats and Serbs, including one woman -
serving in East Timor under the United Nations rubric.
They have demonstrated that they can work
collectively together in the right circumstances.
Additionally, we have nine military officers already
serving in Ethiopia and Eritrea, again, in a United
Nations role as military observers.

Two weeks ago, I was in the Republika Srpska at
Banja Luka. The Republika Srpska has now agreed
with us to form a composite military group of about
160 personnel. The Government of Switzerland has
very kindly offered us motor vehicles. This group
would be a light transportation and logistics company
equipped with non-combat arms that, hopefully, would
be able to take up a role in the United Nations Mission
by September or October. I think this demonstrates, as
Ambassador Zivalj has said, that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not only profited from the
participation and interest of the Council, but also that it
is now prepared to return something as well.

There are 95 nationalities represented in the
Mission itself, and 47 in the IPTF. We are of different
ethnicities, nationalities, races, religions and
ideologies. I think we still remain the best example for
the local population. If we under the mandate and
universal umbrella of the United Nations can actually
work together constructively in carrying out the
directives and mandate of the Security Council, we
would certainly be providing an example to the local
population.

There is a real problem concerning the dilemma
we are facing with regard to resources. To be very
candid, Dayton was a less than perfect peace to end a
horrible war. We know that. But Dayton created a
construct where post, telephone, telegraph, commerce,
taxation, regulation, police and military are under two
entities. Therefore, what is the State? In the Republika
Srpska I deal with a Minister of the Interior and a
police department that is paid nine months out of the
year, with relatively centralized control. In the
Federation I deal with a police department that is paid
12 months out of the year, with 10 ministers of the
interior to deal with. The salary scales are also
different. How, then, do I persuade a Bosniac Muslim
policeman from the Federation, who wants to return to
the Republika Srpska, to go back, knowing that he will
receive only nine months' salary instead of 12 and that
he will have to find a way to provide housing and
education for his wife and children?

We are trying to address those issues. One
proposal we are exploring is the one many nations
employ, that is, a construct under which the customs
officials or police authorities confiscate contraband and
then auction it off. The proceeds are then put into a
central account through which police are paid salaries
and provided with the health and life insurance they
need. Having that money would also allow us to
actually say to the Republika Srpska and to the
Federation, "Let us now look at and rationalize police
structures and salaries". This is one approach we are
trying to take.

But we must also move away from what, I think,
is perhaps a too excessive international presence. I
think it is time for us to look very seriously at when we
finish implementing Dayton and begin integration into
Europe. That should really be our thinking over the
next two or three years.
In my estimation, refugee returns is a function of
this year and next year. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees formula for
the rate of refugee return is that for every year one is
abroad there is a 12 per cent lower chance of return.
That means that in five years 60 per cent of those
people will not return.

So we have to look at how we develop a
formulation where we finish Dayton and we say, "That
is done; now it is time for integration into Europe" -
to put it candidly, you go from Yugo to Euro. That is
the way we have to proceed.

I forgot to mention that we also included in the
folder a document entitled "Balkans 2001:
Opportunities in search of a strategic Vision", which
lays out what we see as possible options - the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, et cetera. Since the Council
was so extremely generous in its comments, we have
also brought along a little gift for the members, which
we were holding in abeyance pending the outcome of
the actual meeting.

