Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
first congratulate you on the assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February
and express my full confidence in your leadership and
ability to steer the work of the Council. I should also
commend the Ambassador of Mauritius for the able
and effective manner in which he conducted the work
of the Council last month.

Once again the ongoing Israeli repression of the
Palestinians has warranted another open debate - and
possibly an action - by the Security Council.
Excessive and disproportionate measures adopted by
the Israeli Army, in full disregard for any established
principles of international law and humane standards,
continue to take a heavy toll on Palestinian civilians.
Israel's resort to state-of-the art weapons, such as F-l6
warplanes, Apache helicopter gunships and heavy
tanks, to target Palestinian installations and invade
civilian areas in the occupied territories, have outraged
the international community in general and the Islamic
world in particular. Suffocating closures and the siege
imposed on Palestinian people and officials are further
worsening the situation.

The continuation of targeted assassinations and
the bulldozing of civilians' homes by Israel brought an
end to a few weeks of relative calm in December and
January and have once again demonstrated that Israeli
repressive acts lie at the origin of each new cycle of
violence. Such acts have frustrated efforts made by
Western envoys and have also pushed back some
positive initiatives taken by some Western countries
that could provide new opportunities for addressing the
flagrant injustice the Palestinian people have faced for
decades.

At the same time, it is unfortunate that Israel,
through a massive disinformation campaign, which
includes resorting to levelling accusations against other
States, aims at exacerbating the tension in the region in
an attempt to cover up its campaign of aggression
against the Palestinian people and undermine the
support of international public opinion for them.

Occupation lies at the very origin of the
Palestinian conflict and overall tension and instability
in the Middle East. The uprising of the Palestinian
people constitutes a legitimate response to the
occupation and aims at achieving their right of self-
determination in their own homeland. The shocking
developments over the past few months have brought
closer into view the fact that, unless the principal cause
of conflict is effectively addressed, the crisis will never
subside.

Undoubtedly, repressive acts by Israel are prone
to further exacerbate the Middle East crisis unless the
international community and the United Nations
intervene immediately to stop the brutal campaign
against civilians carried out by Israeli armed forces.

We fully concur with the Secretary-General, who,
in his latest speech in the Council, alerted the
international community to the possibility of the
region's nearing the edge of the abyss. We further
concur with him that security cannot be dealt with in
isolation and that it has to be addressed alongside key
political issues, particularly the question of land, and
economic and social issues, including the increasingly
critical and desperate conditions of the Palestinians.

We believe that the international community
should stand by the Palestinians and lend support to the
establishment of a viable, sovereign Palestinian State,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. A complete end
to foreign occupation and the full restoration of all of
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination and to return
to their homeland, should be the main pillars of any
solution.

There is no doubt that the Security Council is
expected to act appropriately, with a view to putting an
end to the violations by the occupying Power and to
paving the way for bringing those responsible to
justice. Regrettably, the exercise and the threat of
exercise of the veto have so far prevented the Council
from discharging its constitutional responsibility with
respect to so crucial an issue, to the profound
disappointment of the international community.
Undoubtedly, the inaction of the Security Council is
emboldening Israel to defy the wishes of the
international community, which are reflected, inter alia,
in numerous General Assembly resolutions.

The lingering violence in the occupied territories
has further demonstrated the need for an international
protection force to be established by the Council, with
a view to protecting defenceless Palestinian civilians.
The resort to the veto last year to discard draft
resolutions intended to authorize the establishment of
such a force proved a disservice, as can be seen from
the worsening situation in the area. The presence of
such a force on the ground could have forestalled more
violence and more bloodshed and saved many precious
lives.

