Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this annual debate on
the working methods of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
President of the General Assembly Likketoft and
Mr. Jurgenson for their comments and for setting the
tone for our discussion. I would like to speak briefly
about some recent working method improvements and
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
before concluding with a few words about selecting the
next Secretary-General.

At a time when the Security Council is grappling
with such disparate and complex threats to international
peace and security, the Council has an obligation to
consider how to adapt and improve its functions. We
believe that the Council should continue to explore
how its working methods can be improved and
welcome suggestions on how best to do that. Council
presidencies have some discretion on innovating,
and the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which Ambassador
Gaspar Martins of Angola so ably leads, is another
place where we try to improve the way the Council does
business. The Informal Working Group has made a lot
of progress over the past few years by adopting a series
of notes to improve the Council's working methods,
from clarifying the role of penholders to revamping the
handover process from one subsidiary organ chair to the
next. Very relevant to today is the fact that the Informal
Working Group has done its part to promote dialogue
with non-Council members and United Nations bodies,
including through note S/2013/515 on the subject. That
leads me to a part ofthat note I want to highlight, which
is the Council's commitment to the Arria Formula and
other formats.

My delegation is a big supporter of Arria-format
meetings. At their best, such meetings provide an
important venue for us to hear views beyond those of
Member States, a way to inform ourselves informally
about the difficult issues on our agenda. After
Wednesday's Arria-format meeting on supporting
victims of terrorism, chaired by Spain and the United
States, the Council will have held 13 Arria-Formula
meetings thus far in 2015, where it has inviteda wide
range of civil society to participate in our work. Those
meetings have provided opportunities to hear directly
from individuals experiencing unimaginably difficult
circumstances, and many have been extremely powerful
in reminding us of the human toll that accompanies
conflicts. For instance, in the last year we have heard
from civil society leaders and activists from Syria and
Crimea and from threatened lesbian, gay, bisexual or
transgender individuals, to name just a few. We have
held five Arria-Formula meetings with the Human
Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry on Syria.

We also want to highlight the importance of
peacebuilding. A bit later in this meeting, Ambassador
Skoog will discuss the topic in more detail. The
Security Council has continued to welcome the
Chairs of the various country-specific configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission to participate in
Council meetings. In its advisory function to the
Security Council and other United Nations entities,
the Peacebuilding Commission provides valuable
information from diverse stakeholders on the ground
in post-conflict States. We deeply value its role on
the ground in building institutions to give countries a
genuine chance to stabilize and develop. We look forward
to participating in the 2015 peacekeeping architecture
review process and hope that it will outline how the
Council and the Peacebuilding Council can best work
together, playing differentiated but complementary
roles in engaging with countries recovering from and
vulnerable to conflict.

Finally, as co-equal principal organs of the United
Nations, the General Assembly and the Security
Council each has its own defined role in the selection
of the Secretary-General in accordance with Article
97 of the Charter of the United Nations. The United
States is in favour of the membership's gaining an
understanding of the views of potential nominees for
Secretary-General and supports a selection process
for Secretary-General that is guided by the principles
of transparency and inclusiveness, building on best
practices and the participation of all Member States,
as outlined in General Assembly resolution 69/321. As
we agreed in that resolution, the United States looks
forward to a process that leads to the appointment of the
best possible candidate for the position of Secretary-
General - one who embodies the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity and who
demonstrates a firm commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Organization. With the innovations of
the General Assembly revitalization resolution in hand,
we believe that the course has ben set for the selection
process of the next Secretary-General. We look forward
to continuing engagement during this important
moment in the Organization's history.
