Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I feel it
incumbent upon me first and foremost to affirm our
firm, established position of advocating the need to
establish justice and oppose impunity, in line with the
objective set out in the United Nations Charter of
creating conditions under which justice and respect for
the obligations arising from treaties and other sources
of international law can be maintained.

Like others, we continue to call for the truth to be
brought to light regarding the crime of the
assassination of the former Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Mr. Rafiq Hariri, pursuant to the desire of the fraternal
Lebanese people, in all its factions, to punish the
perpetrators of that outrageous crime.

In that spirit, we did not hesitate to support the
establishment of the Independent International
Investigation Committee, and voted in favour of
relevant Security Council resolutions that paved the
way for the establishment of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, which enjoys the consensus endorsement of
all Lebanese factions. In a letter dated 21 November
2006, addressed to the President of the Security
Council, the State of Qatar clearly indicated its
position on the legal aspects of the constitutional
process by which agreement was reached between the
Lebanese Government and the United Nations to
establish the Tribunal.

The State of Qatar remains committed to helping
Lebanon seek the truth, hold accountable all those
involved in those crimes and bring them to justice,
while placing the interests of fraternal Lebanon at the
top of our priorities so as to ensure the maintenance of
its independence, sovereignty, national unity and
political stability.

While committed to uncovering the truth and to
the establishment of the Special Tribunal to try
whoever may be implicated in the crime, we feel that
the draft resolution before the Council now entails
legal encroachments known to all. That may not
promote national detente and could further complicate
the situation in a country that is at present in dire need
of national cohesion and political stability.

In spite of those difficulties, we were quite
willing to consider the draft resolution in a positive
07-36208
spirit, with the aim of arriving at a consensus formula.
The State of Qatar supports the establishment of the
tribunal to punish the perpetrators of that outrageous
crime. However, the insistence of the sponsors to
present the draft resolution under Chapter VII -
although all Security Council resolutions are binding,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter - goes
beyond its designated aim of endorsing the
establishment of the tribunal, especially in the light of
the complicated and delicate political situation in
Lebanon. We are simply apprehensive that the adoption
of the draft resolution under Chapter VII will not serve
to bring stability to that country.

In the light of the foregoing, we shall abstain in
the voting on the draft resolution before us. At the
same time, we will continue our good offices to bring
points of View in Lebanon closer, in the interest of
national unity and to ensure endorsement of the
establishment of the tribunal through national
mechanisms and in accordance with article 19 of the
agreement to establish the tribunal.

