Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by welcoming the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Poland, Ukraine and the
Netherlands. I would also like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary- General for Political Affairs;
Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine; and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their comprehensive and detailed briefings
on the political situation in Ukraine.

The conflict in Ukraine is entering its fifth year.
Ongoing ceasefire violations in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions are a source of concern for us, as
they could spark tensions and cause the situation to
deteriorate as a result of escalating violence in the east
of the country. That, in turn, would undermine the
efforts of the international community, including those
of the Security Council, to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis.

The challenging work of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to maintain the
ceasefire and reduce tensions requires the cooperation
and efforts of the parties to the conflict. Their
cooperation is essential to achieving a peaceful political
solution to the crisis. We therefore call for an immediate
ceasefire and request that both parties respect the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, as endorsed
by resolution 2202 (2015), as the only path to stability
in Ukraine.

The impact of the violence and instability on the
civilian population caused by the prolonged conflict
is another source of concern. It generates economic
losses in the region and exacerbates the suffering of
the people, forcing some of them to leave their homes.
We thank the humanitarian organizations for their work
on the ground, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and her team for their support and
efforts in the region to provide assistance to those who
need it most. We call upon the parties to the conflict to
facilitate safe access for humanitarian workers on the
ground to enable them to provide assistance to those
in need and to improve people's living conditions.
Failing to do so would constitute a serious breach of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law.

In conclusion, we believe that the solution to the
crisis is a peaceful one alone and that it can be achieved
through direct, earnest and inclusive negotiations. The
goal must be a definitive and just solution that attempts
to foster harmonious relations among the various ethnic
groups in Ukraine and between Ukraine and countries
of the region. The solution to the crisis in Ukraine is
not a military one; it is a political one. The international
community must therefore continue to support all
diplomatic efforts for a political solution to the crisis.

