Mr. Nina (Albania): At the outset, allow me to than
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the topic ofthe protection ofcivilians in conflicts during
your first month of Security Council membership, as
well as for the concept note (S/2016/22, annex).

Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. Allow
me to make the following remarks in my national
capacity.

The protection of civilians provided by international
humanitarian law is quite extensive; however, as in
the past, in all ongoing conflicts, the difficulties are
related to its application. As accurately pointed out
in the Secretary-General's report of 18 June 2015,
unfortunately, in many parts of the world, the situation
has deteriorated significantly. It is outrageous, as
rightly noted in the report, inter alia, that

"[d]irect attacks on schools and hospitals have
become common features of many armed conflicts.
Humanitarian and health-care workers are
deliberately targeted." (S/2015/453, para. 4)

On a daily basis, across the world, we see a
widespread failure to respect international humanitarian
law, which is the duty of all States and non-State
actors, pursuant to the Geneva Conventions. In ongoing
conflicts, civilians have been specifically targeted
and subjected to terrible atrocities, which ignores the
very basis of the Geneva Conventions: respect for the
human person. It is shocking that, in the twenty-first
century, the outbreak, continuation and escalation
of armed conflicts and the recurrence of violence in
post-conflict settings all over the world have taken a
dramatic toll on civilians, in particular for the most
vulnerable - women and children, older persons, the
disabled, internally displaced persons and refugees.

Neither States nor non-State armed groups have
respected their obligations adequately, including
during the past 16 years, during which the Council
has established a robust normative framework for the
protection of civilians. Furthermore, every passing year,
the consensus grows stronger around the idea that the
protection of civilians lies with the State, but it is also
a legitimate and necessary focus of collective action
by the international community. But progress made at
the normative level makes sense only if translated into
tangible action on the ground. On that, unfortunately,
we have to concur with the conclusion in the Secretary-
General's report that

"the task of protecting civilians on the ground
has been more pronounced in its failures than its
successes" (ibid, para. 6).

That sad reality shows that much more needs to be
done to reverse the catastrophic consequences of the
continued actions by terrorist groups. It is therefore
important to recall the need for the Security Council
to act swiftly and resolutely in all situations affecting
civilians. The Security Council should be given credit
for the fact that, by creating the International Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and by referring the
situations in Darfur and Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), it has itself sent out important
messages. It is therefore equally important that, when
a peace operation is to be deployed in an ICC-situation
country, its mandate should authorize it to assist the
ICC, which is an important step towards providing
justice by making those responsible for human rights
violations accountable.

For a number of years, the mandates of many
United Nations peacekeeping and other missions have
included the protection of civilians. Albania believes
that, for future missions, it will be increasingly crucial
for information to be gathered from current global
missions in order to evaluate, analyse and contextualize
their work, specifically on civilian protection. That is
why there is a need to match the protection mandates
for peacekeepers with appropriate resources, providing
specific training on civilian protection, including
training on child protection, measures against sexual
exploitation and abuse as well as developing civilian
protection doctrines and practical guidance. Any abuse
at the hands ofpeacekeepers - in other words, of those
mandated to protect - is unacceptable for international
peacekeeping. Moreover, we strongly support the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy.

We reaffirm the need to carefully plan
peacekeeping operations and to conduct them in such
a manner so as to facilitate post-conflict peacebuilding
and progress towards sustainable peace, stability and
development. We also believe that the implementation
of such activities requires close coordination between
peacekeeping, United Nations country teams and
development actors.

On a final note, we would like to point out that we
have entered an era in which armed conflicts are greater
in complexity and in the numbers of actors, broader in
tactics and weapons used and, above all, more horrific
in the human suffering they cause. The international
community's response should also be adapted to the
new reality and the challenges we all face. We therefore
reiterate the call to the Council to provide consistent
political and operational support for the protection of
civilians in conflict, including where State parties are
involved in attacks and atrocities against civilians.

Next year's World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul will be an opportunity for all of us to renew and
further the commitment for a world of peace, security
and sustainable development. Unless we adopt more
effective ways to address the suffering of civilians in
armed conflict, we cannot aspire to meeting the targets
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), whereby no one
should be left behind.

