Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Mr. President, my
delegation joins you in regretting the departure of our
friend, Ambassador Merimee. We will miss his friendship,
not to mention his sartorial elegance.

The signing of the Abuja Agreement by the Liberian
parties and political leaders on 26 August 1995, and the
subsequent installation of the Council of State on 1
September, presented those in positions of political
leadership in Liberia with an ample opportunity to end the
senseless killing and destruction that they had visited upon
their country and people for a long time. The spontaneous
jubilation in Monrovia during the swearing-in ceremony of
the Members of the Council of State was a clear
demonstration of the Liberian people's yearning for peace
and for their country's return to normalcy. The political
leaders and parties have witnessed the true expressions of
the wishes of the people of Liberia, and it is only fair that
they should heed the will of the people by making
concerted efforts to ensure that there are no cease-fire
violations. The cease-fire must continue to hold and remain
effective in accordance with the clearly expressed wish of
the people for a peaceful future. It is important that the
parties demonstrate as early as possible their commitment
to peace by moving expeditiously to implement the other
aspects of the Abuja Agreement to take the peace process
to a point of irreversibility.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has been at
the cutting edge of the search for durable peace in
Liberia. It remained steadfast in their pursuit of peace in
Liberia even in the face of the recalcitrance of the
warring Liberian political leaders and the impatience and
despair of the international community.

Patience in the pursuit of a noble cause often pays
in the end. It is patience that has today resulted in
ECOMOG succeeding in delivering a peace agreement so
pregnant with promise and, for that matter, a peace
agreement struck in the nick of time, when the United
Nations was threatening to abandon the people of Liberia
to their own fate. My delegation commends the efforts of
ECOMOG and, in particular, the crucial role played by
the Governments of Ghana and Nigeria. We also
commend the facilitating role played by Ambassador
Nyakyi, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and the Reverend Banana of Zimbabwe, the
Eminent Person of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU).

Resolution 1001 (1995), among other things, called
upon States neighbouring Liberia to harmonize their
policies in their approach to the situation in Liberia. The
resolution also expressed the readiness of the Security
Council to restore the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL) to its full strength if significant
progress was achieved in the peace process. The policies
of Liberia's neighbours vis-a-vis the Liberian conflict are
in harmony, and the Liberian parties have done exactly
what the international community demanded of them. An
opportunity for durable peace now exists in Liberia, and
the Security Council should not be found wanting in
rendering assistance to the Liberians to speedily
consolidate it. There are numerous challenges which, if
not urgently confronted, could reverse the gains which
have been made so far. In this regard, UNOMIL must be
restored to its full strength, as reflected in operative
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution before us. This is not
only in line with the language of operative paragraph 6 of
resolution 1001 (1995) of 30 June 1995. It would also be
a strong signal to the Liberians that the international
community stands ready to help them if they are willing
to resolve their own differences.

ECOMOG has a major role to play in monitoring the
cease-fire and in the disarmament and demobilisation of
the combatants. My delegation fully shares the sentiments
reflected in operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution,
and wishes to express the hope that the international

 

community will respond positively and concretely by
providing financial and logistical support to the subregional
peace-keeping operation, ECOMOG, to enable it to end the
war in Liberia once and for all.

The months ahead will be very important in managing
and nurturing the nascent peace process in Liberia. There
are enormous humanitarian problems that need urgent
attention. The Secretary-General's report before us indicates
that out of an estimated 50,000 to 60,000 combatants, 25
per cent are children. There are 450,000 internally displaced
persons. Some 800,000 Liberians are refugees. These are
problems which are at the very core of the peace process in
Liberia. We therefore look forward to the outcome of the
Secretary-General's consultations with the Chairman of
ECOWAS and to his recommendations on the possibility of
holding a pledging conference for Liberia. In this respect,
we very much welcome the language of operative
paragraphs 8 and 14 of the draft resolution.

The Secretary-General has reminded us that since
1989, at least 10 peace agreements have been signed and
broken. He has, however, expressed optimism that the
prospects for peace are better this time than ever before.
My delegation is convinced that the Liberian political
parties and leaders have the primary responsibility to give
practical expression and credence to the words of the
Secretary-General. They are in essence an expression of the
hopes and aspirations of the people of Liberia and the
international community as a whole.

