Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for organizing this important
debate.

Youth are a key asset and the hope for peaceful
and prosperous societies. Yet today an unprecedented
number of young people travel to Syria and Iraq to fight
as foreign terrorist fighters alongside terrorist groups
such as Daesh. Similarly, the ranks of Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram consist predominantly of young people.
On all continents, an increasing number of young men
and women are vulnerable to extremist ideologies,
radicalization and terrorism.

In order to counter that phenomenon, it is necessary
to take robust measures to stop young people from
travelling to conflict zones, as required by resolution
2178 (2014). Turkey has been doing its part by adopting
numerous measures, including enhancing controls
at borders and establishing a no-entry list. Needless
to say, that struggle cannot be led by Turkey alone,
and effective international cooperation and timely
information-sharing, particularly on the part of the
source countries, are crucial.

On that point, since issues related to recruitment
and travel to conflict zones have been highlighted
earlier with specific references, let me mention one
striking example that recently received wide press
coverage. According to media reports, the United
States citizen who took part in a suicide bombing in
Syria was believed to have travelled to that country
more than once. That is a reminder of the importance of
close cooperation and information-sharing.

In addressing that phenomenon, the first step is
to understand the root causes of radicalization among
youth. As underlined in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, effective counter-terrorism
requires the eradication of conditions conducive to its
spread. In that task, it is important to remember that
radicalization and Violent extremism are not peculiar to
one particular religion, faith or community. The process
that leads to violent extremism may have different
triggering factors, ranging from underdevelopment to
a feeling of discrimination. Particular emphasis should
be placed on better designed integration policies. The
more migrant communities are truly integrated where
they live, the easier it will be to marginalize extremism
and to overcome the perceived grievances of being left
out, stigmatized and rejected.

Protracted conflicts nourish conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism among youth. Other factors
that contribute to such conditions include the absence
of the rule of law, Violations of human rights, ethnic,
national and religious discrimination, political
exclusion, socioeconomic marginalization and lack of
good governance. The multiple factors that can lead
to youth radicalization show that a holistic approach
involving multiple branches of Government and
various sectors of civil society is needed. A whole-of-
Government strategy must be supported by a whole-of-
society approach.

In Turkey, several Government agencies including
security, youth, education and social policy institutions,
are involved in such efforts. Furthermore, the Office of
Religious Affairs of the Prime Ministry plays a special
role in Turkey as an actor in efforts to combat Violent
extremism by harmonizing Friday sermons through
guidelines that accentuate the message of peace in
Islam.

International cooperation can be instrumental in
empowering youth in the face of violent extremism.
Both the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and relevant Security Council resolutions,
such as resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014),
identify the concrete steps to be taken. We welcome the
announcement by the Secretary-General of an action
plan on preventing Violent extremism at the White House
Summit on Countering Violent Extremism in February.
We believe that youth must be an important target
group of those efforts. In that framework, we welcome
the projects already implemented by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, focusing on youth, and
we call for their continuation. In addition to the joint
United Nations efforts, the many framework and good-
practices documents - including those adopted by the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
platforms - can provide us with valuable guidance.

As terrorists use and abuse modern communications
technologies to spread their morbid messages, protecting
youth from those toxic indoctrination attempts requires
conveying messages of peace and tolerance to them as
part of our common struggle against discrimination,
intolerance, racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia,
anti-Semitism and discrimination against Christians
and members of other religions. In that context, the
Alliance of Civilizations, of which Turkey is a sponsor,
is doing valuable work with respect to the topic of our
debate through numerous projects and activities that
focus on four main pillars, namely, youth, education,
media and migration. Young people should trust that
regardless of the differences in our beliefs, we can live
in unity, peace and harmony. Only thus can our societies
be truly resilient in the face of Violent extremism.

