Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his informative
briefing and for his commitment. I am also grateful to
my Swiss colleague, Mr. Jiirg Lauber, in his capacity as
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his very useful briefing.

France takes note of the results of the referendum.
Although the elections were held in relative calm, as
has been said, we deplore the fact that the campaign
took place in a climate clouded by intimidation and
various threats of violence against those opposed to
constitutional reform. The revision of the Constitution
introduces amendments that run counter to the Arusha
Accords. Indeed, if care is not taken, it may begin to
unravel the Accords, which have been the backbone
of a decade of peace in Burundi. The institutionalized
system of power-sharing between the various elements
of the Burundian community has been put in doubt, and
the mechanisms for protecting the Tutsi minority have
either been weakened or are disappearing. In our View,
this reform will not help to resolve the crisis that the
country has been mired in since 2015.

We therefore remain very concerned about the
political impasse and the security situation in Burundi.
Faced with the impossibility of dialogue and a total
shutdown of the political arena, the most radical
opposition factions have been tempted to resort to
armed struggle. In the ruling party, the Imbonerakure
militias are playing an increasingly significant part in
intimidating and repressing any dissenting voices and
are difficult to control. The situation is therefore at risk
of deteriorating and the status quo is not sustainable in
the long term. The Ruhagarika massacre of 11 May, in
which 27 civilians were murdered, is yet another new
and tragic illustration of that.

We must break out of the current vicious circle. The
dialogue facilitated by the East African Community
has so far failed, mainly due to obstruction by the
Burundian authorities. However, the priority must
remain to launch a genuine inclusive national dialogue,
without conditions or exclusions, that gives voice to
the aspirations of every element of Burundian society.
That priority is inseparable from the issue of respect
for human rights, which is also worrying. An inclusive
dialogue can be possible only if the Government makes
the right moves, including enabling the opposition, the
media and civil society to play their part without being
undermined. We also expect robust demonstrations of
regional support to ensure that this dialogue can truly
take place.

In this difficult context, we call on all Burundian
parties to return to the spirit of consensus that led to
the conclusion of the Arusha Accords and on their
guarantors to mobilize in the quest for a political
solution to the crisis. The necessary regional leadership
for the situation in Burundi must accompanied by close
monitoring on the part of the Council. In Burundi's very
volatile situation, the Arusha Accords are now more
than ever the compass that must guide the efforts of the
Burundian parties and the international community in
the service of Burundi and its stability.

