Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
As I stated here in the presence of the President of
Liberia, France is determined to support the great
efforts made by the Liberian authorities, and to fully
support the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), whose role has been and continues to be
critical for the recovery of that battered country.

The French authorities, who officially received
Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf at the beginning of March, have
always made every effort to achieve that objective, and
they will continue to do so. We are well aware of the
consequences, for the entire region, of the Liberian
civil war and its brutal atrocities. We must not now let
down the people of Liberia. The renewed hope for a
Liberia that is stable and at peace provides an
opportunity for all of West Africa.

Furthermore, France welcomes the arrest and the
transfer to the special court for Sierra Leone of Charles
Taylor. In this regard, we wish once again to pay a
sincere tribute to President Obasanjo for his decisive
action and to the Liberian authorities for their
determination to ensure that justice is finally done.

France is wholly dedicated to the stability and
development of the African continent. It is shouldering
all of its responsibilities, and is fully committed,
alongside the African people, the Secretary-General
and all United Nations personnel on the ground who
are working for peace. That is particularly true in Cote
d'Ivoire, where the difficult road that leads to unity and
reconciliation is, for both the African and the
international communities, a continuing cause for
concern.

My country believes that the Security Council
must act in this matter in accordance with two simple
principles. First, the stability of West Africa is a single
integrated whole. Any attempt to separate the situation
in Liberia from that in Cote d'Ivoire makes no sense. It
is in that context that we need to carefully consider and
adapt our efforts for each of those two countries.
Secondly, the unity of the international community
must be complete. In other words, the Council must
pay particular attention to what Africans are telling us
and to the Secretary-General's recommendations.

That is why my delegation, like the
overwhelming majority of the Council, has, over the
past few days, supported the following: with regard to
Liberia, the gradual and reasonable reduction of the
number of UNMIL troops, as proposed by the
Secretary-General; and, with regard to Cote d'Ivoire,
the maintenance in Abidjan of the UNMIL company,
which has been deployed since February, as well as -
and this is the most important aspect - the
strengthening of the military and police forces of the
United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), for
which the Secretary-General, the Economic
Community of West African States, the African Union
and a near-majority of Council members have been
calling for 12 months now.

France finally agreed to endorse the draft
resolution on UNMIL, which has just been adopted,
because it contains a double commitment. On the one
hand, UNOCI will once again be able, as soon as it
proves necessary, to immediately benefit from the
reinforcement provided by UNMIL. On the other hand,
it is clear that by 30 April the Council will be taking a
decision on strengthening UNOCI. That is, more than
ever, essential as a corollary to the peace process set
out in resolution 1633 (2005), which today is entering
the most sensitive and most critical phase. The
strengthening should be authorized as soon as possible,
because the timetable for the process is tight and, as
the Secretary-General has told us, the security situation
in Cote d'Ivoire remains particularly volatile.

My delegation notes that the Council has just
made a firm commitment to settle the issue of the
UNOCI troops by the end of April. My delegation will
draw all the relevant conclusions in the Security
Council in the coming weeks. France is convinced that
the investment that can be made to ensure peace in
Cote d'Ivoire will be a considerable additional
guarantee of Liberia's stability, to which we are
extremely committed.

