Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): I would like to
thank the Argentinian presidency for organizing this
meeting and in particular for the way you have framed
the debate.

Iceland agrees that in the wake of the ceasefire in
Gaza, this open debate is an important opportunity to
focus on that longstanding issue. That is not to diminish
the importance and urgency of other crises demanding
our attention in the region, or the importance of other
forums where this issue is discussed, including the
Quartet. But, as the President has pointed out, the
Council can and must play a more active role and
assume its responsibilities, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, by supporting all efforts
and initiatives aimed at reaching a lasting peace. It
is, after all, the Security Council that is charged with
maintaining international peace and security.

The present state of affairs is sustainable neither for
the Israelis or the Palestinians. When we look at Gaza,
the facts on the ground are shocking. In the pointless
war of the past summer, 20,000 homes were destroyed
and more than 2,000 Palestinians killed, most of them
civilians, including more than 500 children. More than
70 Israelis were killed, including 6 civilians. Iceland
has condemned the disproportionate use of force by
the Israel Defense Forces during the conflict, and we
also condemn the indiscriminate rocket attacks by
Hamas and other militant organizations in Gaza against
civilian targets in Israel.

The phrase "facts on the ground" began as an
innocent euphemism for Israeli settlements established
in violation of international law. It has come to signify

the enormous gap between statements of political intent
and actions - that is, what people have done in spite of
what they say or have said. Those facts stand in disregard
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
The facts on the ground include widespread violations
of the rights and dignity of Palestinians through denial
of property rights and restrictions on their freedom
of movement and expression. Those actions have
clear consequences for the chances of the peaceful
coexistence of two States living side by side. We have
seen a series of actions over a long period that diminish
the chances of establishing a two-State solution. And
that means diminishing the chances of any solution that
would allow both populations to live in peace for the
long term.

A sea change is needed to move this issue onto a path
that can lead to an enduring peace. The core problem
on the ground is the occupation of Palestine, and that
occupation must end. Without a clear political horizon
there is no hope and the bloodshed will continue.
Choosing the way of peace must bring results. On the
twenty-fifth anniversary this year of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, we should think about all
the children whose names have been read out in this
very forum at former meetings, to remind us that in
the end, maintaining international peace and security
is about people, and that the Security Council has both
the responsibility as well as the tools to do its utmost
to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as all
the other conflicts in the region where children are
suffering.

