Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): My delegation
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the Central African Republic. We should also
like to thank Mr. Sy, the Secretary-General's
Representative, for his introduction to this debate. We
should also like to thank the representatives of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank for their interventions. My delegation is
also pleased that Minister Mezode of the Central
African Republic is present here today.

It was good that our debate was begun by the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius. He set out a thoughtful
and perceptive African perspective on the Central
African Republic's problems. My delegation agrees
with this perspective. Minister Gayan noted, for
example, that the problems of the Central African
Republic include an absence of good governance, a
lack of respect for democratic institutions, violations of
human rights and the absence of transparency.

My delegation is very concerned by the dismal
situation in the Central African Republic, which is
getting worse. It is very important, as others have said,
that the efforts of the international community and of
the United Nations over recent years not be wasted.

In that context, we believe that the only way to
resolve the present national crisis is for there to be full
consultation and cooperation between the Government
of President Patasse and the opposition. We are
concerned about the allegations that militias are being
used to intimidate the opposition. It is essential that all
sides use only democratic means to resolve their
disputes.

We understand that the Government has now
found money to pay at least some of the backlog of
public-service salaries, and we welcome this, but it is
just a temporary solution. It is essential that the
Government of the Central African Republic carry out
reforms that will lead to a lasting solution to the
country's economic and civil problems.

My delegation would like to welcome the work of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
the Central African Republic (BONUCA) on security
reform and also the progress being made by the
Government on restructuring the defence services.

We share the concerns that have been expressed
by others over the impact on the Central African
Republic ofthe situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are interested in the recommendations
that the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Essy,
has made to mitigate the effects of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the Central
African Republic. We would be interested to learn what
progress is being made in implementing those
recommendations.

Finally, we hope that Governments will make
speedy progress in releasing funds for security and
development programmes in the Central African
Republic.

