Mr. Gaviria (spoke in Spanish): I believe that we
in the Organization of American States (OAS) have
had some experiences that can be of use to other
regional organizations. Specifically, for example, in the
area of terrorism, we have made significant progress
since 11 September 2001 and have created a general
environment of cooperation. We have agreed on a
convention, already ratified by a large number of
States, whose fundamental focus has been on
cooperation and on accepting the definitions arising
from United Nations conventions. We have spent our
energy on trying to define, not terrorism, but rather the
fundamental and critical aspects of cooperation.

When norms take the form of treaties, political
legitimacy is greatly enhanced in States. In the
Americas, when we deal with offenses of organized
crime, there is also a series of aspects that are involved
in such cooperation. For example, we have problems
related to banking secrecy and to the right of asylum.
There are a great number of aspects that can maintain
legitimacy - a prerequisite for their effectiveness -
only if they are regulated by a convention or by a
treaty.

Naturally, all the countries of the OAS respect
and are committed to Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). That is the principle on which we are working:
full acceptance of that resolution. I also believe that, in
the inter-American system, we have mechanisms for
the settlement of disputes - already used for many
decades - that could be useful for other regions,
especially since we in the inter-American system do
not call for the use of force; we are totally committed
to the peaceful settlement of disputes. That is our
fundamental focus, and I believe that we have achieved
some important results.

We also have had some post-conflict experiences,
and I should like to mention one that other regional
organizations could explore at some point: using only
civilian personnel to deal with post-conflict solutions.
After the confrontations and the domestic conflict that
took place in Nicaragua, an OAS mission was able to
demobilize 22,000 armed personnel using only civilian
staff. I know that that cannot be done in every case, but
in the Americas it has been possible to take that
approach. I also believe that it could be an important
experience for other organizations.

On the subject of terrorism, at the meeting held
here in the Security Council we committed ourselves to
cooperating with other regional organizations and with
the United Nations to follow up on what was said here
and on our discussion on the experiences of various
organizations. We are fully prepared to have such a
follow-up meeting within the inter-American system.

Moreover, and in conclusion, I understand that
the Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials
is something on which Mexico has already taken the
initiative by sharing its experiences with other
countries. But our organization is also doing something
very interesting: we are harmonizing instruments
related to fighting drug trafficking, to border control, to
money laundering and to financial structures and are
creating databases that can serve all countries and can
be accessed by them - there, we have had some pilot
experiences. But we are harmonizing legal and judicial
cooperation being worked out through annual meetings
of Ministers of Justice and Attorneys General so as to
tackle the various types of crime that are now so
widespread. As the representative of Chile said,
globalization has empowered them. But by using these
same instruments to deal with all of those crimes, using
the network that was created in the Convention to fight
corruption, and using them against drug trafficking and
terrorism, I believe that we are developing an approach
that might be interesting.

We are also very much bearing in mind the
regional organizations within the OAS area. The
Caribbean has its own organization, and we are
working on financial aspects in the Caribbean. We have
also worked in Central America, which has a treaty on
security and democracy. In MERCOSUR, the Andean
area, they have their own concerns. I believe there is a
set of elements there that might be of interest to other
regional organizations.

