Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank all our briefers, particularly
Ms. Wazma Frogh, who embodies the voice of women
and civil society that is so essential to building a lasting
peace in Afghanistan.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

I will limit myself to four main comments. I would
like to begin by stressing France's great concern about
the persistent tragically high level of violence and
suffering in Afghanistan and the presence of terrorist
groups in the country, particularly Da'esh. That state
of affairs and its consequences are worrying and
should compel us to redouble our efforts to put an end
to them. As the report (S/2017/1056) of the Secretary-
General points out, it is civilians, particularly women
and children, who are suffering and continue to pay the
heaviest price. The Afghan forces, whose commitment
and determination I should commend once again, are
fighting the Taliban and the terrorist groups bravely
and striving to better protect civilians. However, the
continued armed clashes and terrorist attacks are still
severely destabilizing to the entire country. France takes
the establishment and proliferation of terrorist groups,
particularly Da'esh, in Afghanistan and the region. We
fully share the determination of the Afghan authorities
and our allies to combat terrorism and its financing.
This anti-terrorist effort, if it is to be successful, must
be supported by all countries in the region.

My second comment has to do with the importance
of ensuring that the Afghan Government continues
the reforms it has begun with the aim of establishing
democratic governance that can better serve the
population. This relates in particular to electoral
reform. Progress has been made in this area and
preparations for the parliamentary elections have
begun, in particular through the Independent Electoral
Commission. Nevertheless, much remains to be
done in order to ensure the crucial goal of holding
free and transparent elections in 2018 in accordance
with the official schedule, as Mr. Yamamoto has just
emphasized. France encourages the Afghan authorities
to continue those efforts, with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

The reforms aimed at combating corruption are
also going in the right direction. However, I would like
to take advantage of Mr. Fedotov's presence today to
briefly discuss the narcotics problem. Drug trafficking
continues to fuel the illicit economy, fund the Taliban
insurgency and terrorist groups and threaten the health
ofmany Afghans. The latest Afghanistan Opium Survey
2017 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
highlights some disturbing trends that Mr. Fedotov also
just mentioned. Despite progress in the programmes
for eradicating poppy production in a growing number
of provinces, the report estimates that the area under
cultivation has increased and that this year's potential
opium production, at around 9,000 tons, is almost
double that of last year. France calls on the Afghan
authorities to redouble their efforts in that area, with
the support of the international community and the
United Nations. In that regard, the Paris Pact Initiative
continues to be the preferred forum for exchanges
among all countries affected by the trafficking of drugs
produced in Afghanistan.

On the human rights front, the situation of women
and children remains very precarious. The Afghan
Government must not relax its efforts to implement its
commitments to women's rights. With a view to the
parliamentary and presidential elections, to be held
in 2018 and 2019, respectively, the full participation
of women in the electoral processes as voters and as
candidates will be essential.

My third comment concerns the pursuit of a
negotiated political solution to the conflict and the
long-term stabilization of Afghanistan. France hopes
that Afghan actors will re-engage in the peace process
as soon as possible, with the support of the countries
of the region and of the international community. The
sincere commitment and unambiguous support of all
Afghanistan's neighbours to peace are essential to this
work. We ask everyone to make a renewed effort in
that regard, as well as concrete commitments. France
took note of the announcement of a new meeting of the
Kabul process early next year and hopes that that will
make it possible to bring together existing initiatives
under the authority of the Afghan Government.

My fourth and final remark relates to the
importance of strengthening United Nations support
to Afghanistan, and in particular that of UNAMA,
around the four pillars reaffirmed in this summer's
strategic review - first, helping to establish peace in
Afghanistan; secondly, facilitating the involvement of
countries in the region; thirdly, guiding the dialogue
between the Government and the Afghan political
forces; and fourthly, coordinating international
assistance. During the Security Council's visit, a
few weeks from now, France looks forward to the
opportunity to discuss with the Afghan authorities and
the actors on the ground the ways that the international
community can continue to support Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France's full
support to the Afghan Government and the efforts of
the United Nations in their pursuit of lasting peace for
all Afghans. Lastly, I would like to commend Japan's
work and leadership on this issue throughout the year.

