Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Dennis Byron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), for their statements to the Council elaborating
on the measures their respective Tribunals are taking to
achieve the completion strategy.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
pay tribute and express its appreciation to Prosecutor
Carla Del Ponte for the stellar work and contribution
she has made to international criminal justice. We also
wish to thank Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow for his
statement before the Council today.

My delegation commends both Tribunals for the
steps they are taking to ensure that they achieve the
completion strategy. In particular, we welcome the
measures taken to increase the efficiency of the
Tribunals in processing their trials by holding a high
number of trials simultaneously, by effecting
amendments to the Rules of Procedure for the purpose
of expediting proceedings and also by making optimum
use of ad litem judges.
The completion strategy is time-bound, and
therefore, notwithstanding the steps the Tribunals are
taking to increase efficiency, the key element in
achieving the completion strategy is the referral of
cases to national jurisdictions. For now, that strategy is
the referral of intermediate and low-ranking
individuals to national justice systems. In the future,
with due passage of time and given the inability to
effect arrests, we may have to look at the referral of
cases at other levels to national justice systems. To that
end, we commend the various countries that have
accepted cases from the Tribunals. We are particularly
keen to see the situation countries, where the crimes
were committed, take up for themselves the
responsibility of accepting more referrals from the
Tribunals. We therefore welcome any efforts to provide
technical assistance to the situation countries in order
to reform their justice systems with a view to enabling
them to absorb the cases from the Tribunals. We
strongly believe that justice sector reform is a critical
element of post conflict reconstruction.

In both Tribunals there are indictees still at large
and some of them are particularly high-level accused or
are alleged to have committed crimes that ideally
should be dealt with at the international level. For
example, in the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda there is the fugitive Felicien Kabuga and for
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia there is Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic. It is important that those fugitives ultimately
be brought to justice, and we call for full cooperation
with the Tribunals to arrest and surrender those
individuals for trial.

We note with satisfaction the recent arrest of
high-level fugitives, General Zdravko Tolimir and
Vlastimir Djordjevic. My delegation welcomes the
cooperation between the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the countries
of the region that led to the eventual capture of those
fugitives.

Finally, the fact that the Tribunals are working
towards completing their work raises questions
regarding their legacy and the lasting preservation of
their achievements. The Tribunals were established by
the Security Council consistent with its responsibility
to maintain international peace and security, and
therefore, as we consider their legacy and
achievements, we have to measure them by the extent
of their contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Today Rwanda is on a path towards development,
and the countries of the former Yugoslavia live in
relative peace with each other. It can therefore be said
that the Tribunals have contributed much to the
maintenance of international peace and security. There
will, however, be a need to consolidate the Tribunals'
achievements and to ensure the preservation of the
Tribunals' legacy. The work required includes ensuring
that the passage of time does not result in impunity for
any fugitives. It is also important that the archives of
the Tribunals be preserved and stored in a place where
future generations could have access to them and take
lesson from the work of both Tribunals - that lesson
being namely, that there shall be no impunity for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

I will, if I may, take this opportunity to ask Judge
Byron one question. What lies in store for individuals
who are acquitted and those who serve their sentences
and are then released? We were under the impression
that those individuals had the right to return to their
own countries. We have not received any indication
that their countries would be unwilling to accept them.
Therefore, it would be interesting to find out what is
the basis for looking beyond the countries of origin of
those individuals.

