Mr. Arrocha Ruiz (Panama): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Human
Security Network, a cross-regional network composed
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country, Panama.
The Human Security Network is an informal group
of States that promotes the integration of the human
security approach into policies and programmes at the
regional, national and international levels.

On behalf of the Network members, I would like to
express our appreciation to the presidency of Poland for
convening this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, as well as to thank today's briefers
for their statements and to express our gratitude for
the presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/462).

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is one
of the priorities of the Network, and we have engaged
constructively in Security Council debates on the issue
since 2002. We encourage the Security Council to
continue advancing the protection agenda and separate
this important issue from other political discussions
that could undermine the potential of this framework
of action. The Human Security Network is of the
view that traditional security approaches should be
complemented by a people-centred, holistic approach
to security. That includes a focus not only on the
protection of civilians once a conflict situation occurs,
but also conflict prevention in a broader sense.

The Human Security Network welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General. We observe with
growing concern that civilian populations continue to
bear the brunt of armed conflict across the globe, in
particular when explosive weapons are used in populated
areas. In such cases, international humanitarian law is
often insufficiently implemented. We appreciate that
the Secretary-General's report addresses the issue,
and we encourage Member States to participate in
their respective ongoing talks. We wish to support the
Secretary-General in his call for strict compliance with
international humanitarian law, including the utmost
precaution in the conduct ofhostilities in urban settings.

We share the Secretary-General's view that, in the
long term, the best way to protect civilians is to address
the root causes of conflict, build sustainable peace,
promote human rights and the rule of law, strengthen
governance and democratic institutions and invest in
inclusive and sustainable development. We encourage
the Council to use all the information generated by
the different organs of the United Nations to better
implement the international norms and obligations for
the protection of civilians.

We welcome the continued calls for accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law, which
is vital for the protection of civilians and achieving
sustainable peace. Accountability is a key element in the
protection of civilians. States must comply with their
obligations under international law to hold accountable
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians.
As the international community, we should do more
to build national capacities to ensure accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights.

We value the continued attention that the Security
Council is giving to this important issue, and we further
call on the Security Council to strongly, systematically,
consistently and promptly respond to all violations
of international law in situations of armed conflict.
Neither silence, nor tolerance nor impunity are an
option. That is a message that should clearly emanate
from the Security Council and one that must resonate
with us all.

