The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic
of Serbia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules or
procedure to Mr. Joachim Rijcker, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Riicker to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/768, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of document S/2008/7,
which contains a letter dated 4 January 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of Serbia to the United
Nations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
statement by the His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie,
President of the Republic of Serbia, on whom I now
call.


