Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area - Iceland and
Lichtenstein - align themselves with this statement.

The European Union strongly condemns and
expresses its dismay at the latest outbreak of terror and
violence in the Middle East, which has led to more
casualties, including a significant number of civilians.
We wish to convey our most sincere condolences to the
Israelis and the Palestinians, both victims of this
situation.

The current spiral of violence must cease
immediately, and the suffering of both peoples must be
brought to an end. Both parties need to take urgent
measures to restore calm and to return to negotiations
in order to resolve a conflict that has no military
solution. We appeal to the Israeli Government and to
the Palestinian Authority to offer, with the assistance of
the international community, a perspective that is
different from the current perpetuation of violence and
of the suffering of their peoples. The lack of such a
perspective only encourages further confrontation and
plays into the hands of the extremists.

Terror and violence must end. Each side must
face up to its responsibilities and take immediate and
resolute action.

The Palestinian Authority and its elected
President, Yasser Arafat, must do everything possible
to put an end to terrorism and the armed intifada,
dismantle all terrorist networks, and arrest and
prosecute the perpetrators of these kinds of acts. In this
regard, we welcome the detention by the Palestinian
security forces of those suspected of involvement in
the killing of Israel's Minister of Tourism.

To eradicate terrorism and work towards peace,
Israel needs a partner. That partner is the Palestinian
Authority and its elected President, Yasser Arafat,

S/PV.4478

 

whose authority and capacity to fight terrorism must
not be weakened by travel restrictions and other
obstacles.

The Israeli Government must withdraw its
military forces, stop extra-judicial executions and lift
the closures and all restrictions imposed on the
Palestinian people and its leadership. A total freeze
must be imposed on settlement activities, as an
immediate step. There must be an end to action against
the facilities of the Palestinian Authority and to the
destruction of the Palestinian infrastructure and of
other facilities that contribute to the economic, social
and humanitarian development of the Palestinians and
that are financed by the European Union and other
donors. We call on the Israeli Government to facilitate
the access of humanitarian staff and assistance to the
Palestinian populations.

Security is a priority, but it should not be isolated
from the need for a political and economic perspective
for the Palestinian people. To that end, in the Laeken
Declaration of the European Union Council, and in the
latest conclusions adopted by our ministers of foreign
affairs, the European Union has issued a firm call to
the parties to adopt all necessary measures immediately
and unconditionally to implement the Tenet ceasefire
plan and the Mitchell Committee recommendations.
The objective of peace requires that security and
political measures be implemented in parallel in a
mutually reinforcing way.

As the Secretary-General indicated last Thursday
to the Security Council,

"New thinking and imaginative new ideas
are now being proposed from several quarters.
This is to be welcomed, and such ideas should be
considered promptly and thoroughly both by the
parties and by the international community."
(S/PV.4474, p.3)

The European Union encourages in this regard
ongoing contacts between both sides, particularly
between the Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Shimon Peres, and the President of the Palestinian
National Legislative Council, Mr. Abu Ala. The
European Union also regards as a positive step the
proposals of the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and
looks forward to their further development.
The European Union considers it essential and
urgent that the United Nations, the United States, the
Russian Federation and the Arab countries that are
most closely concerned take resolute concerted action
to help the parties break the cycle of violence and
commit themselves to resuming political negotiations.
In that regard, the High Representative of the European
Council, Mr. Javier Solana, is now in the region to
maintain the necessary contacts with the parties as a
sign of our commitment to assist them in finding a
final solution to the conflict.

We stress that a just and lasting settlement of the
question must be based on the principles of the Madrid
conference, in particular the principle of land for
peace, and on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).

The European Union is convinced that an
impartial monitoring mechanism would serve the
interests of both parties and is prepared to take an
active part in the establishment of such a mechanism. It
is equally important to ease the difficult socio-
economic situation of the Palestinians as a way of
encouraging peace.

The European Union will spare no effort in trying
to contribute to reducing the Violence and ensuring that
Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side in peace
and security. That requires the reaffirmation and full
recognition of Israel's irrevocable right to live in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders,
the establishment of a democratic and viable
Palestinian State and an end to the occupation of the
Palestinian territories.

