Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.

As the Council is aware, the capital of Kazakhstan
just hosted the eleventh international meeting in
the framework of the Astana process, in which the
issues of progress on a political settlement based on
the groundwork laid in Geneva and Sochi, further
improvements in the situation on the ground and the
development of confidence-building measures among
the Syrian parties were discussed. We thank our
partners in Kazakhstan for their unwavering hospitality.
As a result of the meeting, ajoint statement was agreed
on in which, having emphasized their determination to
strengthen their trilateral cooperation, the guarantor
countries among other things repudiated all attempts
to create new realities on the ground on the pretext of
combating terrorism, and expressed their determination
to counter any separatist plans designed to undermine
Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity or the
national security of its neighbours.

Iran, Russia and Turkey welcomed the success
on 24 November of the pilot project to exchange
people who had been forcibly detained, which was a
step forward in the work of building trust among the
Syrian stakeholders.

On the whole, the situation in much of Syria is
stable. While problems remain, there is clear evidence
that things on the humanitarian front are improving,
which is particularly noticeable in the areas controlled
by Damascus. It is perhaps premature to take stock
of outcomes for the year, but we believe that it is a
major achievement that the so-called besieged areas
have completely dropped off our agenda, for instance.
However, the growing number of violations of the
cessation of hostilities regime in the Idlib de-escalation
zone is worrying. There was a particularly alarming
incident last week when militants based inside the zone
fired shells containing toxic substances on resident
neighbourhoods in Aleppo, as has already been
mentioned today. There are casualties. We hope that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
will undertake the necessary measures in connection
with the reports from Damascus as soon as possible.
Prior to that, there was an attack in the area of Jurin by
militants from Haras Al-Din, an illegal armed group
affiliated with Al-Qaida, in the repelling of which 18
soldiers were killed.

The Astana guarantor countries will ramp up
their efforts to ensure that the cessation of hostilities
is maintained and affirm their Willingness to fully
implement the 17 September memorandum on the
stabilization of the situation in Idlib. But it is important
to understand that however significant a sustainable
ceasefire is, it does not eliminate the need to continue
working effectively to combat terrorism. The flow of
refugees and internally displaced persons returning to
their homes is gaining strength, with an average of up to
1,000 people returning from Lebanon and Jordan every
day. To the extent that they can, the Syrian authorities
are making significant efforts to create favourable
conditions for their citizens. Helpful adjustments are
being made at the legislative level.

As we have repeatedly stressed, at this critical
juncture it falls to the international community to
collectively get behind the Syrian people in order to
repair the devastation as soon as possible and establish
normal life for those who have voluntarily decided
to return to their homeland. The guarantor countries
of the Astana process have urged the international
community, especially the United Nations and its
humanitarian agencies, to increase assistance to Syria,
including by expanding humanitarian deliveries and
rebuilding civilian infrastructure. Meanwhile, however,
we are obliged to assume that some Western capitals
have not grasped this and have made assistance in the
restoration conditional on political circumstances,
which is an inhumane approach. Sometimes they are
also intimidating others who might dare to circumvent
illegal unilateral sanctions, for example, and that is
also unacceptable.

Following the eradication of the terrorist presence
in the southern suburbs of Damascus, the Syrian
authorities have been developing a plan to restore the
Palestinian refugee camp in Yarmouk, and the streets
there are currently being cleared. We assume that
the foreign donors who are traditionally sympathetic
to the plight of the Palestinians might participate in
implementing those plans.

The situation in the health-care sector remains
very serious. According to the response plan for Syria
in 2019 prepared by the World Health Organization
(WHO) country office, humanitarian medical
assistance is still needed, especially in newly liberated
areas. More than half of the country's medical facilities
are closed or functioning only partially. There is an
acute shortage of medicines for treating common
diseases, owing to disruptions in the supply chain. A
third of the population is using water from unreliable
sources. Over the past year all of these factors have led
to outbreaks of measles, leishmaniasis and diarrhoea.
It is important for WHO to focus on restoring the
local authorities' capacity to provide medical care. We
continue to highlight the inadmissibility of maintaining
unilateral sanctions against Syria, which significantly
limit the ability of the authorities to obtain medicines
and medical equipment.

Unfortunately, many questions remain about the
activities of the so-called coalition led by the United
States, which is present on Syrian soil in violation of
the basic principles of international law. We are deeply
concerned about the continued build-up of the United
States militarypresence onthe leftbank ofthe Euphrates.
According to the media, the total number of United
States military bases in Syria has already reached 19.
The speed of its occupation and consolidation of quasi-
State structures on the ground is growing, complicating
the prospects for a political settlement.
The military operation in the area of Hajin in
Deir ez-Zor governorate, which was announced as
being against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), has done no significant damage to the terrorists.
Instead, as we have heard, including from Ms. Ghelani,
time and time again its victims are civilians, and that
is ever more difficult to deny. The Syrians have been
sending desperate letters to the Security Council but
for some reason they seem to resonate very little with
the international community, just as we have seen no
reaction to the discovery of mass graves of victims of
the coalition's air strikes in Raqqa. Incidentally, the
discrepancies in the statistics jump out at one. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1041) speaks of
1,000 bodies exhumed, while according to the letter
from Syria to the members of the Security Council the
figure is four times larger. According to some reports,
the United States refuses to consider the possibility
of paying compensation for those killed in Raqqa.
Against that backdrop, we are genuinely shocked by the
details that have time and time again come to light of
some Western capitals' support for Syrian opposition
armed groups, including the transfer of arms and other
material means to terrorists, while the public has been
kept in the dark or deliberately misled.

In our view, those with influence over the armed
groups controlling certain areas in north-eastern Syria
should convince their clients to address the situation
in which schoolchildren are not being given access
to educational institutions in Government-held areas,
which we also heard about in Ms. Ghelani's briefing and
which can only be described as barbaric. In Damascus,

by the way, they are doing everything possible to ensure
uninterrupted schooling throughout Syria.

In general, it should be acknowledged that
the self-proclaimed local councils, which have the
support of external allies, have from time to time been
implementing discriminatory policies in the country's
north-eastern areas that are changing the historical
composition of the population.

The situation in the Rukban camp remains very
unfortunate. The humanitarian operation launched at
the beginning of November was inadequate from an
organizational standpoint. United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent personnel were not allowed inside
the 55-kilometre zone occupied by the United States
around the Al-Tanf base. Militants from the Maghawir
Al-Thawra armed group organized the distribution
of aid. Without the necessary oversight, a significant
portion of the humanitarian assistance failed to reach
those who needed it. Many could not get inoculated
because the vaccinations were being administered
at a distance from the camp. Considering such gross
errors, it would be difficult to expect that the Syrian
Government, which has no authority in the area of the
camp, to give instant permission for a new humanitarian
convoy to come in. It is the United States, which is
fully responsible for the plight of the civilians in the
area, that should ensure the security of humanitarian
operations in Rukban, not shift the fulfilment of the job
onto illegal armed groups.

It is important to ensure that United Nations
humanitarian personnel are involved in the delivery
and distribution of humanitarian aid, with the
assistance of reputable organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. We urge that the possibility
of organizing a permanent humanitarian corridor to
Rukban be considered. The bigger picture should focus
on gradually dismantling the camp and resettling its
residents. We are ready to continue consultations with
the United Nations, the Government of Syria and our
United States and Jordanian colleagues. However,
the only real way to solve the problem is by ending
the occupation around the Al-Tanf base, not through
one-off humanitarian initiatives. Incidentally, one
of the ISIL terrorists taken hostage during a special
operation to liberate Druze prisoners on the Al-Safa
plateau in eastern Suwayda testified that he and his
accomplices had received weapons, munitions and food
from the area around the Al-Tanf base. It would be a
good idea to properly investigate what exactly is going
on in that grey area.

One extremely worrying fact is this year's record
low wheat harvest in Syria, the worst in 30 years, which
is partly due to drought. In that regard, the United
Nations specialized agencies should help to support the
country's food security, including by re-establishing its
stores of vital cereal grains.

There is continuing major uncertainty with regard
to cross-border deliveries of humanitarian assistance
to Syria under the interim mechanism introduced by
Council resolution 2165 (2014). Despite the persistent
assertions about its transparency, there is absolutely
no sign of it. Inside Syria, everything is farmed out
to various so-called third parties and partners, who
for some reason are reluctant to be identified to the
Council. There is evidence that part of the humanitarian
aid coming from outside is being confiscated and
stored by Jabhat Al-Nusra and its satellites in Idlib.
Armed groups are extorting at checkpoints along the
line of demarcation, and local authorities, escorted
by terrorists, are extracting tribute from farmers
and businesses.

The Secretary-General's report briefly touches on
the problem in a reference to abuses at the Bab Al-Hawa
border crossing. However, the description does not
convey the scale of the manipulations, with Al-Nusra's
participation. The data shows that in 2015 and 2016, the
forces controlling that border crossing from the Syrian
side were making $2 million a month. It is difficult to
believe that no one in the United Nations was aware of
the scale of these operations. The Secretary-General's
survey of the situation has made none of it any clearer.
The reality is that the situation on the ground in Syria
has significantly changed, and that should be reflected
in a comparable way in the adjustment of the cross-
border mechanism.

