Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
the briefers, Under Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Ambassadors of Canada and Bangladesh, for their
contributions and updates.

The United States is pleased to have played a
central role in refocusing the United Nations and
Member States on the importance of force generation
at the leaders' summit in 2015. In recognition of the
critical importance of multinational peace operations
and the challenges they face, the international
community has rallied behind the series of ministerial
conferences to raise awareness about capacity shortfalls
in peacekeeping and expand the pool of available
resources to address them.
From the first summit here in New York, those
meetings have focused on deliverables. We are
pleased with what those conferences have achieved,
as over 40 delegations have made pledges aimed
at fundamentally improving peacekeeping. Those
pledges have since materialized into concrete assets
that address mission-critical needs on the ground,
such as the Nepalese engineering unit deployed to
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
the Senegalese tactical helicopters sent to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, and the
Croatian special forces unit deployed to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

Through our bilateral peace-operations capacity-
building programmes, the United States is further
assisting partner countries to fully develop pledge
capabilities, particularly those that address chronic
capability gaps. For our part, in 2015 the United States
pledged to develop and deliver curriculum to address
policing in extremist environments and add specialized
training to increase police peacekeepers' survivability
in mission. To date, we have delivered that training to
four Cameroonian formed police units deploying to the
Central African Republic and two Senegalese formed
police units deploying to Mali.

We look ahead to the Vancouver Defence Ministerial
Meeting as an opportunity to both analyse new pledges
and solidify existing pledges. Pledges alone, however,
will not address growing peacekeeping demands. The
United States encourages the registration of all pledges
to ensure that commitments can ultimately be converted
by the United Nations into actual deployments,
increased capacity and better peacekeeping.

As mission mandates and operating environments
grow increasingly complex, we need units that are fully
trained and equipped to deliver the desired effects on
the ground. That means peacekeeping units that are
trained in both core military or police skills, as well
as in mission-specific needs. The work of the Strategic
Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell has
been instrumental in the registration and assessment of
potential peacekeepers for deployment.

Since the establishment of the Cell and the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS),
we have seen improvement in how the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) manages force
generation and deployments. It is critical to the success
of United Nations peacekeeping that the Organization
identify the most appropriate forces for peacekeeping
missions and expand the available base of troop- and
police-contributing countries. We need to continue to
improve the speed and methods it uses to do that.

To match the progress we have seen on force
generation, the United Nations needs to better forecast
future requirements, including ground units, but also
leadership, sustainment, information and mobility
systems. Institutionalizing that kind of strategic
planning, improved early warning capacity and
structural changes at United Nations Headquarters
in New York would enable United Nations leaders to
respond quickly and decisively to new crises.

In addition to the Cell and PCRS, we support the
further development of the DPKO operational readiness
assurance and performance-improvement policy as
a Vital tool for collecting data on troop and leader
performance. Peacekeepers are truly the international
community's front lines. Because mission success
can be a matter of life or death for civilians who rely
on peacekeepers for protection, as well as for the
peacekeepers themselves, we urge the United Nations
to make force protection and deployment decisions
based on objective performance data.

The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) is an example of how performance-based
decisions can lead to marked improvements in how
peacekeeping missions deliver on their mandate. To
address the shortcomings that led to UNMISS troops'
failure on several occasions to intervene to protect
civilians under attack in and around United Nations
bases, the Secretary-General directed the Mission to
undertake a number of steps to improve performance.
UNMISS has subsequently better defended its bases
against attacks and effectively projected peacekeepers
to respond to emerging humanitarian crises, such as
protecting 50,000 new displaced civilians in May.

Transparent, objective analysis of field performance
through the performance-improvement policy and other
existing mechanisms will support the identification

of capability gaps and help bilateral supporters of
peacekeeping better target contributions to meet the
requirements of troop- and police-contributors. It
will assist troop-contributing countries (TCCs) to
understand where improvement is needed and help
donors match training and equipment contributions to
existing needs.

As a donor, the United States has provided over a
quarter of a billion dollars-worth of capacity-building
support bilaterally to TCCs, and those systems can help
us target future assistance. To that end, we strongly
support the United Nations in working to strengthen how
it collects, manages and analyses data on peacekeeping
operational requirements and unit field performance.
Increasing the availability of objective information to
support performance-based decision-making will make
missions more effective on the ground and promote the
overall legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping.

We are committed to helping peacekeepers improve
training and capability, but ifa mission's forces are not
able to fulfil their mandate, we need to know and we
must be flexible enough to change our approach. We
owe that much to both our peacekeepers and the critical
missions they are sent to accomplish.

