Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
comprehensive and very sincere briefings.

This is the last time that Uruguay will make a
statement on the Syrian conflict as a member of the
Security Council, a conflict that has left the world
horrified and in constant suspense. The barbaric
terrorism, the intransigence of the Government in
Damascus and the geopolitical gains that several States
of the region and elsewhere have tried obtain from this
conflict have prolonged and worsened the crisis in a
manner that was completely unnecessary.

For the Council, and in particular for the 2016-2017
membership, the agenda item on Syria has undoubtedly
generated the greatest amount of work, easily
surpassing 100 meetings - including open briefings,
consultations, meetings under the heading "Other
matters" and emergency meetings - in addition to the
multiple negotiations and contacts that have been held
in attempting to contain the crisis. However, all of that
has unfortunately been insufficient.

Despite the willingness of the United Nations
and the Security Council to achieve a political and
negotiated solution in Syria, it is two years since
the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) and we are
unfortunately yet to see direct negotiations between the
parties or a political transition process with a road map
and clearly established deadlines, which we have been
unable to implement.

In difficult times such as the present, we encourage
Special Envoy De Mistura not to let up and to continue
seeking new ideas to allow that process to get under
way as soon as possible. It will require flexibility
and original ideas to impose a new dynamism and,
in particular, to create the conditions to generate a
minimum level of trust between the Government and
the opposition.

There is little left to say that we have not previously
mentioned on Syria. Uruguay has attributed maximum
priority to the peaceful resolution of the crisis and
has always focused on the protection of its civilian
population and on the humanitarian tragedy of the
millions of Syrians who have been affected since
2011. As we have done each month, we recognize
the sacrifice, selflessness and bravery of the workers
of United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its associated agencies and
organizations in Syria and bordering countries, who
risk their lives on a daily basis in attempting to alleviate
the living conditions of millions of Syrian civilians. In
the fulfilment of their tasks, we must always ensure
their protection and security.

We are pleased that a few moments ago, by adopting
resolution 2393 (2017) (see S/PV.8141), we were able
to renew the mechanism for cross-border aid, which
makes it possible to aid almost 3 million people. The
serious difficulties that have hindered humanitarian
assistance in Syrian territories have made it essential
that that mechanism be renewed.

Last month, a few hours prior to the previous meeting
on this agenda item (see S/PV.8117), we received news
of relief aid being delivered to eastern Ghouta, which
unfortunately never arrived. To date, 400,000 civilians
remain besieged in a situation of great need, the famine
is affecting the most vulnerable, the bombings continue
and medical evacuations are not being carried out, with
500 civilians in urgent need thereof. And all of that is
happening despite being one of the de-escalation zones
according to the Astana process. Worst of all is that
it has not been possible for the humanitarian convoys,
which are constantly on standby to deliver aid, to reach
that region. We urge the Government to put an end to
thee blockades, to lift all sieges and to allow aid to
reach all those who need it without exception.

In another area, and in an emblematic example, not
even the hospital at Khan Shaykhun was spared from
repeated bombings, a locale that became notorious in
April as a result ofa merciless chemical attack. Nothing
is left of the hospital. All those events were in flagrant
violation of resolution 2286 (2016), which we adopted
last year.

I would like to reiterate one final time several
points that are very important for Uruguay.

Over the past two years we have constantly argued
that there should not be any impediment to access and
the distribution of aid throughout Syria, including
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We are concerned
that humanitarian access continues to face serious
difficulties every month. We need immediate, secure
and unhindered access in order to reach all of the
people in need in Syria. We would urge countries that
have influence over Syrian officials to see to it that this
is done through ongoing cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. The Syrian Government has
the primary responsibility to ensure that it provides
food, water and medicines and other vital goods to its
population in order to ensure their survival, and it must
lift all sieges that it currently maintains.

Humanitarian principles, human rights and
international humanitarian law must be respected in
all conflicts. When they are violated, as has happened
blatantly and repeatedly in Syria, where very serious
crimes have been committed that constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity, the only option
is to find a way to hold those responsible for such acts
accountable in a court of law. In that regard, we once
again support the request of Secretary-General Guterres
for specific cases relating to Syria to be referred to the
International Criminal Court. We also hope that there
will be full cooperation with the International Impartial
Independent Mechanism Investigating Serious Crimes
in Syria, established at the end of 2016 to investigate
the serious crimes committed in the country.

With regard to the Astana process, we hope that
the meeting to be held in a few days' time will help to
provide details on the implementation of the violence
de-escalation zones, which must be given transitional
status so that in future the unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic can be maintained.

In conclusion, as we said in 2016 and 2017, we
hope that in 2018 we will see a final end to the conflict
in Syria and the beginning of a political transition
process that is accepted by all the parties, which will
make it possible for its entire population, after so much
suffering, to be part of a better future. That is why we
once again express our support for the role being played
by Special Envoy De Mistura, and we express the hope
that, with the goodwill of all involved, the ceasefire and
direct negotiations can quickly become a reality.

