The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I join other Council members in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his detailed
briefing. We also welcome the participation in today's
Council meeting of His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Palestine, and of the
Permanent Representative of Israel. My delegation
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Over the past month, further efforts have been
made by the international community towards the
resumption of negotiations aimed at achieving a two-
State solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict. Such
collective undertakings have been reflected in a series
of events at various levels and within various
frameworks during the period under review, including
those held on the margins of the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly, such as the meetings of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, of the Quartet
principals and of the League of Arab States Follow-up
Committee on the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as
among the leaders of the United States, Palestine and
Israel. We can also note that, under difficult
circumstances, the Palestinian National Authority has
continued efforts to strengthen socio-economic
stability, security sector reform and functional
institutions for a future State.

The peace process, however, remains clouded
with persistent challenges. Though substantive
progress has been recorded in implementing Council
resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009), Israeli
military incursions, the construction of the separation
wall, the expansion of settlements and the blockade of
Gaza have never ceased, inflicting vast deprivations on
the Palestinian civilian population. Sporadic rocket
attacks have placed civilians in southern Israel under
continuous threat.

It is essential in this context that all parties
concerned should try to shoulder their mutual
obligations under the Road Map, the Madrid terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant
Council resolutions. Constructive dialogue and
political negotiations remain the only viable solutions.
We urge Israel to immediately halt illegal settlement
activity, dismantle outposts erected since March 2001,
open all border crossings, release all Palestinian
prisoners and ensure unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance. We also urge Palestinian
factions to set store by their long-term national
interests, resolve their differences through
reconciliation and jointly work towards the
establishment of a government of national unity.

We note with deep concern the findings contained
in the report (A/HRC/12/48) prepared by the United

09-5573]
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
which was established by the Human Rights Council,
to the effect that Israel seriously violated international
human rights and humanitarian law during the conflict
and failed to extend the required cooperation to the
Mission, and that the rocket and mortar attacks caused
loss of life and property damage to southern Israeli
communities.

My delegation believes it is legitimate that the
report should receive due attention and consideration
by the pertinent United Nations agencies and the
parties involved. Given the extremely explosive nature
of the regional situation, and in the interests of peace
and justice, we underline that the greatest imperative
for all parties concerned is to stop all acts of violence
and strictly comply with international humanitarian
and human rights law, as well as to observe the
paramount priority of ensuring safety and security for
all civilians and for diplomatic and United Nations
premises and personnel.

We share the concern about the delay in the
formation of a new Government in Lebanon after the
parliamentary elections last June. We hope that
negotiations will soon be concluded in a spirit of
consideration and dialogue in order for a new
Government to be formed, representing the interests of
all communities in Lebanon.
At the same time, we welcome the efforts being
made by the Lebanese authorities, in cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), to defuse the tension brought about by the
recent multiple security incidents in southern Lebanon.
We urge Israel to cease flights over Lebanese territory
and withdraw from the northern part of the village of
Ghajar and adjacent areas north of the Blue Line. We
reiterate our support for UNIFIL and the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

Finally, Viet Nam stands ready to join the
international community's unremitting efforts towards
a peaceful settlement of the Israel-Palestine and Arab-
Israel conflicts and the ultimate attainment of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. In
that spirit, we continue to support Russia's initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East in Moscow before the end of this year.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list for this meeting. In View of the lateness of the hour,
I intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.10 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
