Mr. Butagira (Uganda): First of all, I should like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
which has enabled non-members of the Security
Council to participate.

In most parts of Africa and, indeed, of the world,
the AK-47 rifle has become a menace. Lives have been
destroyed, livelihoods disrupted and many people
herded into camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons as a result of use of that weapon. It has been
used by gangsters, robbers and rebels.

Even in some developed countries where the
bearing of arms is a constitutionally guaranteed right,
easy access to small arms has resulted in many deaths.
In some communities, such as that of the Karamojongs
of north-eastern Uganda, the possession of firearms is
seen as a protection measure, mainly against cattle
rustlers from other communities. Those weapons have
also been used to carry out raids to capture cattle. All
the scenarios that I have described are alarming.
Something must be done.

First, the root causes of the proliferation of small
arms in illegal hands must be addressed. Poverty is
sometimes at the centre of the matter, and measures to
eradicate poverty must be put in place.

Secondly, the law and order regime must be

strengthened, including through the provision of

efficient courts and law enforcement agencies, to
obviate the need to defend oneself.

Thirdly, incentives have to be put in place to
encourage the voluntary surrender of arms. For
example, in the Karamoja area of Uganda, such
incentives have included the setting up of business
enterprises and the provision to communities of ox
ploughs and seeds for planting, as well as measures
such as the provision of water to herdsmen to enable
them to live a settled life. The Government of Uganda
has put in place a programme known as the Karamoja
Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme,
which includes some of the measures that I have
outlined. We call on the international community to
support this Programme.

What else has Uganda done? We have put in
place a national action plan on small arms and light
weapons, which was adopted in June 2004. It is a five-
year plan focusing on the strategic themes of control,
reduction and prevention, setting out a framework for
action at the national level. A functional analysis of the
Uganda plan on small arms and light weapons was
carried out in September 2007 by a consultancy
commissioned by the Regional Centre on Small Arms
and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the
Horn of Africa and Bordering States with a view to
rationalizing the functioning of the national plan and
streamlining its organization, structure and staffing.
The report setting out the analysis has already been
released and outlines the challenges at hand.

The key objective in developing a comprehensive
national policy was to address the full spectrum of
issues related to small arms and light weapons and to
provide a basis for the review of national legislation,
regulations and administrative procedures governing
small arms and light weapons. A legal drafting
committee, comprising legal experts, has since
embarked on the drafting of the bill and the policy,
which, upon completion, will be presented to the
Minister of Internal Affairs for submission to the
Cabinet. It is on the basis of that policy that the review
of the Firearms Act and other relevant laws will be
carried out.
I now turn to the issue of stockpile management,
which involves the marking, collection and destruction
of illicit, surplus, obsolete and unserviceable small

arms and light weapons. It remains an obligation of
States parties to the Nairobi Declaration and the
Nairobi Protocol within the region to mark their
weapons by the end of December 2008. So far, the
Uganda Police Force and the Uganda People's Defence
Forces have started to mark their weapons under State
control, including those for licensed civilians.

During May and June 2006, a major destruction
exercise was coordinated under the national plan in
which more than 57,000 small arms and light weapons
were melted down at Steel Rolling Mills in the town
known as J inja. It was billed as the largest single small
arms destruction effort in Africa. A second round of
destroying small arms and light weapons was carried
out on 25 July 2007, and more than 237 tons of such
weapons had been destroyed by November of that year.
In all these endeavours, financial and logistical support
was provided by the United Nations Development
Programme and the United States State Department,
with Saferworld extending technical assistance.

Before I conclude, I want to bring a disturbing
piece of information to the attention of the Council. It
has been reported in some international media that
there is credible evidence that some peacekeepers of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo have been
giving weapons to illegal militias in exchange for gold
and ivory. Among those militias is the notorious
Uganda rebel group known as Allied Democratic
Forces. Obviously, Uganda is concerned. A thorough
investigation should be carried out. We also call on
MONUC to undertake robust action to disarm all
negative forces on the soil of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which pose a threat to peace and stability
in neighbouring countries.

