I thank the Prosecutor for her report and today's informative briefing. At the outset, I would like to affirm Estonia's strong support for the International Criminal Court (ICC) as an independent and impartial judicial institution and an important pillar of the rules-based international order. We welcome the update provided by the Prosecutor on the status of current cases and the progress achieved in the Libya investigations during the previous reporting period. We recognize the challenges arising from the security situation and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that affect the Court's work in Libya. Regarding developments on the ground, Estonia is worried about the 45-per cent rise in civilian casualties caused by the escalation in violence in the first quarter of 2020. We condemn the indiscriminate use of shelling and air strikes, causing death and injury among civilians, and the incidences of arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance, torture and extrajudicial killings. We are further concerned about reports of crimes against migrants and refugees in Libya. We want to recall that attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure may constitute a war crime under the Rome Statute. Estonia calls on parties to the conflict to respect international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Like others, Estonia is highly concerned that there have not been any executions of ICC arrest warrants in the Libya case, meaning that the three fugitives remain at large. We recall that these three individuals are accused of the grave international crimes of murder, torture and inhuman and degrading treatment. Executing the arrest warrants is necessary to provide justice for the victims. Ending impunity is essential for long-term peace. In that regard, we take note of the fact that preparations are moving ahead for possible new applications for arrest warrants. International criminal justice continues to rely on a collective effort. We welcome the assistance provided to the Office of the Prosecutor by States, international and regional organizations, civil society organizations, the Libyan authorities and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. But ultimately, it is we, States, that have to show up and fulfil the clear obligation arising from resolution 1970 (2011) to cooperate with the Court. Therefore, Estonia urges all States, including States that are not party to the Rome Statute, to fully cooperate with the ICC in order to end impunity and establish justice for the victims in Libya, and to demonstrate respect for the rule of law. Finally, let me assure the Prosecutor of Estonia's full support for the work of the ICC in pursuing accountability in Libya.
