Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence of the
Secretary of State of the Chancellery of the President
Poland. It is an honour to have you among us. We also
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.

The Dominican Republic reiterates its grave
concerns about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
demolition and seizure of Palestinian property by
the Israeli authorities continue. Sixty-six buildings
were recently demolished or seized owing to a lack
of construction permits, which are difficult for
Palestinians to obtain as they are issued by the Israeli
authorities. This practice must stop. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the recent incidents caused the displacement of 90
Palestinians, including 58 children.

Although there has been a reduction in violence in
Gaza in recent months, protests continue in peripheral
areas. Last Friday, 2 August, during what was the sixty-
ninth week of the Great March of Return protests, the
Israeli forces again used firearms and other violent
means of controlling the protests. There are reports
of 64 injured, including 27 children. The Dominican
Republic calls on the international community to
condemn all violations of international law and to ensure
that civilians taking part in the protests are protected.

The Dominican Republic continues to defend the
current international consensus whereby the only way
forward for Palestinians and Israelis is the negotiation
of a two-State solution with borders based on the
1967 lines. We reiterate the importance of creating an
enabling environment for peace in order to pave the
way for talks on all final-status issues, including the
issue of Jerusalem.

With regard to Palestinian attacks against Israel,
the Dominican Republic maintains its position,
namely, that we emphatically condemn any act of
violence. The launching of rockets and mortars towards
civilian populations is inhumane and prohibited under
international law. Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad must stop this practice immediately.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories continues to be a source of concern and
could be further undermined if the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), which provides assistance
to over 3 million Palestinians, does not return to a
level of funding that enables it to meet the needs of
at-risk populations. A recent report by the UNRWA
ethics office revealed evidence that UNRWA senior
management has engaged in "sexual misconduct,
nepotism, retaliation, discrimination and other abuses of
authority". As a consequence, two donors, Switzerland
and the Netherlands, immediately suspended their
contributions. Belgium followed suit shortly after.

In conclusion, we urge all the parties concerned to
work together to open the door to talks and to avoid
provocations and soaring rhetoric. We trust that the
work of the international organizations is vital in
providing relief, reducing the risk of violence and
finding a solution to this regrettable situation.

