Mr. Sokona (Mali) (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to speak here today in the Security Council
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On behalf of His Excellency Alpha Oumar Konare,
President of the Republic of Mali and current Chairman
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and also on my own behalf, it is also my
pleasure to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting, and I would like to tell
you what great importance we attach to results of our
work here.

The presence at this meeting of many heads of State,
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
ministers and many eminent persons gives testimony, if
testimony is needed, to the importance that the
international community attaches to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This situation is a critical one. It is characterized by,
inter alia, a deterioration of the military situation, of

 

security conditions and of the humanitarian situation as well
as by human rights violations.

What is to be done? The Security Council and the
international community must take swift and concrete
action. In this connection, I should like to touch on several
points that my delegation believes could contribute to a
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

First, Mali believes that stopping the fighting must be
the top priority, for no military solution to the conflict can
truly resolve the crisis. We call on all parties to the conflict
to implement the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. They must
be determined to respect the Agreement that they
themselves signed. In the same context, we believe that the
United Nations should support the implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement by swiftly deploying a peacekeeping
operation with the appropriate mandate and resources.

Secondly, Mali believes that the establishment of a
lasting peace and of stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo requires the implementation of a genuine process
of national reconciliation among all of the Congolese
people. In this connection, we welcome the appointment of
Sir Ketumile Masire as the neutral facilitator for the inter-
Congolese dialogue, and we assure him of our full support.
With the help of the Organization of African Unity and of
the United Nations, we will thus have grounds for hope that
significant progress can be made in this matter.
Thirdly, it is Mali's view that a lasting settlement of
the conflict requires the parties to make the necessary
arrangements to guarantee the future security, stability and
development of the region. The principles underlying such
arrangements were set out in the statement by the President
of the Security Council of 11 December 1998. They are:
respect for the territorial integrity, political independence
and national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other States in the region; the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign forces; the taking of the
necessary steps to ensure security along the international
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the
re-establishment of the authority of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the whole territory
of the country; respect for human rights and humanitarian
law; and, lastly, dealing with the question of refugees.

Fourthly, we believe that to help attain these
objectives, the convening of an international conference on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity is a welcome proposal,
which Mali fully supports.

In conclusion, I should like to welcome the
initiatives taken at the regional level by, inter alia,
President Chiluba, President Bouteflika and President
Mbeki in support of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would also like to congratulate
the American delegation for having taken the initiative of
convening this meeting today.

