The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Israel, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 3 December
2008 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2008/755 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council, which will
be held on Wednesday, 3 December 2008,
regarding the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in response to a
letter dated 2 December 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/2008/754. I should also like to draw the attention of
Council members to another letter dated 2 December
2008 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, contained in
document S/2008/753.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Libyan Arab J amahiriya.


