Ms. Citaku: It is a great honour to be here in the
Chamber today to represent the youngest democracy in
South-Eastern Europe. We are gathered here only days
after we all commemorated the centennial of the end of
the First World War. As the stories of the few remaining
witnesses to that dark chapter of human history
recently reminded us, a steep price has been paid for
freedom and peace in our old continent. The aftermath
of the Great War also reminds us that peace is not
sustainable unless it is complemented by justice. It is
no coincidence that, before the dust of that terrible war
had settled, our continent was hit yet again by a peril
of unprecedented proportions in the form of the Second
World War, causing a staggering loss of human life.

While the nations of the Western Balkans were
occasional protagonists of that conflict, more often
than not we were a battleground - a stage where
ideals clashed, nations brawled, lives were cut short
and dreams were gutted. Following the Second World
War, a most unfortunate course of events would lead
our region and my dear country, Kosovo, to become the
arena of the last war on the European continent. That
is a war that I remember all too well. I was among the
1 million Kosovar-Albanians who were displaced and
forced out of our homes as part of the ethnic cleansing
campaign carried out by the Serbian military forces.
One million refugees were scattered, twenty thousand
women raped and tens of thousands killed. Many are
still missing.

The wounds of war cannot be healed easily,
especially when the aggressor - the Serbian
State - continues to refuse to take responsibility for
its actions. Does anyone believe that peace in Europe
would have been possible if the perpetrators of the First
and Second World Wars had not been held accountable
for what transpired? Can anyone seriously contend that
it would have been possible for the world to move on
if the instigators of those wars had insisted on moral
parity? There was no moral parity in the First World
War, or in the Second. There is no moral parity in
the Kosovo war either. There is an oppressor and the
oppressed, and we are all acutely aware of who the
oppressor is.

Unfortunately, the President of Serbian only
recently visited Kosovo. Instead of using the visit to
send messages of peace, the Serbian President praised
Milosevic - the person in charge of instigating the
most terrible tragedies in Europe since the World Wars.
Yet we Kosovars refuse to be defined by our painful
past alone. Instead, we choose to identify ourselves
with our capacity to build a better future. We are not
yesterday's victims; we are today's champions. We are
the nation of Majlinda Kelmendi, Distria Krasniqi and
all of the young women who have elevated Kosovo to
the highest pedestals of the Olympics by relying solely
on their own abilities.

We are a nation of youngsters who refuse to accept
failure, who, when given the chance to perform, raise
the bar for everyone else. We are a young republic that
has been recognized by the majority of the free nations
of the world. We are relentless and resolute in repelling
every desperate attempt by our northern neighbour to
undo our accomplishments. And should they try, they
will undoubtedly fail.

Kosovo is its own entity and the President of Kosovo
has the legitimate right to visit any part of Kosovo
without asking for permission from anyone. There was
no incident on the day President Thaci visited Lake
Ujman. As the Kosovo Force confirmed, the incident
unfortunately occurred the day after, when the Serbian
bar owner who offered coffees to the President and his
team was attacked with a bomb by Serbian parallel
structures from the north.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank all of
the Caribbean countries that have reconfirmed their
recognition of Kosovo's independence and sovereignty.
On behalfofthe people ofKosovo, I also want to humbly
express our gratitude to each and every delegation
sitting around this table for everything they have done
for the people of Kosovo. Dozens of statements and
resolutions adopted in this Chamber have made Kosovo
a better place, and the Council was our voice in our
darkest hour of need.

However, we need to acknowledge that the world
has since changed. Kosovo has changed. It is no
longer 1999; it is 2018. Kosovo has moved on and
it is long overdue for the Council to do the same on
the matter of Kosovo. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is not
a peacekeeping mission anymore, and it is certainly
not an administrative mission. The most instructive
illustration of the point that I am trying to make and
convey is resolution 1244 (1999) itself. I urge members
of the Council to go back and read it again. Read it and
the Council will be baffled to find that it refers to an
alternate reality, a world that ceased to exist a long time
ago. Kosovars as a people have been on the receiving
end of the United Nations helping hand. We believe that
the Organization's resources can be put to much better
use in offering solutions to more troubling problems
and crises around the world.

As far as Kosovo is concerned, I implore the
Council to consult the ruling of the International Court
of Justice, which, I might add, was written upon the
request of none other than Serbia itself. The ruling is
precise and unambiguous. It states that Kosovo did
not break any international laws when it declared its
independence one decade ago. Those facts and realities
are indisputable and irreversible. They will not change
now or ever. Kosovo is independent, and it is here to
stay, now and forever.

These meetings do not help peace. These meetings
do not help dialogue. Unfortunately, this Chamber
is being misused. It is being turned into a theatre, a
platform to fuel our own domestic audiences. It is being
used and misused for our own domestic audiences, and
we should not allow that.

Kosovo has undergone a process of painful growth
through which it has come to realize that independence
is not sufficient in and of itself. While we rejoice and
take immense pride in the individual accomplishments
of our champions in sports, the arts and science, our
institutions have a long way to go in order to meet
the rightful expectations of the Kosovar people. Our
Government must do much more to provide higher
quality education, better welfare and more opportunities
for its people. It must also go the extra mile in combating
corruption, nepotism and other negative phenomena
that plague our young republic.

However, while some battles are ours to fight
internally, we will be able to meet other challenges
only if we are completely integrated into the global
community. Kosovo cannot be expected to effectively
battle transnational crime ifit is not part of INTERPOL.
Kosovo cannot, and should not, be a black hole in the
middle of the European continent. We are prepared and
willing to help make not only Kosovo, but our entire
region and Europe at large, safer for its inhabitants. The
Kosovo Police Force - and here the United Nations
should take pride because it helped us to establish it,
19 years ago - meets all the conceivable criteria for
a credible partner in the fight against transnational
crime. It has already helped foil international terrorist
plots and curtail violent extremist groups. It has also
signed over 80 bilateral agreements of cooperation
with counterpart law enforcement agencies around
the world.

However, in order to become a proper contributor
to regional and global security, Kosovo must become
a member of INTERPOL. That is what membership is
about. Frankly speaking, I do not know how on Earth
such an outcome would be a loss for our neighbour. I
really do not know. The matter is not a zero-sum game;
it is quite the opposite, actually. In this day and age,
it is irresponsible to pretend that our nations are not
deeply affected by what happens beyond our borders.
We should view our growing interconnectedness as a
reason to increase cooperation. The fact of the matter
is that those who obstruct Kosovo's membership in
INTERPOL are implicitly aiding organized crime. It is
evident that the only parties who stand to benefit from
keeping Kosovo out of INTERPOL are criminals, drug
cartels and terrorists. The question that must be asked
is: do we really want to be on that list?

The same principle applies to the establishment
of Kosovo's armed forces. First and foremost, I must
emphasize that Kosovo has not engaged in building
an army with the intention of threatening to fight or
invade any land. That is not something we do. We
are actually transforming the mandate of our existing
security forces in order to make them compatible to
contribute to regional and global security to the full
extent of their potential. Our soldiers and officers
have excelled in every single international competition
that they have participated in, proving that they are
ready to give back. Moreover, we are proud to have
the second most diverse security force relative to all
NATO members. In Kosovo we perceive our diversity
as a source of strength. It is an attribute that we cherish
and want to preserve. Hence it is a matter of concern
to see Serbian members of the Kosovo Security Force
be subjected to intense campaigns of intimidation,
which are not limited to the members themselves but
affect their families as well. The Serbian State and its
proxies have left no stone unturned in their endeavour
to stop the process of the transformation of the Kosovo
Security Force.
But let me be clear: no State other than Kosovo, no
other citizens than those of Kosovo, have veto power
over the establishment of our armed forces. The issue is
a matter of sovereign decision, one which Kosovo shall
conclude soon. And again, allow me to be completely
candid: the matter is not something on which we will
ever have a dialogue with Serbia. Also, as the Council
is well aware, the decision is in no way a violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

While we are on the topic of the dialogue, I feel
it is necessary for me to reiterate, on behalf of the
Government of Kosovo, that our country remains
committed to fulfilling all the arrangements previously
agreed to in Brussels with Serbia. However, as the
expression goes, it takes two to tango, and Serbia is not
holding up its end of the bargain. It has consistently
failed to deliver on almost everything that we have
agreed upon, from its disregard for the energy
agreement, which is costing Kosovo millions on an
annual basis, to its unwillingness to recognize Kosovar
diplomats, and many other matters that are hindering
normal interactions for citizens in both our countries.
Furthermore, Serbia has been in violent breach of the
Central European Free Trade Agreement with Kosovo,
dumping its products in order to destabilize our
markets. As such, Kosovo's imposition ofa 10 per cent
tariff on Serbian products was unavoidable. It is both
an economically and a politically sensible measure.
Our Minister for Trade and Industry has sent dozens of
letters to his counterparts in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in Serbia, letters that were never answered.

That of course brings us back to the necessity of
dialogue with Serbia. We all agree that dialogue is the
only path forward for our two countries. Nonetheless,
it is crucial for us to also agree on what that dialogue
is, and what it will never be about. That dialogue is not
about debating Kosovo's right to exist as a free nation
under the sun; rather, it is principally and exclusively
about peace, reconciliation and mutual recognition.
As such, the dialogue will have meaning and produce
results only if we decide to speak in earnest with our
own domestic audiences about the process in Brussels.
Beyond the agreements and papers signed, it is essential
that our neighbours begin to treat us as human beings,
equal in every dimension and endowed with the same
inalienable rights and freedoms.

Dialogue is very important, but we in Pristina
are the ones who decide. We - not people in
Belgrade - decide who represents us. We are proud
that we represent the generation that fought Slobodan
Milosevic. Fatmir Limaj was acquitted twice by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, at
The Hague. And we in Kosovo can look back very
calmly at our own past and not be ashamed of it.

Just two months ago, an 18-year-old boy from
Kosovo was beaten and hospitalized in Serbia because
someone on the streets of Serbia heard him speak the
Albanian language on the phone. Thankfully, that time
he survived. Not long ago, an infant - a baby - was
about to die because Serbian air traffic control refused
to grant a permit for the use ofits airspace to a plane that
was due to land in Pristina. Indulge me for a moment and
think about this - Serbian air traffic control officials
refused to grant a permit for the use of airspace to a
plane because it was headed for Pristina, even when it
could have saved a baby's life. That behaviour is beyond
comprehension. In another instance, dozens of buses
carrying Kosovo Albanians were attacked with stones
as they passed through Serbia because Kosovo was their
destination. Another case in point is the Kosovar artists
and scholars who are banned from entering Serbia in
the first place, even though the purpose of their travel to
Belgrade is to promote peace and dialogue. Such issues
transcend politics. However, they are exceptionally
more hurtful when the State is complicit. An innocent
infant was about to die in the sky in September because
Serbian authorities refused to grant a simple request by
an international aircraft operator.

We can agree or disagree on various and numerous
counts, but we cannot and will not discuss placing a
price tag on human life. There are no circumstances
that can justify that horrendous notion becoming the
subject of negotiation. In fact, it is shameful that a
European Union candidate country is utilizing such
despicable tools to make a political point. An agreement
between States can be meaningful and sustainable only
if it is an agreement between people that brings about
more secure peace and better living standards for those
involved - not if it triggers the opposite outcome. Our
northern neighbours may have their doubts. However,
we in Kosovo know exactly where we stand, where
we are headed and where we belong - in Europe.
We are reminded of that every day by our brave and
courageous journalists who work fiercely to hold our
politicians to account. We are constantly reminded of
that by our athletes, men and in particular, women, who
defy the odds and bring gold medals back home. We
are reminded of that by our vibrant youth who excel
in science and technology, explore new frontiers and
experiment with cutting-edge innovations to find
answers to the questions of the future.

We are reminded of that by brave women like Vasfije
Krasniqi. Vasfije was only 16 years old when she was
taken from the arms of her mother by Serbian military
forces in the spring of 1999. She was raped. They did
not kill her because, as she herself has testified, they
explicitly told her "you will all suffer more if we keep
you alive". Little did they know that Vasfij e would grow
up to become an incredible woman, a mother of two
beautiful daughters, and nearly two decades later she
would return home stronger and braver than ever to
teach all ofus a lesson aboutjustice. That lesson is about
the justice that was once denied to her. It is a lesson
of perseverance - about never giving up. Despite the
best efforts to make Vasfije a victim, she is not one.
She is a hero. And heroes like her define my country.
The lessons of war still speak to us, reminding us that
progress must never be taken for granted. Kosovo has
borne witness to the worst of humankind. We live in
the absence of justice for the dead, the wounded, the
raped and the missing. Remorse cannot do justice to
such suffering. We believe that every act of aggression,
terror, cruelty and oppression must have repercussions,
for hatred shall never prevail.

As Kosovars, we have a responsibility to do better.
We are determined to honour the lives that might have
been by ensuring that their sacrifice was not made in
vain. Their memory has fuelled our transformation and
empowered our sense of purpose. They have inspired
our collective commitment to realizing the dreams of
the fallen and our persistent efforts to pursue a future
of enduring peace and prosperity. We know that those
ideals are not easy to achieve, but they are nonetheless
worth striving for. However daunting the odds may be
and however big the challenges may seem, everyone
can rest assured that Kosovo will never give up. We
are a young republic, one that is far from perfect, but
also one that will not stop striving to become better for
all its citizens, regardless of their ethnic or religious
background. Because that is how we keep our promise
to our children. That is the Kosovo we are fighting for.

