Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
briefing us at such short notice.

Malaysia is alarmed at the escalating violence in
eastern Ukraine since the last Security Council meeting
on the subject (see S/PV.7365), less than a week ago.
Since then we have seen a repeat of indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. On 22 January a public transport
stop in the city of Donetsk was shelled, with as many
as 15 people killed and more than 20 civilians injured.
Two days later, at least 30 people, including two
children, were killed in the city of Mariupol, and more
than 100 civilians injured. Malaysia condemns such
indiscriminate attacks in the strongest terms. It is most
unfortunate that the latest violence in Mariupol did not
even merit the Security Council's condemnation, owing
to a lack of consensus among Council members on the
draft press statement. Malaysia calls for an independent
investigation into the incidents. The perpetrators of
such heinous crimes against civilians must be held
accountable. We would like to remind the parties to the
conflict that they should adhere to international human-
rights and humanitarian law. Attacks on humanitarian
convoys must also cease immediately.

The recent events have seriously undermined the
ceasefire agreement reached in September of last year
between the conflicting parties. Malaysia strongly urges
the relevant parties to comply with their commitments
as outlined in the Minsk protocol of5 September and the
memorandum of 9 September. The latest developments
in eastern Ukraine prove that a diplomatic and political
solution is more urgent than ever. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes all efforts that could facilitate a
de-escalation of the crisis and contribute to ending the
conflict, including the possibility of resuming Geneva-
format negotiations. As Malaysia stated last week (see S/PV.7365), a military solution would be in no one's
interests in the long run and would not be suitable.

Seventy years after the establishment of the United
Nations, we still see blatant disregard today for the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly respect for countries' sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Malaysia urges the relevant parties
to reflect on the consequences of such actions for their
long-term interests and international standing. We
reiterate our call to the relevant parties to explore all
possible avenues for finding a peaceful solution. We are
committed to playing a constructive role in the Council
in order to de-escalate the crisis and see talks resume so
as to restore Ukraine's stability and territorial integrity.

