Mr. Mukerji (India): I hank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank the
Secretary-General for his quarterly report (S/2015/151)
and our briefers this morning.

This is a critical decade of transformation for
Afghanistan. India is proud to call itself Afghanistan's
first strategic partner. We share the Afghan people's
vision of a strong, independent, united and prosperous
State, for which so many Afghans have sacrificed so
much. India stands ready to do all that is possible within
our capacities and means to work with the Afghan
Government and its people to realize that great vision.

Afghanistan's historic political transition remains
on course. The patience, forbearance, courage and
democratic aspiration of the people of Afghanistan
have strengthened that process. A priority is to
complete the task of Government formation as rapidly
as possible so that all Government ministries can start
functioning normally. The ministries have to deliver
the public services that the Afghan people have been
waiting for for so long. In that context, we welcome
the appointments of some of the key ministers, and
express India's hope that the remaining process will be
completed as soon as possible.

We note that the national unity Government has set
itself two important political tasks: lectoral reforms and
the organization of a constitutional loya jirga. We hope

that those tasks will be completed soon, particularly the
task of electoral reforms.

We are concerned at what the latest report of the
Secretary-General tells us about the security situation
inside Afghanistan. The report states,

"In terms of incidents recorded over the past 13
years, 2014 was the second-highest, after 2011."
(S/2015/151, para. 12)

That, of course, was the year when Osama Bin Laden
was neutralized. Those incidents are a matter of great
concern.

The Secretary-General's report substantiates our
view that it is terrorism, and not tribal differences or
ethnic rivalries, that is the main source ofinsecurity and
instability in Afghanistan. Terrorist groups, including
the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, are active despite the efforts of
the valiant personnel of the Afghan National Security
Forces and the international coalition forces. It is
obvious that their activity cannot be sustained without
systematic State support from beyond Afghanistan's
borders. Reports indicate terrorist groups are mutating
into more virulent forms, in a region already impacted
by terrorism. The Council must act against that threat
with a sense of urgency.

The Secretary-General's report mentions the
London Conference on Afghanistan. In today's global
economic situation, when the feeling of aid fatigue
exists in most traditional donor countries, Afghanistan's
economic transition will have to be also supported by
a private-sector-led process. President Ghani has taken
a lead on issues of connectivity, and we welcome and
encourage all members of the international community
to reciprocate that step in full measure.

As a lead country of the trade, commerce and
investment confidence-building measure under the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, India has gained
appropriate experience on this issue. Both Afghanistan's
lack of connectivity to sea ports as well as to the faster
growing economic regions of Asia are major constraints
for private sector investment in Afghanistan.

India, Afghanistan and Iran are examining how
the existing port of Chabahar in Iran can be developed
to help Afghanistan connect with the outside world.
India has unilaterally offered Afghanistan access to
Attari on our side of the India-Pakistan international
border for Afghan trucks and goods that until now
have transit rights only up to Wagah on the Pakistan
side. The implementation of that offer would provide
Afghanistan significant access to one of the fastest
growing economic markets in our region. The proposed
motor vehicles agreement of our regional organization,
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation,
would further facilitate the movement of goods and
people from Afghanistan.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan must continue to play a leading role in
shaping and coordinating the international community's
efforts to assist Afghanistan's political and economic
reconstruction process. UNAMA must also focus on
the important role it plays in ensuring the delivery of
valuable humanitarian and development assistance to
Afghanistan. The recent avalanches in the northern
regions of Afghanistan only underscore the importance
of this point.

Finally, we reiterate our commitment to stay the
course in Afghanistan.

