Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting as a
follow-up to the Security Council summit held last
September. As the Council's role continues to evolve in
order to respond to the constantly changing realities of
today's world, it is important to review its effectiveness
from time to time, to identify the problems it faces and
to set priorities for its activities.

My delegation supports the general thrust of the
declaration attached to Security Council resolution
1318 (2000), which was adopted at the conclusion of
the Millennium Summit. It is particularly significant
that the Council then pledged to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations in addressing
conflict at every stage - from prevention to settlement
to post-conflict peace-building - with a particular
focus on Africa. As my delegation stressed at the open
meeting on peace-building held last month, the
problems of conflict and development in Africa
demand the urgent and committed attention of the
international community.

As acknowledged in the declaration attached to
resolution 1318 (2000), there is a long list of issues
that deserve to be discussed. But today I would like to
focus on a few points that we believe are of
fundamental importance.

First is the need to take a comprehensive and
integrated approach in addressing a conflict situation.
Such an approach must include economic and social
dimensions in addition to political and military
dimensions. Conflicts cannot be prevented nor peace-
building achieved at the post-conflict stage unless the
root causes of the conflict are addressed, and this
requires efforts for reconstruction, development and
capacity-building. The multifaceted mandates of many
recent United Nations missions around the world are
testimony to this requirement.

To ensure the effectiveness of such an approach,
the Council must be particularly mindful of the
importance of ensuring the smooth transition from one
stage of conflict prevention and peace-building to the
next. This requires a clear and coherent strategy
throughout the entire process of United Nations
involvement. Most importantly, utmost attention must
be given to avoiding any gaps in the international
assistance required at different stages, particularly at a
point of transition from one stage to another, because
such a gap could bring to naught any progress achieved
in preceding stages. This point will be particularly
salient when we consider, for example, the United
Nations presence in East Timor after its independence.

The cooperation of the entire international
community is also essential. As my delegation has
stressed on other occasions, players outside of Council
must also be mobilized and fully involved to attain full
cooperation. Non-Council Member States that commit
their personnel as well as financial resources to United
Nations efforts must be mobilized in order to ensure
the success of any peace effort. Relevant regional
organizations can also provide valuable insight and
assistance to the Council.

Needless to say, the creation of a sound
foundation for peace-building requires the cooperation
of various agencies and institutions, such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund. Indeed, it is essential
to involve these States and institutions at the earliest
planning stage. In this regard, we strongly support the
Council's recent practice of holding full-scale debates
involving troop-contributing countries, major donors
and relevant agencies and institutions. We strongly
hope this practice will be continued.

Before concluding, I would like to mention here
once again an obvious but unfulfllled requirement,
namely Security Council reform. As reflected in the
Millennium Declaration, which was unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly last September, it is
essential that the Security Council be reformed to
reflect the realities of today's world so as to enhance
the effectiveness and legitimacy of the Council itself.
Although it was disappointing that the declaration of
the Security Council summit made no reference to the
need for such a reform, we hope that the Council,
particularly its permanent members, will remain
committed to the cause of Council reform.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that the subject of
today's meeting requires the continued attention of the
Council. We also realize that the subject is indeed a
broad and complex one and needs to be addressed by
the General Assembly as well. The subject requires full
discussion with the broad participation of the Member
States, and I thank you once again, Mr. President, for
organizing today's meeting.

