Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to begin by
congratulating you on having assumed the presidency
of the Council and to thank you for having convened
this debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. We are called once
again to discuss the need for a peace process that
would lead us to the realization of a Palestinian State
living side by side with the State of Israel, and to bring
an end to Israel's illegal military occupation of
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories.

I welcome the new members of the Council:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and
Nigeria. We know that they will always act in defence
of the principles of the Charter of our Organization. I
would also like to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.

This year marks the sixty-second year of the
looting of the Palestinian people of their homes, their
ancestral lands and of their most fundamental and
inalienable human rights. It is also the forty-third year
of brutal military occupation by Israel, marked by
death, physical and psychological aggression, blockades,
ethnic cleansing, imprisonment and humiliation. It has
also been a year since the brutal Israeli invasion and
occupation of Gaza, the damage to which, exacerbated
by the continued blockade, has been amply
documented and will have harmful effects on the
Palestinian population for decades. The international
community demands that those responsible for this
massacre be tried before impartial tribunals.

We cannot allow Israel to continue to play with
human lives and with the rights of Palestinians,
Syrians, Lebanese and those in neighbouring countries.
How long are we going to meet in the Security
Council, calling for open debates and consultations,
adopting resolutions, and discussing an issue
concerning which our Organization has already decided
what must be done? The United Nations must meet its
historic responsibility.

Or is it perhaps possible that some Member State
still has doubts about the content of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), which called for the creation of two
States in Palestine, one Arab and one Jewish. Also
clear and transparent are Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1701 (2006) on Lebanon and
497 (1981) on the Syrian Golan Heights. The
fundamental problem does not lie in the content of

these resolutions, but rather in the fact that Israel, the
occupying Power, has not been required to comply
with them. Those who are responsible for enforcing
compliance are the permanent members of this
Council, in particular one of them, the primary
accomplice and ally of Israel.

The reality is that the issue of the Israeli
occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories has not
been resolved because Israel and its primary ally do not
want to resolve it. From its beginnings, Israel has had
its own clearly defined road map: the absorption of the
entire Palestinian territory, the exile of that people
along with the corresponding Judaization of the
territory, and the expansion of its own State - all in
full sight and with the consent of the members of this
Council.

Illegal settlements throughout the Palestinian
territory, walls that divide houses and neighbourhoods,
ethnic cleansing that is being carried out, and the
usurpation of East Jerusalem all point to a policy of
absorption. The solution based on two States living
together side by side is something that Israel has never
contemplated.

As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Nicaragua fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt as
Chairman of our Movement. We condemn Israel's
illegal occupation of all of the Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese territories, and we demand its immediate
withdrawal. We condemn the Israeli policy and practice
of building and/or not dismantling settlements, the
inhuman blockade of Gaza and the bantustanization of
the West Bank and other Palestinian territories.

It is high time for the international community to
move from declarations and resolutions to action.
Recognition by the entire international community of
the Palestinian State would send a clear message that
all the resolutions we have adopted must begin to be
implemented. We do not understand why there some
still who refuse to acknowledge that at this point. Thus
far, only the Palestinian side has made commitments,
whereby it has demonstrated its desire for peace. It is
time now for the permanent members of the Council to
demand that Israel make a commitment to peace and to
a solution to this question in conformity with United
Nations resolutions.
There is a manifest universal consensus in favour
of speeding up the peace process; only Israel opposes
it. Thus, in order to get the job done, it is crucial that
those who support Israel take appropriate action to
ensure that Israel commits to the peace process. If
Israel will not commit to an acceptable timetable, the
Security Council must take appropriate measures as
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
Palestinians, strengthening their unity with the support
of the Arab nation, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
rest of the international community, must prepare for
their own declaration of independence, for their free
and sovereign State, and for their admission as a full
Member of this Organization.

