Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the personal participation in
today's meeting of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia,
Colombia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, which we
consider extremely important given the Secretary-
General's assessment that the peace process in Colombia
is at a very critical stage.

At the risk of attracting your ire, Mr. President, I
would nonetheless like to thank Ms. Rosa Salamanca and
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for the presentation
of the Secretary-General's report (S/20l9/265) and the
substantive description of the work of the Mission and
the developments in the country's situation in the past
three months.

Russia has always been a friend of Colombia and
Colombians. As a permanent member of the Security
Council, we have unfailingly provided support to the
Colombian peace process and intend to continue doing
so. We are very encouraged by the fact that Colombia's
first steps towards a sustainable peace have already
become an inspiration for many other problem regions.
However, in calling ourselves friends of Colombia,
we do not define a friend as somebody who says only
nice things. We will therefore be honest about what
we believe it is important to say, which is that we are
concerned about the situation of the Colombian peace
process, and we are in full agreement with the opinion
of the Secretary-General's report that the country is at
a major crossroads.

Much has been done in the two and a half years
since the signing of the life-changing Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace to consolidate peace in the country.
Now it is important not to go backwards or allow
any reversals in the country's national reconciliation
process, which is a difficult one but the only right
way. In that regard, we were extremely alarmed by the
worrying assessments in the Secretary-General's report
and by other international stakeholders in connection
with Bogota's decision to return the bill for the statutory
law for the Special Jurisdiction for Peace for changes.
We know that the decision has caused more than 150
public organizations to call on the people to stage a
nationwide strike. We share that concern, and support
the Secretary-General's call for enacting the statute for
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as soon as possible.

We unquestionably appreciate the explanations of
Mr. Trujillo, who has come to New York to meet with
Council members in person and who has informed us in
detail about the motives behind the proposed changes.
We respect that, and we certainly do not intend to
interfere in Columbia's internal proceedings. However,
in turning to the Security Council, the Colombians have
entrusted us, the members of the Council, with a major
share of the responsibility for the success of the peace
process and a common duty to live up to that trust.

That is why the Security Council and the Secretary-
General made the decision to use their authority in
support of the specific text and all the key provisions
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, including on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. And it is now extremely
important to ensure that the agreements that were
reached remain unchanged. I will not go into detail
about the report's critical assessments, of which there
are a considerable number. For example, one of the
pivotal elements of the peace process, comprehensive
rural reform, has still not been fully realized. There is a
complex tangle of problems related to ensuring security
in areas where the central Government's presence
is weak.

The crop substitution programme is also delayed.
Regrettably, we saw no optimistic signs in the report
about a dialogue between the Government and the
armed groups. Needless to say we condemn the
terrorist act of 17 January, but we also firmly believe
that a lasting solution can be achieved only through
direct dialogue with those who are ready to talk and
reach an agreement. We are not seeing enough progress
in the legal, socioeconomic and political reintegration
of former combatants. The issue of their security and
employment remains urgent, and all of this leads to
growing numbers of dissidents. The humanitarian
demining programme is stalled and there are reports
that mines have again been planted in previously
cleared areas.

There are other worrying developments that for
whatever reasons are omitted or given inadequate
attention in the Secretary-General's report. Thus we
are beginning to see pockets of discontent among the
population about the delays in the implementation of
key provisions ofthe peace agreement. In south-western
Colombia, for example, the indigenous population has
been blocking one of the country's main transport
arteries, the Pan-American Highway, for nearly a
month. The illegal armed groups that have resorted to
using terror against the Indian population are trying
to exploit the situation and thereby fuelling popular
discontent. The problem of the internally displaced
remains serious. Halfa century ofconflict has displaced
more than 7 million people, that is, one in six of the
population, and that figure has unfortunately continued
to worsen. We realize that Colombia is dealing with an
additional burden in the form of the influx of refugees
from Venezuela, and we believe that the international
community should help Bogota to address that.
The developments regarding Venezuela should not
become a factor that hinders the implementation of the
peace agreement.

We have also noted the opinion of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
Colombia's human rights problems are also directly
related to the setbacks in implementing the final
peace agreement. Nor can we ignore the view of the
International Committee of the Red Cross that the
current situation in the country is even more problematic
that when the Havana peace agreement was signed.
There are at least five internal conflicts in Colombia
that are still going on and are even intensifying. Four
significant anti-Government groups are involved in
them, and according to Colombia's Ministry of Defence
they involve as many as 10,000 combatants. We should
point out that according to the Secretary-General's
reports, the number of ex-combatants who had taken up
arms again by the end of 2018 was up to almost 2,000,
including five top military leaders and a significant
number of field commanders.

In this highly sensitive situation, it is very important
to restore trust in the peace process among those who
have met their share of obligations under it in good
faith. As friends of Columbia, we have to say straight
out that the international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council expect the current
Colombian Administration to comply strictly with its
obligations under the peace agreement. We are ofcourse
pleased with the Secretary-General's assessment that
Colombia's political leaders are committed to the peace
process, but we urge them not to stop there. It will be
essential to consolidate and build on the progress that
has been made, consulting with the signatories to the
agreement at every stage. It will be difficult to bring an
end to the armed conflict without that.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the Security
Council has frequently pointed out that Colombia is
the poster-child for how international support can and
should be provided, through close cooperation with a
host Government in the leading role, and a responsible
attitude on the part of the whole of society. It is the
national ownership demonstrated by the Colombian
people and their desire to seek a sustainable political
solution that have made peace in their country possible.
We hope that the United Nations Verification Mission in
Columbia, which we support, will continue to contribute
to the implementation of the peace agreement and play
a major role in facilitating the reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo into civilian life and
political activities.

