Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to welcome the presence here of His
Excellency Mr. Goran Svilanovic, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
listened with interest to his statement, and we believe it
important to continue to make every effort to
implement the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council on Kosovo. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his useful
and informative briefing on the functioning of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

We think that with the success achieved by
UNMIK during the 28 October elections - in
particular the respect for electoral rules and
procedures, the participation of such a great part of the
population and the absence of violence during the
vote - a significant hurdle has been overcome. This
progress should be buttressed with a View to
elaborating, with the agreement of all the parties to the
conflict, a vision of the substantially autonomous
regime foreseen in Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). We believe that the new situation prevailing
throughout the Balkans makes it possible to envisage
the holding of constructive political dialogue on the
future of Kosovo. The new disposition of the province
should taken into consideration the rights of all the
inhabitants to security, to have their differences

S/PVAZA')

 

respected and to participate in public life. Further, this
disposition should abolish hatred and attitudes based
on ethnic considerations and should promote the
peaceful coexistence of all the communities. In this
context we think that the inhabitants of Kosovo should
discuss the elaboration of a pact for Kosovo society.

I would like to express my delegation's concern
about the fresh outbreak of acts of violence in Kosovo.
These are the sort of acts that undermine the
international community's efforts and their political
nature seems designed to destabilize the region. These
acts are unacceptable. In this regard we welcome the
UNMIK initiative to create a group charged with
examining the political violence, and we also welcome
the efforts aimed at strengthening UNMIK's work in
the security field, in particular its work to protect high-
risk individuals.

Furthermore, we express our great concern
regarding the heightened level of armed clashes in the
Presevo Valley. This violence has already led to a flood
of displaced persons in the interior of Kosovo and has
contributed to making the situation more complex. We
encourage the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK to
persist in their efforts to restrict the activities of
extremists. In this regard we subscribe to the idea that
the presence of international organizations in and
around the security zone can improve the situation and
strengthen the confidence of the population. In
addition, the Belgrade authorities' expressed
willingness to find a solution to the problem of persons
of Albanian extraction in southern Serbia and to
promote the return of displaced persons, in particular
by strengthening confidence measures, is encouraging.

The issue of detainees and people who have
disappeared is particularly sensitive. It remains one of
the principal sources inter-ethnic tension in Kosovo.
We note with satisfaction that, following the
designation of a Special Envoy on Persons Deprived of
Liberty, an office charged with dealing with this issue
has been created. In this regard we encourage all the
parties to take appropriate steps to ensure the well-
being and security of the detainees and to find a
definitive solution to this issue.

The establishment of a reliable and impartial
judicial system is essential for the re-establishment of
peace in Kosovo. The impartial and non-discriminatory
application of the laws will strengthen the confidence
of the inhabitants of Kosovo in the rule of law-

which alone can ensure the peaceful coexistence of all
the ethnic communities. My delegation welcomes the
progress achieved in this field and urges UNMIK to
continue its efforts, in particular to implement the
recommendations of the report on the criminal justice
system in Kosovo.

The issue of refugees and displaced persons is
crucial to the search for a lasting solution in Kosovo. It
is important therefore to ensure that satisfactory
conditions exist for the return of former inhabitants. In
particular the security of minority communities should
be strengthened. This issue is all the more vital because
of the spontaneous nature of many returns. In this
context we salute the laudable efforts of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In conclusion, I would like to pay vigorous
tribute to Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
and to thank him for his tireless efforts and for his
commitment to the work of the international
community. I also congratulate his successor, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, and wish him complete success in his new
role.

