Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to associate myself with other speakers in
welcoming the initiative of your country, Mr. President,
to organize this open debate. The choice of this subject
reaffirms the sustained commitment of your country to
contribute to the strengthening of the United Nations,
as Mr. Leonid Kuchma, President of Ukraine,
explained so well in his letter of 27 February 2001
addressed to the Secretary-General.

The relevance of the choice of this subject has
been shown in the statements made by representatives
of States Members of the United Nations, and in our
view, this is a valuable contribution to assisting the
Security Council and further strengthening its ability to
discharge, with due effectiveness and credibility, the
responsibilities conferred upon it under the Charter.
Furthermore, this is the subject matter, as well as the
objective, of resolution 1318 (2000) and, now, six
months after the adoption of the resolution, we must
take stock of the follow-up given by the Security
Council to the commitments that it undertook at the
highest level.

In this regard, and after having listened with great
interest to the various statements, my delegation would
like to make several points. First, in engaging in an
assessment of the results achieved by the Council in
implementing the various provisions of resolution 1318
(2000), we must keep in mind from the outset that the
resolution contains short-term and medium-term
commitments, as well as others for which
implementation will require more time. Consideration
of the results of the work of the Security Council
during the six months that followed the adoption of
resolution 1318 (2000) reveals that the Council has
begun to provide effective follow-up for several of
these commitments, in particular those that lent
themselves to immediate implementation. This is
especially the case with regard to the adoption of
measures within the framework of resolution 1327
(2000) following up the Brahimi report, in order to
make it possible to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations in peacekeeping operations. These
measures include spelling out the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and strengthening cooperation
and consultation with troop-contributing countries.

Secondly, if they are to be effectively
implemented, the objectives set out in resolution 1318
(2000) will require concrete support from all Member
States and bodies of the United Nations, each in
accordance with its mandate and competencies, and
from all the international and regional organizations
involved. In this regard, we welcome the fact that the
Council has been careful to ensure that, during
consideration of certain items on its agenda, it has
worked in close cooperation with the regional and
subregional organizations, in particular those in Africa,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States. We also welcome the Council's initiative to
meet with the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement in connection with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These initiatives,
in particular those concerning partnerships with
regional organizations, together with the Security
Council missions to certain regions, are a clear
demonstration of the Council's commitment to
strengthening the effectiveness of its role by engaging
in direct contact with the parties that are in the best
position to help it grapple with the problems under
discussion and to provide appropriate responses.

Thirdly, the concept of the maintenance of
international peace and security, which experience has
shown to be one that is evolving, can no longer be
restricted only to conventional peacekeeping
operations. This was demonstrated both during
discussions of the Brahimi report and during the
thematic Council debates, in particular that on
peace-building, which my country initiated during its
presidency of the Council during the month of
February. The debate on peace-building, as well as the
presidential statement that followed, highlighted the
fact that, if international peace and security are to be
maintained in a sustainable way, there is a need to
provide for the drawing up and implementation of a
comprehensive, consistent, integrated and joint strategy
to tackle, effectively and with determination, the
underlying causes of conflict, in particular those of an
economic and social nature. This clearly must be a
collective undertaking, and it can succeed only if all
those involved take on their part of the responsibility
within the framework of coordinated action.

Fourthly, our debate today has demonstrated that
strengthening the effectiveness and credibility of the
Council is a concern we all share, and one that should
continue to be at the top of the Council's priorities. In
this regard, we believe that the Security Council should
follow-up the expectations of the Member States of the
Organization by continuing down the path of
enshrining transparency in its work and by proceeding
to the necessary reforms in the area of sanctions. Those
reforms should lead to institutionalizing clear and
precise parameters, common to all sanctions regimes
imposed under the Charter, and should take into
account the adverse impact of sanctions and the
provisions of the Charter, in particular those of Article
50.

We cannot, of course, say that the Security
Council has always been able to respond - and
respond positively - to every expectation of the
international community. Examples of this, although
not unique ones, are those of protecting the Palestinian
civilian population of the occupied territories and the
final lifting of sanctions against Libya and against the
Iraqi population. It is clear that the lethargy of the
Council should prompt us to preserve its credibility. I
agree with Ambassador Greenstock that the Council
does not have a magic wand. That is true; but the
Council must also have the capacity to evaluate the
urgency of situations and to react to them without
making any calculation beyond the desire to preserve
peace and security.

In closing, I would like to emphasize that while
the main responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security devolves upon the
Security Council, the success of any undertaking in
that area is a collective responsibility. That
responsibility must be reflected at all levels and by all
actors involved through genuine political will and the
mobilization of all necessary means - in particular
financial ones - to meet the challenges of peace,
stability and development, which are integral elements
of any effort that we want to a lasting one.

The Secretary-General said this morning that the
resolutions of the Security Council are not self-
implementing. As the international community we must
all see to it that we ensure their implementation.

