Prince Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and to extend my appreciation to your
predecessor for her efforts in administering the work of
the Council during the month of June.

We are gravely concerned at the dangerous
escalation in our region as a result of the engagement
between Israeli forces and Hizbollah that quickly
escalated throughout the past week, resulting, as is
usual in such circumstances, in civilian casualties. I
wish to reiterate the Jordanian Government's clear
position in condemning the practice of violence and the
killing of civilians, whoever they may be.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan strongly condemns the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon, its use of force and actions outside
the scope of international law, leading to the loss of
innocent lives and the destruction of civil institutions
and infrastructure in Lebanon. What is taking place in

Lebanon runs counter to our vision of a region living in
peace and prospering as a result of reform efforts and
democratic processes. The region, as we see it today,
is, unfortunately, headed towards destruction. Indeed,
the region will suffer significant strategic losses as a
result of disproportionate Israeli military operations in
Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territories -
actions in blatant, grave violation of the provisions of
international law - but also as a result of the positions
of some radical groups that run contrary to our vision
of peace. Those groups have chosen to advocate and
promote violence and escalation rather than align
themselves with the track initiated in Madrid in
1990 - a peace process that we all have been working
so hard to maintain over the past years so that peace
could be enjoyed by all the peoples of the region.
Clearly, they chose violence and escalation over
contributing to the building of a sustainable peace.

A decision to go to war is not taken by a faction
or a group. Legitimate Governments should act
responsibly and in accordance with international law
and international legitimacy. In this context, I wish to
reaffirm Jordan's position in supporting Lebanon's
unity and enabling the Lebanese Government to
exercise full sovereignty over all of its territory.

The Jordanian Government views these
dangerous developments with grave concern. My
Government warns against taking any measures that
could undermine Lebanon or its sovereignty and which
could lead to unforeseen results. Accordingly, Jordan
calls on the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities to stop this dangerous escalation. It
calls on all parties to de-escalate and to take rational
and responsible steps to prevent any further
aggravation of the situation, and it also calls on all
parties within and neighbouring the Middle East region
to cease any other provocative activities.

I wish, on behalf of the Jordanian Government, to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
efforts to resolve this crisis.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is continuing to deteriorate due to the
continuing excessive military operations by the
occupying Israeli forces in Gaza and in various areas of
the West Bank, which lead, on a daily basis, to the
death of innocent Palestinian civilians. I reiterate my
Government's condemnation of Israel's continued
widespread military operations in the occupied
Palestinian territories and of the use of collective
punishment that Israel imposes on the Palestinian
people. This has caused a serious humanitarian crisis
that threatens also to cause a security catastrophe in the
Palestinian occupied territories.

We call on both sides, Israeli and Palestinian, to
respect all signed agreements reached between them,
including the understandings reached at Sharm el-
Sheikh. We call on them to put an end to all measures
that could further escalate and aggravate the situation.
We call on them to focus, alternatively, on the political
process. In particular, we call on Israel to respect
international law that it violates with great indifference
and to end all practices that violate the human rights of
the Palestinian population, including all forms of
occupation.

We condemn Israel's continued restrictions on the
freedoms of the Palestinian population, its military
measures, its ongoing settlement activities and the
building of the separation wall - practices that do not
help the Palestinian Authority implement its part of the
parallel obligations under the road map. We call on all
Palestinian groups and factions to deal with the
situation in a way that serves supreme Palestinian
interests and aspirations. We applaud President Abbas
for his genuine efforts to contain the situation and
revive the political process.

Peace in the Middle East requires an end to the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories on
the basis of internationally binding resolutions. It
requires that a final, agreed solution be found to the
Palestinian refugee problem, on the basis of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). To achieve this result,
all concerned parties need to take responsible steps,
motivated by strong political will, to stop the current
escalation across the board and immediately resume
negotiations, because unilateral measures and the use
of force will not lead to a lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.
Military operations do not lead to stability and
security in the region. We therefore call for an
immediate ceasefire and for the exercise of maximum
self-restraint. We all realize the different political and
security challenges we face in the region. We call for
an immediate return to the peace process. Failing that,
the region will suffer devastation to the extent that it
will be very difficult to start over from any
recognizable point.

