Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the initiative of the Polish presidency
to convene this high-level debate, and thank it for
the concept note (S/2019/643, annex), which calls on
us to reflect on the current challenges to peace and
security in the Middle East. We particularly welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of Poland and
thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti for her important
briefing this afternoon.

Peru has forged and maintained ties with the Middle
East thanks to its Hispanic heritage. We recognize
the rich cultural, religious and ethnic diversity of
its peoples, as well as their unwavering yearning for
peace and prosperity. It is therefore regrettable that
the region continues to be a place of numerous violent
confrontations, of varying scale and intensity, in which
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights devastate the civilian population.

The hundreds of thousands of victims in Syria after
more than nine years of bloody fighting, the constant
famine and outbreaks of disease in Yemen and the
confinement and lack of hope and opportunities for the
people in Gaza are just a few examples of that harsh
reality. This tragic panorama is further compounded
by the threat posed by terrorist groups and criminal
organizations, as well as by the use of the Middle East
as an ideal market for the large-scale sale of various
types of military equipment.

We believe that the international community can
help by supporting the establishment of robust and
inclusive institutions that can prevent and resolve the
differences that naturally arise among the peoples of
the region. That entails building capacities to meet the
expectations of the people, including protecting and
promoting their human rights and recognizing their
legitimate aspirations, especially those of minorities,
women and young people. It also means consolidating
the rule of law to promote economic growth and aligning
humanitarian assistance with development plans that
offer hope and opportunities to the civilian population,
in accordance with the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Another great challenge we must address is
the plight of the millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons, which requires not only the
availability of financial resources but, primarily, the
political will to ensure them a safe and dignified return
under internationally accepted parameters.

This Organization in general, and the Security
Council in particular, has a crucial role to play
in that regard - to demand strict adherence with
its resolutions, thereby ensuring full respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights as a
fundamental measure to protect civilian populations,
strengthening international cooperation to effectively
combat terrorism and safeguarding non-proliferation
regimes on weapons of mass destruction.

Special priority should also be given to conflict
prevention, which requires coordinating strategic
actions for mediating and facilitating dialogue,
developing early-warning systems, building confidence
and promoting good practices and assisting countries
interested in replicating them. In short, we must
preserve an international order based on norms as a
minimum basis for coexistence in today's convulsed
and interdependent world.

To that end, Peru stresses that any analysis of the
realities of the Middle East must address the urgent
need to find a solution to the question of Palestine,
which includes promoting the resumption of direct
negotiations leading to the two-State solution. The
Arab Peace Initiative, which remains fully valid and
relevant, should contribute to that objective.

We also take this opportunity to reiterate our
strongest condemnation of the attacks and actions
taken against vessels in the Strait of Hormuz, which
jeopardize the freedom of navigation in an area of
global strategic importance and exacerbate tensions.
We urge all actors concerned to exercise restraint in
these dangerous circumstances and to avoid taking
new unilateral actions that could trigger a conflict with
unpredictable consequences.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that we
are at a critical juncture in which the efforts of the
international community must aim, as a matter of
priority, to avoid further fragmentation of the Middle
East and to achieve its long-term stability.

