Mr. Magbengu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, at the beginning
of my statement today, to convey how pleased I am to
see you, Mr. President, presidomh over this open debate
of the Security Council and to say how much this
agenda item, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security, is at the core of the goals for which
the United Nations was established. On behalf of
my delegation and myself personally, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your initiative to put this issue
on the table for the Security Council's consideration
during your presidency.

We believe that to best discuss this issue, the three
aspects of prevention, crisis management and crisis
settlement should be underscored. In 1945, following
the San Francisco Conference, the peoples of the
United Nations pledged to preserve future generations
from the scourge of war, which twice in a lifetime has
brought untold suffering to humankind. Since that
time, war and the use of force were supposed to be
banished from relations between States. That idea is the
cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations. Article
33 establishes the sacred principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, which prohibits all use of force
as being incompatible with the goals of the United
Nations, while Article 2, paragraph 4, establishes the
principle of the prohibition of the use of force. As is
clear, the Charter's premise is to establish an effective
prevention principle that seeks to make war and the use
of force violations of international law, contrary to the
first steps taken in the Treaty of Versailles of 1919 of
the now obsolete League of Nations and the Kellogg-
Briand Pact of 1928, which simply limited the right of
recourse to war, while recognizing its legitimacy as a
means for settling international disputes.

If we were able to keep to the letter of the Charter,
as it was envisioned by the drafters in 1945, the debate
today might be much easier. Unfortunately, international
practice has not always been faithful to that principle.
The violence ofthose who consider themselves to be the
strongest no longer obeys legal parameters, much less
limits. We are witnessing global chaos, anarchy and an
unleashing of violence, which are often disguised as
the exercise of self-defence. However, once one goes
outside the framework of self-defence and Security
Council-approved actions, any use of force becomes
illegitimate and is a threat to peace, be it a breach of
peace or an act of aggression under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Those who analyse the
Charter see in that disarray a rebirth ofjus ad bellum in
the form of bellum justum - a just war. They criticize
the attitude of some Governments that appropriate the
right to unilaterally decide to use force in circumstances
other than legitimate self-defence when the Security
Council is unable to take action.

Today, it is not war in the traditional sense of the
word that threatens international peace and security.
Challenges that the drafters of the Charter of the United
Nations had not even thought of are present in our world
now, such as the establishment of terrorist and criminal
networks of drug traffickers and human traffickers,
poachers and traffickers in endangered species, which
fuel the cycle of corruption and the illegal use of natural
resources, piracy and maritime trafficking.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, also needs to be better structured
so as to act decisively, not only to prevent conflicts and
put an end to wars born of conflicts, but also to ensure
that such conflicts do not re-emerge once peace has
been built.

In that regard, experience has shown that the
United Nations often has a hard time successfully
maintaining and building peace. That explains the
occasional re-emergence of conflicts after periods of
calm. The management of the war in my country is a
textbook case that should not be forgotten. After the
democratic elections of 2006 and 2011, there was every
reason to hope for lasting peace in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Strides were made
with the success ofjoint military operations involving
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to reduce the risks to the security ofcivilians and
to facilitate the handover of the security responsibilities
to the Government.

However, it did not take much for operations such as
the mixing, intermingling and integration of the former
rebels into the regular army to lead to the reappearance
ofa culture of weapons and violence in the North Kivu.
Former combatants of the former rebel movement of
the Congres national pour la defense du peuple, who
had deserted the ranks of the Congolese army in the
beginning of April 2012 and become members of the
M-23, succeeded in turning their weapons against
the regular army with the support of a neighbouring
country, indeed a member of the Security Council,
Rwanda.

We know that the United Nations is not a perfect
Organization. That is in fact the merit of today's
discussions, the goal of which is to think of new
strategies to improve the situation in conflict areas.
We have certainly all understood that the statement
made this morning by the representative of Rwanda,
who attacked the United Nations, was just subterfuge.
His attack on the presence of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is to be expected.
And we know that the members of the Security Council
were not fooled.

The United Nations presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is extremely irritating for
Rwanda, our neighbour. In that regard, we all know the
game that that trouble-maker country has played in the
Great Lakes region, and the international community has
grown accustomed to that. They move from one pretext
to another. On 2 August 1998, when Rwandan armies
were crossing the eastern borders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, attacking and surrounding the
various provinces in the east, in particular the North
Kivu, South Kivu, Orientale, Equator and Bas-Congo
provinces, it was under the pretext of ensuring
Rwanda's own security. They were probably looking
for the perpetual fugitives of the Forces Democratiques
de Liberation du Rwanda in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who apparently were everywhere, even
in the trees and underground. The representative of
Rwanda seems to have forgotten that, in May and June
2000, the armies of Rwanda and Uganda, both of which
invaded the Democratic Republic of the Congo, clashed
two more times in Kisangani, a Congolese mining
town, in a battle for control of the diamond riches of
the region.

In any case, given the new challenges, the Security
Council must be inventive, break with business as usual
and draw up new strategies, as was recently done with
the establishment of the Intervention Brigade with a
more robust mandate to bring security to civilians in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, armed conflict, terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destructions and small
arms and light weapons, transnational organized crime,
piracy, drugs and the trafficking in human beings are
all emerging challenges. To better address those issues,
the Security Council's structure must be readjusted.
There is therefore a genuine and pressing need to make
the Council more democratic, effective and transparent,
and to guarantee equitable representation that would
reflect the increase in United Nations membership
from 50 members in 1946 to 192 in 2011.

Members of the Organization, individually and
collectively, must ensure that the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and its collective security
system are firmly upheld so as to ensure that the world
is more than ever free of the scourge of war.

