Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to address the Council once again on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau, in my capacity as Coordinator of the
Ambassadors of the member countries of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) that are
accredited to the United Nations.

I also want to thank the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his report on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau (S/2018/110), presented today by Mr. Modibo
Toure, his Special Representative, whom we welcome
here, along with his team, and whose briefing has
provided us with a thorough picture of the situation in
that country. Lastly, I would like to thank Mr. Mauro
Vieira for his commitment and efforts in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Since it began, the crisis in Guinea-Bissau has
continued to be a source of great concern for the Heads
of State of West Africa, who are therefore sparing no
effort to arrive at a favourable and lasting outcome. This
issue has been on the agenda of every recent meeting
of our subregional organization's Summit. In my last
statement to the Council in August (see S/PV.8031), I
discussed the trampling of the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, which led to the possibility of
having recourse to the ECOWAS sanctions. Since then,
the impasse is still there, despite the proposal for a new
road map by President Jose Mario Vaz at the conclusion
of the fifty-second Ordinary Session of Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in
Abuja on 16 and 17 December 2017, and reaffirmed in
Addis Ababa at the ECOWAS Extraordinary Session
held on 27 January, on the margins of the 30th Ordinary
Session of the African Union Assembly.

In that regard, the President-in-Office of ECOWAS,
Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe, in consultation
with his peers, dispatched a mission of the ministerial
sanctions committee to Guinea-Bissau on 31 January
and 1 February 2018, led by Mr. Robert Dussey, Togo's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and African
Integration. Its purpose was to assess the progress
made by the parties to the crisis in implementing the
Agreement and to report to the ECOWAS Heads of
State on the potential consequences if the stalemate
persisted. Following that report, the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, in view of the fact that no
significant progress has been seen in the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement despite ongoing mediation
and calling on all of Guinea-Bissau's political leaders to
show their sense of responsibility and respect for their
country's Constitution through a frank and inclusive
dialogue, decided to activate the sanctions mechanisms
against individuals and organizations that are hindering
a settlement of the crisis, with the aim of promoting the
restoration of democratic governance and respect for
the rule oflaw in Guinea-Bissau.

As a result, 19 political figures have been subject
to sanctions since 4 February, in accordance with our
decision 01/2018, on individual sanctions designed to
promote the restoration of democratic governance and
respect for the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau. The list
is not exhaustive,and the monitoring committee for
the implementation of sanctions i composed of Togo,
Guinea and the ECOWAS Commission - therefore
reserves the right to revise it as the situation on
the ground changes. Here I should point out, as the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire noted earlier, that
these sanctions were established through ECOWAS's
Supplementary Act of 17 February 2012 concerning
sanctions regimes against Member States that do
not honour their obligations to the Community, and
are based on article 45 of the ECOWAS Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance. They include
suspended participation in Community activities, and
a travel ban and financial assets freeze for those listed
and their families, wherever they may be.

The sanctions cannot be effectively implemented
without the assistance of the United Nations and
other multilateral and regional organizations. In that
regard, I would like to take this opportunity to call
for multifaceted support to ECOWAS in implementing
these measures, which we hope will help to create an
atmosphere conducive to the restoration of dialogue
among the people of Guinea-Bissau, with a view to
resolving this political and institutional impasse, which
has lasted too long.

In conclusion, I would once again like to invite
all the parties to the Guinea-Bissau crisis to show a
spirit of compromise, responsibility and openness to a
peaceful, negotiated and lasting solution to this dispute,
which hampers development efforts in the country and
therefore in the entire subregion, which is still dealing
with persistent security challenges.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
