Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on the
evolution of the situation in Tajikistan. I should also like to
express my thanks to his assistants, and in particular to his
Special Representative, Mr. Gerd Merrem,

We welcome the serious efforts being made by the
Government of Tajikistan, as well as those of the United
Tajik Opposition, to fulfil the commitments entered into
under the General Agreement. My delegation also
welcomes the progress made in the activities undertaken
by the Commission on National Reconciliation, and I
would mention in particular the exchange of prisoners of
war and detainees as well as the registration of members
of the United T ajik Opposition who are present in
Tajikistan and the repatriation of refugees from
Afghanistan to their country.

In this regard, I should also like to express our
concern at the explosive security situation in Tajikistan,
especially in the central part of the State. In addition,
there is a need to call upon both Tajik parties to
cooperate further in ensuring the safety and freedom of
movement of the personnel of the United Nations, the
collective peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and other international
personnel.

I should like, in this context, to express our
appreciation for the agreement reached by the two parties
regarding the creation of a joint security unit to carry out
the task of providing security, including armed escorts,
for the personnel of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT). In this regard, Egypt
hopes that the unit will begin functioning at the end of
this month, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report.

In conclusion, my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution on expanding UNMOT, on the basis
of the proposals of the Secretary-General in his report,
and on the extension of its mandate until 15 May 1998.

