Mr. Courtial (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Togo for organizing this debate,
which gives us a chance to exchange ideas about the
impact of organized transnational crime on
international peace and security in West Africa and the
Sahel. I also thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing and I
would like to take this opportunity to reassert my
country's appreciation for his work and the
organization he runs.

I align myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

The Security Council has many times been made
aware of the threats posed by international organized
crime to stability and security in various regions in the
world, such as Afghanistan, Haiti or Central America.
But the case of West Africa - which has undergone
many conflicts over the past decade - shows the
diversity of organized crime and, above all, its negative
effect on efforts at achieving good governance and
rebuilding public institutions in post-conflict
situations.

The Council has several times expressed its
concern about the growing drug traffic and its
destabilizing effect in Guinea-Bissau. The phenomenon
affects the whole of West Africa and is tied in with

maritime insecurity and armed piracy on the high seas.
Organized crime networks form and use the Sahel
region - which is particularly porous - as a transit
area, before spreading to the rest of the continent or the
shores of Europe.

We also know that, as elsewhere, drug trafficking
in Africa attracts other transnational illicit trade, such
as in weapons, money laundering and human
trafficking. The spread of both small arms and heavy
weapons is another challenge characteristic of West
Africa and the Sahel region. The penetration of funds
from those illegal trades into the broader regional
economy, the corruption it causes, and the violence
among criminal groups striving to capture markets all
undermine governance and threaten socio-economic
development.

In that context, France welcomes the fact that the
Security Council is assessing the impact of those forces
and also welcomes the initial responses implemented
by the States of West Africa. Various bodies of the
United Nations are working to promote political
awareness of the challenges involved and more
effective political collaboration in addressing them. On
the ground, we must take advantage of the
opportunities for cooperation among the various United
Nations agencies and other international organizations
working on those issues. The instability caused by
various forms of illegal trade, particularly drug
trafficking, requires a coordinated response, as well as
reconstruction and crisis prevention policies that
include combating transnational organized crime. This
principle is at the heart of the West Africa Coast
Initiative, which includes Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone,
Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia and which is supported by
France.

I would like specifically to commend the role
played for several years now by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in helping the
States of the region. Since 2008, UNODC has played a
major role in implementing the 2008-2011 Praia
Regional Action Plan of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). The direct
involvement of African countries is critical, especially
of those suffering the full brunt of the destabilizing
effects of that illegal trade. The voices of those
countries must be better heard and their actions
supported.

In that regard, we are fully convinced that
ECOWAS must play a central role. Given the
international dimension of the criminal networks of
which we are speaking, some of which have their
origins outside West Africa and even outside the
continent, it is more crucial than ever to strengthen
regional and international cooperation on matters of
policing and the rule of law. It is particularly important
to establish national criminal justice systems that are
accessible and aligned with international norms.

The United Nations Conventions against drugs,
the United Nations Palermo Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and United Nations
Merida Convention against Corruption have
established an exemplary and appropriate policy
framework for the fight against narcotics. It should be
universalized and implemented.

The States of West Africa and the Sahel region
can count on strong and determined support from
France and, more broadly, from the European Union, in
strengthening their capacities to combat transnational
organized crime. The European Union is a major
player, providing substantial support for efforts to
combat drug trafficking and organized crime in West
Africa and for the fight for maritime security, both in
the Gulf of Guinea and in the Sahel region, where the
Union is implementing significant technical assistance
programmes.

France is fully committed to those efforts,
alongside the countries of West Africa. Thanks to its
network of volunteers and other partners, its interior
security attaches and its liaison officials, we have been
able to step up our cooperation. In that regard, France
has contributed more than €10 million to technical
cooperation programmes in support of good
governance and the justice sector in the countries of
the Sahel region, as part of its special priority funds
programme.

France is also fully committed to the fight to
ensure maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, for
example by developing a three-year project for Benin,
Ghana and Togo, and also working alongside the
Economic Community of Central African States.

Finally, each year, our interior security attaches in
West Africa, often in close coordination with other
relevant international organizations, implement
technical assistance programmes that include police
training and the provision of equipment. We must

strive to strengthen coordination between the United
Nations, African regional organizations, the European
Union and other specialized organizations working in
that area, such as INTERPOL.

Lastly, within the United Nations system itself,
there is a need for coordination among the bodies,
agencies, funds and programmes that play a role, direct
or indirect, in providing assistance in the fight against
transnational organized crime. It seems to us important
that we are all informed about what will be done in that
area. We would therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's continued consideration of cross-cutting
threats, especially transnational organized crime, when
considering conflicts, prevention strategies, integrated
missions and peacekeeping operations.

Furthermore, we hope that the Secretary-General
can provide recommendations to the Security Council,
better enabling the Council to fully understand and
address those cross-cutting threats, particularly in the
case of West Africa and the Sahel region. Those
recommendations should focus on the main,
destabilizing factors. In that regard, we consider drug
trafficking to be the number one priority.

Finally, there is a need for the Security Council to
continue to be informed and updated on these issues
and continue to discuss them, based on regular
briefings from the Executive Director of UNODC.

