Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President for holding this meeting today.

We who hail from a conflict-ridden continent and who
have seen the colossal human tragedies of conflict fully
appreciate the convening of this meeting on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, commonly known as
DDR. For us, this is an important issue that deserves this
body's undivided attention for a number of reasons.

First, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants in the aftermath of
conflict is increasingly placing more demands and
challenges on peacekeeping operations, making it more
imperative that we redefine the role and scope of
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
this regard, South Africa believes that it no longer serves
any good purpose to insist on an approach to peacekeeping
that does not, where appropriate, include DDR. This would
render peacekeeping moribund in relation to the actual
challenges on the ground.

Secondly, DDR is proving every day to be an
important and necessary process in stabilizing post-conflict
situations and in preventing the recurrence of conflict at
both the intra-State and regional levels; hence, it is an
important tool in the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is therefore more imperative now than ever
before to consider the early integration of DDR into United
Nations peacekeeping mandates, where applicable. The lack
of timely and decisive DDR programmes in United Nations
peacekeeping operations is bound to have a negative impact
on the United Nations ability to really end the recurrence of
conflict. We have seen throughout the world that such
delays and lack of resolute action on DDR perpetuates
polarization, making timely conflict prevention,
management and resolution more difficult.

Thirdly, DDR provides an important bridge in the
transition from the cessation of hostilities to sustainable
peace by incorporating political, security, economic and
social objectives. This demonstrates the need to desist from
theorizing on what United Nations peacekeeping should
be when our people, in the words of the Secretary-General,

"need a real and sustained commitment to help end
their cycles of violence, and launch them on a safe
passage to prosperity".

Rather, our efforts should focus on ensuring that there are
clearly defined mandates with adequate resources where
DDR programmes are to be undertaken in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

It would be inappropriate to place squarely on the
United Nations the responsibility for ensuring the success
of DDR programmes. It is for this reason that South
Africa strongly believes that, for the sake of their political
legitimacy and in order to facilitate their timely
implementation, DDR programmes should be strongly
anchored in peace agreements that end conflicts. My
delegation joins the call that parties concerned in fostering
post-conflict stability should demonstrate the necessary
political will by committing themselves to peace. It is of
utmost importance that parties honour and adhere to the
commitments they have made in reaching a peace
agreement.

Likewise, political leaders must genuinely commit
themselves to reconciliation through practical confidence-
building measures that demonstrate this commitment. In
this regard, a commitment to guarantee the security of
those former combatants who decide to lay down their
weapons must be made an integral part of DDR
programmes, including the special needs of children, and
in particular child soldiers, as well as of women and the
elderly. The difficult decision that these former
combatants make and the vulnerable situation that they
place themselves in should always be borne in mind.
Their former comrades who do not make the courageous
decision to lay down their arms often see them as traitors.
They can therefore become the victims of their former
brothers and sisters in arms as they await integration
while in encampment areas.

Because of its wide scope, complexity and fragility,
DDR also requires the support of the international
community in order to succeed. In this regard, my
delegation recommends that all efforts should be made to
include other, non-United Nations institutions in the
implementation of DDR programmes. This mammoth task
can no longer be faced by the United Nations without the
help of others.

 

The report of the Secretary-General before us on the
role of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration offers
useful ground on which to begin our work on this complex
subject. South Africa attaches great value to this report,
which provides us with a definition of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration within a peacekeeping
environment, as well as practical suggestions on how the
United Nations machinery could strengthen this in pursuit
of more effective United Nations peacekeeping and peace-
building activities.

We also believe that the proposal of the recently
concluded session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations also offers practical suggestions
on this issue. Its recommendation that the Secretariat should
formalize lessons learned on DDR programmes that have
made a valuable contribution to peace and regional stability
should be pursued.

In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to the
convening of the informal meeting of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to be held some
time this year, as envisaged in the Committee's recent
report. We believe that the Special Committee should focus
on this issue, which falls within its mandate, as it is the
only United Nations forum tasked with reviewing
comprehensively the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects. We believe that the views
expressed at this meeting will be helpful in defining our
approach not only to DDR, but to other peacekeeping-
related issues as well.

