Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Ms. Mbela
for their briefings. I would particularly like to thank
Ms. Mbela for her brave work as a human rights
activist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and for making such clear recommendations to the
Council, her Government and the Independent National
Electoral Commission. I hope to touch on some ofthose
recommendations later.

As both of our briefers and many of my colleagues
today have made clear, the Democratic Republic of the

Congo is at a crucial point in its history. The elections
scheduled for 23 December could lead to the country's
first peaceful democratic transfer of power. That would
be a huge achievement for the 85 million Congolese
people who have faced such devastating conflicts over
their history. These elections are about more than merely
democratic rights. Successful elections have the ability
to enhance the political security and humanitarian
stability of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region, which in turn can enable future security,
growth, trade and prosperity.

A stable, prosperous Democratic Republic of the
Congo is vital not only for the Congolese people but
also for the region and the world. As we have seen over
many years, the insecurity in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not only had a negative impact on
millions of Congolese people, it has devastated the
wider region. It is therefore entirely appropriate that
we as a Council hold regular discussions, follow the
situation closely and ensure that there is follow-up to
the Security Council's visit of just over a month ago,
particularly in order to take stock of what progress is
being made on many of the commitments undertaken
by the Government and other political leaders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I think it is important to register the positive
developments in recent months. We welcome the
positive steps that the Government has taken with
regard to elections, including on voter registration and
the publication of the final list of candidates for the
elections. We also welcome President Kabila's repeated
commitment that he does not intend to stand for a
third term, in accordance with the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But as Ambassador
Haley reminded us earlier today, democracy is not
about a single event, it is about a process. So we call
on all political actors in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to create the conditions for free, fair and
credible elections, particularly by implementing the
confidence-building measures of the 31 December 2016
agreement so as to ensure that civil and political rights
are upheld. That includes fully respecting the political
space and allowing political parties to gather peacefully.

We welcome the commitment made by President
Kabila to the Security Council during our visit that
his Government would allow peaceful protests by
the opposition. We are therefore deeply concerned about
reports of further arrests and detentions of protesters
and the continued detention of political prisoners. We
call on President Kabila and his Government to live up
to their commitments to allow peaceful protest by the
opposition and to release all political prisoners.

Political parties and their leadership must also do
their part and encourage their supporters to engage
peacefully in the democratic process. Any violence will
diminish the credibility of the elections in the eyes of
the Congolese people and the international community.
We also call on the key political actors, including the
opposition, to engage constructively with the electoral
process, including with regard to the vexed question of
voting machines and the voter registry. The Electoral
Commission's efforts will be crucial to delivering a
credible election, and we join Ms. Mbela in her call
to the Commission to engage with key stakeholders in
order to address their concerns and restore confidence
in the electoral process. One way to restore confidence
in the electoral process and the elections, and
particularly in the voting machines, is by implementing
the recommendations of the Westminster Foundation
for Democracy. We were encouraged by the fact that
during the Council's visit to Kinshasa, the Electoral
Commission said it was determined to implement
the Foundation's recommendations, and we urge it to
continue to implement them as soon as possible in order
to increase confidence in the voting machines.

We commend the logistical support that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has provided for the upcoming elections so far, and
welcome the fact that it is ready to give further support
if needed at the Government's request. We call on the
Electoral Commission to engage with MONUSCO as
soon as possible for any logistical assistance that it may
need. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the political process both in the region, where we have
provided funding for voter education, civil-society
engagement, women's participation and domestic
observation, and here at the United Nations.

In conclusion, it is not the politicians who stand
to win or lose the most in these elections. It is the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who have seen devastating levels of conflict and the
resulting humanitarian suffering since independence.
We therefore call on all leaders to put aside their
personal ambition and to do what is right for their
people - participating in and supporting what is
potentially the first of many credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

