Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this urgent meeting. I am very grateful
for the sobering analysis just shared by our briefers.

As we have heard so clearly, the clock is ticking for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the world is
watching. Just two weeks remain until President Kabila's
second term comes to an end - two weeks to prevent
even more violence, even more deaths and even more
conflict in a country that has already suffered too much.
So here in this open meeting we have an opportunity to
send an unequivocal message to President Kabila that
he must make the right choice, respect the Constitution,
respect the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, respect his two-term limit, commit not to stand,
and hold elections as soon as possible. In truth, there
is no other option. We all know what comes next if he
makes the wrong decision. We saw it in the bloodied
streets of Kinshasa in September. We cannot allow such
barbarity to be repeated in a fortnight's time.

We know what needs to happen. The Constitution
is clear. President Kabila's term ends on 19 December.
The two-term limit cannot be changed, and certainly not
just to suit one man's political agenda. The Government
must reach a consensual political agreement that is in
line with the Constitution before that date. President
Kabila heard this message loudly and clearly when the
Security Council visited last month. It is a message that
the United Kingdom's Parliamentary Under-Secretary
of State for International Development, James Wharton,
repeated only two weeks ago.

It is now time for Kabila and his Government to
undertake confidence-building measures so that can
mediation efforts have a chance of success. This means
dropping the spurious charges against opposition
members, releasing political prisoners and lifting the
media ban. It also means that all sides must reject
violence and commit to peaceful dialogue. In these
efforts, we fully support the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo and the mediated discussions
between the Government and opposition groups. We
urge all parties to continue to engage in dialogue to
reach a peaceful compromise before 19 December.

But that is only half of the message that we need
to send today. If President Kabila ignores the Council,
we must be clear that there will be consequences. It
cannot be business as usual if nothing has changed in
two weeks' time. The Government must respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms essential to political
debate and credible elections, freedom of speech and
assembly, access to the media and accountability for
human rights abuses. Not respecting these fundamental
norms increases tensions and heightens the risk
of violence.

In October, the European Union threatened to
impose sanctions on members of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo security forces responsible for
the suppression of these fundamental freedoms and
the abuse of human rights. The Council needs to be
prepared to respond in a similar fashion if the situation
deteriorates. In parallel, we also need to be preparing
to help, should the worst occur. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to have contingency
planning in place to respond effectively if needed. The
biggest peacekeeping mission in the world, with a clear
mandate to protect civilians robustly, cannot stand by if
civilians are threatened.

As I said at the start, the world is watching. But it is
watching us in the Council just as much as it is watching
President Kabila. We have seen countless times how
difficult it is to bring peace and stability to a country
or region after conflict has begun. We are discussing
here a situation where the violence has not yet erupted.
We have an opportunity to stop a conflict before it
begins, so we owe it to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to the credibility of the
Security Council on conflict prevention to make sure
that President Kabila listens.
