Mr. Sanader (Croatia): I am grateful to Burkina
Faso for bringing us together to address an important
and integral component of our common effort in
maintaining international peace and security.

The effectiveness of the United Nations and of
this Council in particular is often measured against its
ability to prevent and resolve conflicts. In achieving
that goal, the Council has at its disposal an array of
tools, including those mentioned prominently in
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter. As Croatia's
own experience has demonstrated, mediation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes are part and parcel of
conflict prevention, peacemaking and post-conflict
peacebuilding, and can be successfully integrated into
the mandates of missions designed by the Council.

Since the nature of contemporary conflict has
changed, increasingly shifting from the inter-state to an
intra-state level, the United Nations is facing a
different set of expectations. As the 2004 report of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change

(see A/59/565) noted, the demand for United Nations
good offices and mediation has skyrocketed. In
situations ranging from Iraq to Sudan, from Cyprus to
Cote d'Ivoire, from the Democratic Republic of Congo
to Zimbabwe, to mention just a few, the United Nations
has been required to be instrumental not only in
overcoming tensions between opponents or belligerents
but also in offering solutions for transitional justice,
constitution writing or designing mechanisms for
wealth-sharing or human rights protection.

This involvement may take place on any level,
from the Secretary-General himself - or some
esteemed colleagues, seated at this table today - to
the different United Nations departments and agencies,
in particular through the mandates designed by this
Council. Even in the absence of a specifically
appointed individual, tasked with a mediation or good-
offices mandate, through its political or military
presence on the ground, the United Nations finds itself
engaged in the role of a negotiator, intermediary or
adviser. Today, it is difficult to find a Council-
mandated mission that does not include some aspect of
diplomatic, mediatory, non-coercive engagement, often
through the wide-ranging executive authority of the
Head of Mission.

Our own experience with the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Eastern Slavonia (UNTAES)
is a telling example of what the United Nations can
accomplish within a well-defined, realistic and
achievable mandate. The reintegration of that war-
affected territory in eastern Croatia was a joint success,
both for my country and the United Nations, and
Croatia stands ready to share the expertise and know-
how gained through that process.

It has been rightly recognized that, in order to
live up to these expectations, Council-mandated
missions require not only an effective mandate, but
also necessary expertise and adequate resources. The
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) remains the
centre of expertise and resources on mediation, and we
welcome recent steps designed to strengthen it,
including the establishment of the DPA Mediation
Support Unit. The institution of special envoys and
special representatives of the Secretary-General is
often the primary channel for action - virtually the
face of the United Nations in such situations. The
complexity of their tasks requires excellent political,
negotiation, leadership and management skills. In that
regard, we would welcome the appointment of more

women in these positions. No less important than
skilled leadership is the development of local
capacities for dispute resolution, a process in which
civil society can play a crucial role.

The diplomatic and non-coercive methods of
settling disputes surely go beyond the framework of
the United Nations system and the United Nations can
often profit from such synergies. Mediation in
resolving the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire was one of those
success stories and I would like to join others,
Mr. President, in extending my appreciation for the
personal effort you invested in facilitating the signature
and implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement
between the Ivorian parties.

With the increasing interaction between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations, it
is becoming evident that they offer a potential which
commands the Council's attention, and needs to be
further explored by the Council, not only in the field of
peacekeeping, but also in the settlement of disputes.
The joint effort of the United Nations and the African
Union to bring peace to Darfur is a good example,
including through the institution of the joint special
envoys and the recently appointed Chief Mediator
Mr. Djibrill Yipene Bassole' of Burkina Faso. As was
rightly pointed out on previous occasions, their
geographical proximity to and familiarity with the
context of the conflict often makes regional and
subregional organizations well suited to approach the
parties to a conflict. We were also heartened by the
success of the mediating effort led by the former
Secretary-General, His Excellency Kofi Annan, under
the auspices of the African Union that helped to resolve
a grave political and humanitarian crisis in Kenya this
year.

Recent trends give us reason to be hopeful about
the Council's ability to further expand and better
integrate such efforts into its strategies and actions.
Still, for every success like that in Kenya, there are
static situations that can dent the credibility of the
United Nations and compel us to re-examine our
strategies and commitments. We are encouraged by the
positive signals coming from Cyprus and extend our
full support to the good offices of the Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General, Alexander Downer.
We also deeply appreciate the continuing joint
effort that the United Nations and African Union are
investing in the Darfur talks. On the other hand, it is
disappointing to note that after almost a year of
repeated attempts to engage with Myanmar, the United
Nations efforts fall short of achieving tangible results.

A well-managed effort aimed at reaching peace
through a viable political process should be an integral
part of our peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies. However, it should not come
at the expense of other values this Organization was
founded to promote and protect. Without respect for
justice, the rule of law, human rights and basic socio-
economic concerns, hope for lasting peace will remain
illusory and our action incomplete.

