Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Peter
Piot for their briefings on action undertaken since the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000).

France naturally shares the concerns expressed by
previous speakers. The fight against the spread of the
AIDS virus calls for our total vigilance and justifies all
efforts. Since 2000, the Security Council and the
Secretariat have rightly been addressing this subject
that brings us together today. The battle against AIDS
needs to be waged on all fronts, including in areas of
conflict. By their nature, peacekeeping operations are
deployed in regions where the health situation is
precarious and where the populations are extremely
vulnerable. What is more, such missions are always
deployed as a matter of urgency. It is therefore
necessary to ensure not merely that mission personnel
not constitute a risk factor but that they contribute in
the theatre of operations to the fight against the
pandemic. The credibility and prestige of peacekeeping
operations - and hence, of the United Nations -
among local populations also entails action in the area
of public health.

Awareness-raising, prevention and follow-up
efforts depend on both the Secretariat and on
contributing States. The programmes of action pursued
by the Secretariat and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) appear to us to
be particularly convincing and well adapted to the
constraints of peacekeeping operations. They dovetail
satisfactorily with the Council's requests in resolution
1308 (2000). In addition, the extensive awareness-
raising in recent months to prevent sexual abuse has
made it possible to put tough measures and principles
into place. We hope that those guidelines will
contribute to further increasing the accountability of
personnel deployed and to mobilizing contributing
countries.

Nonetheless, it is also incumbent among the
contributing States to act. In this respect, for many
years France has pursued a particularly tough policy
with respect to all of its personnel deployed abroad,
both in missions under United Nations mandate and in
national operations. Our forces practise a policy of
awareness-raising, screening and systematic
monitoring of all of their personnel. These guidelines
are implemented, without exception, for all men and
women who are part of external missions, regardless of
rank or duties.

Only personnel who have satisfactorily passed the
tests are sent on mission. These measures are
accompanied by training activities and awareness-
raising sessions in order to maintain vigilance, not only
on the part of the personnel, but also for the command
structure throughout the mission.

As we all know, the fight against the AIDS virus
is a daily and long-term effort. The programmes that
have been instituted and the action taken by UNAIDS,
the Secretariat and Member States need to be pursued
relentlessly. The coordinated efforts we all make need
to be pursued within the framework of an all-out
strategy to fight this pandemic. In our view, that
comprehensive fight needs to include not only
prevention, but also treatment, with access by infected
persons to treatment and medication.

