Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank the Prosecutor for her thirtieth report on the
situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005)
and her briefing to the Council today. I want to take
this opportunity to thank the Prosecutor and her team
for their dedication in pursuing the investigations and
continuing to seekjustice for victims in Darfur.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
an important role to play in seeking justice and
holding perpetrators of the most heinous crimes to
account, and the United Kingdom strongly supports
its efforts. Since the Prosecutor's last briefing (see S/PV.8554), we have seen positive developments in
the Sudan with the agreement on a transitional period
that sets out a pathway for leading the Sudan into a
democratic future. The appointments of a civilian
Prime Minister and a Cabinet of technocrat ministers
are welcome steps, as are the pledges to protect human
rights and the rule of law. There are still significant
challenges for the transitional Government to address,
however. We welcome the commitment to building
a credible Sudanese judicial system and the pledge
to seek accountability for past crimes, including by
establishing an independent commission of inquiry
into the brutal attacks on protesters earlier this year.
The United Kingdom will support the Prime Minister
of the Sudan and the transitional Government in those
efforts and in building a new Sudan, as called for by the
Sudanese people.

The Sudanese people have suffered as a result of
their country's long history of internal conflict. Past
crimes cannot be forgotten, and we must ensure that
accountability is delivered. That includes the crimes
committed during the conflict in Darfur, which
according to United Nations estimates left more
than 300,000 people dead and 2.5 million displaced.
Those victims deserve to see justice served, as well
as the achievement of a long-term solution to the root
causes of the conflict. Almost 2 million people remain
internally displaced in Darfur, and the United Kingdom
is concerned about the reports of further violence and
displacement in northern Jebel Marra and of returning
internally displaced persons being met with violence.
The transitional Government has stated that securing
long-lasting peace in the Sudan is a priority and has
demonstrated positive steps by engaging with armed
groups and entering into peace talks.

The United Kingdom welcomes the signing of
declarations in Juba and the resumption of talks on
10 December. We continue to urge all groups to engage
productively and without any preconditions in those
discussions. Sustainable peace underpinned by justice
and accountability must be found for the victims of this
conflict and for the people of the Sudan.

The security situation and the safety of the civilians
of Darfur must be a priority as we consider a transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the region.
We appreciate that, during the momentous changes in
the Sudan, there have been limited opportunities for
the Prosecutor and her team to achieve their desired
progress on this case. We welcome the Prosecutor's
briefing and note that she has been able to strengthen
her case. The United Kingdom once again renews its
call to all State parties to cooperate with the ICC. We
encourage the transitional Government in the Sudan to
engage constructively with the Office of the Prosecutor
with the intention of making progress with regard
to this case. We stand ready to support the civilian
administration as it seeks to build the rule of law
throughout the Sudan and ensure that those responsible
for the horrific crimes committed in the Sudan are held
to account and that those horrors to not recur.

Finally, we again thank the Prosecutor and her team
for their continued commitment to making progress
in their investigations, despite long-standing access
restrictions and a lack of cooperation. We urge them
to continue with that important work and to strive to
achieve justice for the victims of the conflict in Darfur.

