Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President and Minister, and welcome to New York.
It is very good to see you today presiding over this
Council meeting, at which Hedi Annabi has, as usual,
given us a most helpful and incisive briefing.

As the representative of Denmark will speak later
on behalf of the European Union, I will limit myself to
two or three key points, as Ambassador Doutriaux of
France did earlier.

I would like to make it clear, right at the outset,
that the United Kingdom continues to support Special
Representative Steiner's standards-before-status
approach - or, I suppose, bench-marking, in the
vernacular. The key challenges in the coming months
will be strengthening the rule of law - and I noted that
Mr. Annabi was quite right to major on this aspect in
his statement - economic progress, and creating the
conditions to ensure sustainable returns of internally
displaced persons.

On the rule of law, like other around this table we
welcome the recent high-profile arrests by UNMIK
police and KFOR. The Kosovo institutions' response to
the arrest of former KLA members was not helpful, and
we have said this publicly. Like others, we support the
eventual arrest of Milan Ivanovic, and we call on the
authorities in Belgrade to share information on his
whereabouts. As we have said often in the Council,
relations with Belgrade are an important and essential
element in making UNMIK work.

We welcome Mr. Kovic's continued cooperation
on Kosovo. This, and cooperation between Belgrade,
UNMIK and the provisional institutions, is essential to
regional security. We need to ensure further
cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina in the
search for the eventual arrest of Mr. Ivanovic. Recent
messages of support of Mr. Ivanovic, coming out of
Belgrade have been inconsistent with Belgrade's stated
support for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

On refugee returns, we fully back UNMIK's
rights-based approach for individual return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to Kosovo. Individuals
must decide for themselves whether - and if so,
when - to return. Mass returns must not undermine an
individual's right to choose. We consider recent call
from Kosovo Serbs for crossing points into Kosovo to
be blocked if there are no mass returns to be unhelpful,
to say the least.

Finally, there is the economy, which will be a key
foundation for Kosovo's future prosperity. We support
plans for privatization as an aid for the encouragement
of investment into Kosovo. We very much hope that a
new director of the Kosovo Trust Agency will be
appointed soon to take the privatization process
forward.

In conclusion, I would want to encourage the
early promulgation of the UNMIK regulation on
ownership.

