Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me join others, Sir,
in congratulating you on assuming the current
presidency of the Security Council and for organizing
this open exchange on very important issues related to
global terrorism, international security and
strengthening joint international efforts in combating
this growing threat. Albania fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of France on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to add a
few comments in my national capacity.

Terrorism continues to evolve, while effectively
and increasingly posing an asymmetrical threat to our
common fundamental values. Combined with other
serious threats to international peace and security, it
continues to demand our proactive capacity for a
stronger and more coordinated response. A few days
ago, terrorism struck the heart of Mumbai, India. I join
other representatives in condemning that cowardly act
and extend our full solidarity to the Indian people and
Government and the families of all the victims.

Terrorism is never justifiable on any grounds. It
is a global threat that requires a global and
comprehensive response. Addressing this evolving
threat effectively requires full-spectrum political will
and a capacity to implement commitments on the
ground. Relevant institutional awareness and policy-
level engagements are part of the same equation. The
nature of this phenomenon and our common drive
towards a shared objective requires participation with
and an inclusive policy towards non-governmental
organizations and civil society. Our national
Government's home-grown strategy, which is
characterized by a developed sense of ownership and
responsibility, continues to be a key factor in
addressing and fulfilling our obligations.

Albania continues to actively participate in the
war against terrorism. In coordination with relevant
members of the international community, we are doing
our best to strengthen institutional efficiency with an
emphasis on creating systems of good governance, an
accountable civil society and a competitive economy.
These fronts represent challenges that must be faced
and require serious engagement in order to obtain
tangible, effective results. All actors will have to
continue their respective work in this regard.

Maintaining a shared level of political will be
high on the agenda. Building necessary trust and
information-sharing are a few elements of our regional
cooperation. In this framework, a holistic approach is
necessary and helpful. Terrorism is transnational and
demands transnational readiness and response.
Building compatible institutional capacities, promptly
complying with international obligations, having
positive and forward-looking foreign policy objectives
and effectively implementing a common constructive
and moderating behaviour are key parameters in our
regional cooperation, as established by some actors.
The western Balkans can offer a more participatory
contribution to international peace and security.
Tangible progress towards integration into Euro-
Atlantic structures can only take place by our joining
with and sharing relevant values and principles.

Although regional cooperation is very useful, the
United Nations has a unique role to play. The current
setting of international treaties gives rise to the duty of
joining and implementing them. Albania has ratified
most of the United Nations counter-terrorism
instruments and protocols and is doing its best to
implement them. The United Nations, together with
other international institutions and countries, is helping
in this regard, for which we are very grateful. We will
continue our combined efforts in the future for the
benefit of our common objectives.

The tendency to increase the number of various
bodies with the praiseworthy intentions of addressing
and tackling this multidimensional scourge has created
a situation that may need to be rectified. A culture of
cooperation and a rationale applicable towards
establishing respective roles of players despite actual
and/or potential vested interests can be helpful in
generating the potential synergies without duplicating
efforts and creating conflicts of interest.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our firm
commitment to actively participate in the fight against
terrorism. We will continue our efforts and cooperation
with the international community in actively and
successfully implementing the United Nations Strategy
and complying with other resolutions and
recommendations of relevant bodies.
