Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is my honour to deliver a joint statement on behalf of Viet Nam and Indonesia,the two States members of the Association of South- East Asian Nations (ASEAN) on the Security Council. At the outset, we would like to thank Ambassador Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, for his briefing. We have noted the Secretary-General's report of 28 September (S/2020/951), and we are encouraged by the progress on regional cooperation despite the unprecedented challenges caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Indeed, the commitment and leadership of the signatories and guarantors to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region are now more critical than ever. To that end, Viet Nam and Indonesia would like to emphasize the following points. First, we stress the importance of addressing the root causes of instability in the region. We welcome the region's positive progress, including the efforts of the Congolese in maintaining a favourable political climate, the peaceful political transition in Burundi and the regional commitments to continuing to pursue peace with neighbours. We continue to voice our support for the good offices of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, and we look forward to his United Nations strategy for the Great Lakes Region. Given the volatile security situation, the region's positive progress should be further reinforced by enhancing the reconciliation process at the national and regional levels, addressing threats from armed groups, strengthening the governance of natural resources and providing development opportunities for countries. Without that, we will risk undoing the hard-won gains and exacerbate instability. Secondly, the work of regional organizations and United Nations missions in the region should be supported by the Council. As two South-East Asian nations, Viet Nam and Indonesia fully understand the importance of regional and subregional cooperation. ASEAN's "One Vision, One Identity, One Community" is the result of the sustained efforts of all countries in our region over many decades. With shared goals and responsibility to our peoples, we could, and will, achieve a great deal together, including ensuring regional peace, security, stability and prosperity. Based on such a conviction, we recognize the important role of the regional mechanisms in the Great Lakes region, including the co-guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement and the 13 signatory countries. We welcome the engagements of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern African Development Community in facilitating border negotiations, peaceful general elections and the bolstering of efforts with regard to COVID-19. The ICGLR continues to play a vital role for peace and in preserving stability by preventing the illicit exploitation and movement of natural resources. We continue to support peace in the region through our contribution to the United Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, ASEAN countries contribute more than 1,600 uniformed personnel to the various United Nations missions in the region. Thirdly, during this global COVID-19 crisis, relief for the humanitarian situation must be prioritized. We must pay attention to those in dire need of assistance: the 22 million Congolese who are facing food insecurity; the 5.9 million internally displaced persons and refugees; and those who are vulnerable, including women, children and the disabled. We call on all international partners to continue to provide technical and financial support for countries of the region through bilateral and multilateral frameworks. Addressing the complex peace and_ security challenges in the region is indeed not easy. We will maintain our commitment as true partners for the region together.
