Mr. Ward (Jamaica): It is with a great deal of
disappointment that we note that events in the occupied
Palestinian territories have made it necessary for the
Security Council to convene this meeting. My
delegation was heartened by the seemingly positive
developments in the Middle East peace process, which
only a year ago offered a glimmer of hope that, at long
last, both sides were moving closer towards a common
understanding, necessary for a comprehensive and
lasting peace agreement. Both sides seemed to be
willing to take the bold steps necessary to bridge the
divide which separates them. Both sides seemed
willing to exercise the political will to bring the
conflict to a lasting andjust conclusion.

However, what has transpired since 28 September
2000 has proved to be more tragic than anyone could
have imagined. In the 10 months since the current
outbreak of violence began, over 750 persons -
Palestinians and Israelis - have died. The concessions,
which were painfully won over several years of
arduous negotiation, have evaporated, and the gains
attained by confidence-building measures have been
reversed, with relations between the parties being at
their worst level in decades.

The parties have not heeded the call by the
Council, contained in resolution 1322 (2000), for the
immediate cessation of violence and for all necessary
steps to be taken to ensure that the cycle of violence be
brought to an end. The Council has committed itself to
fully supporting the role of the Secretary-General in
facilitating the peace process, and my delegation urges
the Secretary-General to explore every possible avenue
for peace.

My delegation supported the convening of this
meeting today, not because we were naive enough to
think that after a day-long series of speeches the parties
would be motivated to salvage the peace process but,
rather, because we believe that it is crucial that the
Security Council continue to offer its help and support
to the peace process. If we can bring the parties back
from the brink of total chaos and offer them hope that
the peace process is not dead, then we will have
achieved significant progress. It is the responsibility of
the Security Council - indeed, it is our duty - to be
engaged on this issue, and the international community
expects no less from us.

Those who would suggest that the Security
Council has no role in dealing with this issue are
wrong, and have been wrong over the past several
months. We cannot stand by and watch total disregard
for human life and property become the order of the
day.

My delegation maintains that the provisions of
the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement and the
recommendations of the Mitchell Committee remain
the best basis to move the peace process forward. In
this regard, we maintain that the parties should
immediately take steps towards implementing their
commitments under the agreement. Specifically, the
parties need to undertake the following four key steps.

First, they must unequivocally end all violence.
They should take immediate, concrete measures to end
the current confrontation, maintain calm and prevent
the recurrence of violent events. In order to achieve
this, both sides need to take the steps necessary to
enable a return to the situation that existed prior to the
current crisis, including restoring law and order,
redeploying military forces, eliminating points of
friction, enhancing security cooperation and ending the
economic blockade of the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Secondly, both parties should resume confidence-
building measures; the parties should resume their
efforts to identify, condemn and discourage incitement
in all its forms. Both sides should take concrete actions
to demonstrate that terrorism in all its forms, and
extrajudicial killings, are unacceptable.

Thirdly, the Israeli Government must freeze all
settlement activity and both sides should undertake to
preserve and protect holy sites sacred to the traditions
of Jews, Muslims and Christians. The Israeli
Government should also reverse action taken recently
against Orient House and other Palestinian institutions
in and around occupied East Jerusalem. Fourthly, the
Israelis and Palestinians should resume negotiations on
the basis of agreements reached prior to 28 September
2000.

Jamaica, for its part, reiterates its unqualified
support for efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace
within the framework of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In March this year, Jamaica
supported sending an observation team to the
Palestinian territories, a position that did not receive
the needed support of members of the Council. We still
believe that the deployment of such a force could act as
a deterrent to further violence and as a confidence-
building measure between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. We should ask ourselves how many lives could
have been saved and how far the peace process could
have advanced had we exercised the political will and
approved sending observers into the field several
months ago.

We note that, since that time, the issue of a
monitoring mechanism has received the support of
important regional and multilateral organizations,
which have concluded that under the current
circumstances, third-party monitoring should be
accepted by both parties, as it would serve their
interests in implementing the Mitchell Committee
recommendations.

The creation of a mechanism to help the parties
implement the recommendations of the Mitchell
Committee report would create a more stable situation
on the ground. We hope that the Israelis and the
Palestinians will find these proposals to be acceptable
in the quest for peace. The Security Council must give
its full backing to this effort.

Despite repeated references to a draft resolution,
to my delegation's certain knowledge there is no draft
resolution or outcome document before the Security
Council for consideration at this time. It is my
delegation's hope, however, that when the Council is
ready to take action, as it should, it will be possible to
act in unity and consensus in advancing the cause of
peace in the Middle East.

Decisions taken in the Security Council following
this meeting will be a litmus test of the Council's
resolve to assist the peace process in the Middle East.
Whether we choose to take concrete action or whether
we choose just to talk will ultimately affect the way
that future historians judge our contribution - the
contribution of the Security Council and of the
international community - to the resolution of the
conflict in the Middle East. Can the Security Council
act responsibly?

