Mr. Lowcock: On 21 September, I warned the
Council that we were losing the fight against famine
in Yemen (see S/PV.8361). Since then, the situation has
worsened. That is why, as required by resolution 2417
(2018), which the Council adopted in May, we issued
the white note that was circulated late last week. In line
with our obligations under the Council's resolution, my
briefing today focuses on the risk of famine.

Famines are mercifully rare in the modern world.
They used to be ubiquitous and a relatively common
occurrence all over the world throughout more than
99 per cent ofhuman history. It is actually a spectacular
feature of progress in our era that only two famines
have been declared in the past 20 years - the one that
took the lives of a quarter of a million Somalis in 2011
and the famine declared last year that affected a few
tens of thousands of people in South Sudan. It is that
recent progress that makes what we now face in Yemen
so shocking. A famine is declared when the three
thresholds of food insecurity, acute malnutrition and
mortality are all breached together. The three criteria
are that at least one household in five faces an extreme
lack of food, that more than 30 per cent of children under
the age of five are suffering from acute malnutrition
or wasting, and that at least two out of every 10,000
people are dying each and every day.

Assessments conducted a year ago identified 107
out of Yemen's 333 districts to be at risk of famine,
where two of those three thresholds were either already
exceeded or dangerously close to being so. A further
assessment exercise is now under way across the country
and the initial results are expected in mid-November. It
has been more difficult to confirm the position on the
third criteria - the number of deaths due to starvation
or starvation-related disease. However, while mortality-
related data is difficult to collect and triangulate, health
workers are pointing to the rising number of deaths
linked to food-related factors.

We also know that many deaths are hidden. Only
half of the health facilities in Yemen are functioning
and many Yemenis are too poor to access the ones that
are open. Therefore, unable to reach care, people often
simply die at home. Very few families report those
deaths and the stories of those people go unrecorded.
However, at the end of last year, one aid agency estimated
that 130 children under the age of five were dying every
day from extreme hunger and disease - nearly 50,000
little children during the course of the year. While we
await the results of the assessments that are now under
way, we already know that a further year of war and
economic crisis have pushed millions more Yemenis
towards famine.

So, just to be clear, my assessment and advice to
the Council is that there is now a clear and present
danger of an imminent and great big famine engulfing
Yemen - much bigger than anything that any
professionals in this field have seen during their working
lives. Some people, perhaps including members of the
Council, will be thinking, "Hang on a minute. They
have told us this before and it did not happen". That is
correct. We warned of famine in Yemen at the beginning
of last year as part of the Secretary-General's call to
action, which also flagged the risk in Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria. The response was a
dramatic scaling up of the United Nations coordinated
relief effort, which helped to mitigate the worst impact
ofthe crisis at the time. I issued a similar warning when
I briefed the Council on 8 November last year on the
likely effect of the economic blockade that had just
been imposed by the international coalition following
missile attacks on Riyadh from inside Yemen. The
blockade was removed and the supervised imports of
food, fuel and medicines resumed through the Red Sea
ports. What I am telling the Council today is that the
situation is now much graver than on either of those
two occasions.

Why is that? First, it is due to the sheer number of
people at risk. In my update to the Council last month, I
said that an additional 3.5 million people were likely to
become severely food insecure in the months ahead, in
addition to the 8 million that we were already reaching
each month through the United Nations coordinated
response effort. That is a total of 11 million people.
That is what I said on 21 September. We now think
that that estimate was wrong. Our revised assessment,
which is the result of new survey work and analysis,
is that the total number of people facing pre-famine
conditions - meaning that they are entirely reliant
on external aid for survival - could soon reach not
11 million, but 14 million. That is half of the total
population of the country.

Secondly, beyond the sheer numbers, while millions
of people have been surviving on emergency food
assistance for years, the help that they get is enough
merely to survive, not to thrive. The toll is unbearably
high. The immune systems of the millions of people
who have been on survival support for years on end
are now literally collapsing, making them - especially
children and the elderly - more likely to succumb to
malnutrition, cholera and other diseases.

Last month, I explained the two recent developments
that have deepened the crisis: first, the intensification
of fighting around Al-Hudaydah, choking the lifeline
that the aid operation and commercial imports rely
on; and secondly, the recent further collapse of the
economy. What has happened since then on those
two issues? Fierce clashes continue in Al-Hudaydah,
including intense fighting, shelling and air strikes in
Al-Hudaydah city over the past several days. More
than 570,000 people have been forced from their homes
across the Al-Hudaydah governorate since fighting
escalated in the end of June. Due to ongoing clashes,
the eastern road from Al-Hudaydah city to Sana'a
remains blocked, which impacts trade and convoys
from the key ports that serve all the population centres
of northern Yemen.

Clashes have also continued to block access to a
milling facility that contains enough aid-financed grain
to feed 3.7 million people for a month, and several
humanitarian warehouses in the Al-Hudaydah area
have now been occupied for over two months.

The parties to the conflict continue to violate
international humanitarian law. Since late May, more
than 5,000 separate violations have been recorded,
including mass civilian casualties and destruction or
damage to critical civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals, electricity, water systems, markets, roads
and bridges. Delays in issuing visas, restrictions on
the importation of equipment and cargo, retractions
of permits, interference in humanitarian assessment
exercises, interference in monitoring and other
obstructions all limit the ability of humanitarian
agencies to provide life-saving assistance to innocent
civilians. In the absence of a cessation of hostilities,
especially around Al-Hudaydah, where fighting for
more than four months now has damaged the key
facilities and infrastructure on which the aid operation
relies, the relief effort will ultimately be simply
overwhelmed. The time surely has come for all parties
to heed those warnings.

On the economy, the central problem, as I
explained last month, is that Yemen is almost entirely
reliant on imports for food, fuel and medicine. The
available foreign exchange, from what little remains of
oil exports, money sent home from Yemenis out of the
country and international assistance, has been simply
inadequate to finance adequate levels of import to
support the population. Since 2015, the gross domestic
product - the national income of Yemen - has
shrunk by 50 per cent. More than 600,000 jobs have
been lost and hundreds of thousands of civil servants
and pensioners have not received regular payment
since 2016. More than 1.5 million families are no
longer receiving support through public safety nets and
more than 80 per cent of Yemenis now live below the
poverty line.

The collapse in the domestic economy has been
partially - but only partially - mitigated by aid
efforts, including generous funding this year from the
Gulf, the United States, European countries and other
donors, and that has allowed the United Nations and
its partners to dramatically scale up relief efforts. Aid
agencies continue to implement the world's largest
humanitarian relief operation in Yemen. More than
200 organizations are working through the United
Nations humanitarian response plan, and we have
delivered assistance to each and every one of Yemen's
333 districts this year. As many as 8 million people a
month are receiving life-saving assistance under the
programme. But because the aid operation cannot
conceivably meet the needs of all Yemenis, I called last
month for an urgent and substantial injection of foreign
exchange and the resumption of payments to pensioners
and key public sector workers, such as teachers and
health professionals.

There have been constructive discussions on
both those issues and indications of further support,
especially from Gulf countries. Today's announcement
that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates will provide $70 million to cover allowances
for 135,000 teachers all over the country is important.
However, I fear that overall action in those areas still
looks to be both too small and too slow to reverse the
trajectory towards famine, so my plea is that those
concerned address that as a matter of great urgency.

At the same time, the Government of Yemen appears
to be planning further restrictions on traders importing
essential commodities. Traders trying to import six
key commodities - wheat, rice, sugar, milk, cooking
oil and fuel derivatives - are now being told that, as
a result of new Government regulations, they must
secure lines of credit from the Central Bank. But only
a handful of lines of credit have been issued since June,
most of them in just the past few days. The enforcement
of those regulations is already having an alarming
effect. Two vessels carrying more than 29,000 metric
tons of fuel have, at the Government's request, been
refused entry into Yemen in recent days. Last month
I described the impact of desperate fuel shortages. If
current trends continue, water services and sanitation
facilities will inevitably be either curtailed or cut
off altogether.

The Government has announced that it intends
to extend enforcement of the new regulations to food
imports starting 9 November. Unless steps are taken
to expedite the process or waive those planned new
requirements, imports of key food commodities and fuel
could, in our assessment, fall by one half. That would,
for reasons I have already explained, be the death knell
for countless innocent civilians, most of them women
and children. Therefore, I call on all stakeholders to do
everything possible to avert catastrophe. We urgently
seek the support of the Council for action in five areas.

First, there must be a cessation of hostilities in and
around all the infrastructure and facilities on which
the aid operation and commercial importers rely. A
humanitarian ceasefire would reflect the obligations
of the parties to the conflict to uphold international
humanitarian law and to do everything possible to
facilitate the delivery ofhumanitarian assistance. As we
have previously made clear, the United Nations is ready
to play an enhanced role in ensuring the appropriate use
of key facilities, especially around Al-Hudaydah.

Secondly, we must protect the supply of food and
essential goods across the country. Humanitarian
and commercial imports must flow into all ports and
onwards to their final destinations. That means lifting
existing and planned restrictions on imports and
keeping the main transport routes open and safe.
Thirdly, there needs to be a larger and faster
injection of foreign exchange into the economy through
the Central Bank, along with expediting credit for
traders and the payment ofpensioners and civil servants.

Fourthly, there must be an increase in funding
and support for the humanitarian operation. Given
projected increases in needs - potentially up to
14 million people, as I have said - and the inevitable
lead times, aid agencies need additional resources now
to start scaling up relief efforts.

Fifthly, with so many lives at stake, we call upon
the belligerents to seize this moment to engage fully
and openly with the Special Envoy to end the conflict.
He and I talk about these issues all the time, and we have
discussed the five asks I have set out before members of
the Council today.

