Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, like previous speakers, we would
like to congratulate you and your team, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. We wish you success,
especially given the very heavy agenda for the month
of November. We are prepared to do everything we can
to help you and your team to achieve success in the
Council's work. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Permanent Representative of
Nigeria and her team for their very successful conduct
of the Council's deliberations in the month of October.

We thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing on the investigation of the situation in Libya
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). As we understood
from his presentation, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) is carrying out phased work on the investigation
of actions committed by representatives of the
Al-Qadhafi regime. We therefore welcome contacts by
representatives of the ICC with some of the accused
with regard to their voluntary surrender to the
investigation. We regret the fact that Al-Qadhafi
himself, who was cruelly killed on 20 October, will not
be unable to say anything to ICC investigators. I
should like to make the following additional points.

During the last briefing by the ICC Prosecutor,
we said that the Court should carefully consider the
actions of all parties in the Libyan conflict. We recall
that, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), the Council
transferred the entire Libyan situation to the Court -
not just the situation pertaining to the actions of the
Al-Qadhafi regime.

The number of civilian casualties and the scale of
the destruction of civilian sites as a result of the actions
of all parties to the conflict in Libya is very great.
Unfortunately, civilian casualties were also caused by
the actions of known NATO coalition forces.

We cannot but be alarmed about the most recent
information from Libya with regard to the uncovering
of mass graves, of both rebels and supporters of
Al-Qadhafi. It is our belief that all who are guilty of
the most serious crimes under international law
committed during the conflict in Libya will be
punished. We therefore welcome the statement issued
by the National Transitional Council (NTC) in which it
expresses its intention to conduct an investigation of
the killing of Al-Qadhafi and his son Mutassim.
However, we would like to emphasize that this is not
an issue of just investigating those separate killings; it
is a matter of a full-scale investigation of all other
serious crimes. We hope that the NTC has enough
determination and, more important, the necessary
resources to impartially and conscientiously conduct
such an investigation.

At the same time, we have nagging doubts that
the conduct of such an investigation in an appropriate
fashion can be possible, at least in the near future, in a
country with a devastated State structure and in the
virtual absence of normally functioning judicial and
law enforcement bodies. It is in that regard that we see
a substantive role for the ICC. We believe that the
Court should carefully follow the pace of the
investigation in Libya and provide it with active
assistance. We believe that if, at some point, it becomes
obvious that the Libyan side is for some reason not in a
position to carry out such an investigation, then the
ICC should step in and do so.

For our part, we are prepared to support the
efforts of the ICC in undertaking a fair investigation of
the actions of all parties to the Libyan conflict, so as to
bring to justice individuals involved in potential crimes
against humanity and serious violations of international
humanitarian law in Libya.

