Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): To evaluate the situation of children in armed
conflict around the world is to assess the future that we
are building. The UNICEF report The State of the

World's Children 2000 contains a map entitled
"Unstable Environments", which indicates that the
legacy of the decade of 1990s was more than two
million dead children, more than six million seriously
injured or permanently maimed, more than a million
orphans or children separated from their families,
unknown numbers of children psychologically
traumatized and more than 15 million children who are
refugees or are internally displaced. All of that
constitutes an extremely serious reality that needs to be
tackled. For this reason, our commitment to the first
decade of this millennium is to leave a totally different
legacy.

Because we have suffered more than three
decades of armed conflict, Guatemala understands very
well the importance of protecting and helping children
and of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of children in their original communities.
We also highlight the importance of establishing
monitoring, reporting and verification mechanisms
such as, in our case, the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA). We can say the
same of the vital need for securing timely, objective,
precise and reliable information to combat the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, as well as the
need to halt the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons and to strengthen States in order to put an end
to such crimes.

Guatemala was visited by the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Olara A. Otunnu, in February
2002. He held interviews with various officials of the
Government, of civil society, representatives of
indigenous peoples and the agencies and funds of the
United Nations. He also visited the most devastated
conflict areas in the country, which enabled him to
draw up a set of recommendations that helped in the
adoption of measures in favour of children and helped
also to give priority to the issue of the protection of
children in the Government's policies, particularly in
the areas of education and health.

That experience prompts us to support the
continued function of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and therefore we welcome the new Representative,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, whom we thank for her
timely briefing this morning. We urge her to continue
to visit countries in conflict or emerging from conflict,
because we are convinced of the benefits of such a

mechanism when it involves the broad-based
participation of civil society.

We welcome also the first report of the Secretary-
General on a specific situation of armed conflict, which
is focused on violations of the rights of the child in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, Guatemala
is a participant in the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in that country.

While it is true that the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of national peace and security lies
with States, it is also a fact that the work of the
Security Council, which is closely bound up with
armed conflicts and with peacekeeping operations,
obliges it also to tackle issues such as the recruitment
and abuse of children in armed conflicts.

My delegation concurs with and supports all the
resolutions adopted by the Council that are designed to
help establish a general framework for the protection
of children affected by armed conflict. We would like
in particular to draw attention to resolution 1612
(2005), which affirms the primary responsibility of
States to put an end to impunity and to bring to justice
those responsible for crimes against humanity and war
crimes, particularly abuses committed against children
in conflict situations. It reiterates also the Council's
resolve to ensure respect for its resolutions, norms and
principles for the protection of children in armed
conflict, and also establishes the Council's Working
Group on this issue.

For that reason, we commend the French
presidency for its report on the work of the Working
Group, and we endorse the presidential statement that
was issued this morning, which, without a doubt,
reflects the magnitude of the problem and the
imperative need to put an end to the recruitment of
children in armed forces by groups and individuals. It
is essential to ensure the reintegration of such children
in their original communities, the lasting rehabilitation
of demobilized children, and the strengthening of
military and civilian justice systems so that States can
put an end to impunity for those who have disregarded
the resolutions and condemnations issued by the
Council concerning such reprehensible practices.

We support the Secretary-General's policy of zero
tolerance and welcome the fact that we are in the "era
of application", as set out in resolution 1460 (2003),
aimed at putting an end to impunity. We regret the
delays that have taken place and the fact that the

independent review will probably not be concluded by
the end of this month, since those responsible for it
have not yet been appointed. However, we do not
believe that this review should be postponed until the
end of the year; on the contrary, we urge that it be done
as soon as possible.

We believe that the appointment of advisers for
the protection of minors in peacekeeping operations is
an excellent idea. We thanks Ms. Ann Veneman for her
report this morning, and we congratulate UNICEF in
particular for its work in the field, because their broad
global coverage of all issues relating to children gives
them a very clear picture of the problems experienced
by children in armed conflict. Above all, we urge them
to continue to work in close cooperation with States'
Governments.

I wish to thank you once again, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to express my country's views on this
very important issue.

