Mr. Whitaker: I would like to thank the Security
Council for receiving me today. As a humanist and as the
UNESCO Special Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation,
I am honoured by the opportunity to come to speak
before the Council on such an important matter, and
I am especially grateful to Ambassador Power for
extending this invitation to me.

I just returned yesterday from South Sudan, training
youth in transformative peace-building through my
foundation. I was also in the country in June with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict Leila Zerrougui and Irma
Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, advocating for
the protection and education of children affected by the
conflict and working with individuals to help push the
country towards peace.

For the past two years, I have gone in and out of
South Sudan, working with my foundation, and I have
watched and participated as the various temperaments
and conflicts have manifested themselves. As I am
sure the Council is aware, the situation in South Sudan
remains dire. After meeting with generals, soldiers and
civilians on the ground, I fear that there is no end to
the violence in sight. About 100,000 individuals have
sought shelter in the overcrowded civilians camps
around the country. Nine months after the conflict
started, most of them still do not feel that it is safe to go
back home or even know if they have a home to return
to. The city of Bentiu in the north is all but deserted,
with houses burned to the ground, hospitals closed, and
villages nearby destroyed.

What concerns me most are the conditions that
so many children in South Sudan must endure. In the
protection of civilians camp in Bentiu, some of the
boys' and girls' hair is turning red from malnutrition.
Throughout the country, hundreds of schools are
empty, and some have been turned into military camps,
as thousands of young people go without food and basic
education. Perhaps worst of all, walking through the
cities, I saw child soldiers wearing military uniforms
and carrying guns.

I know that, to everyone in this Chamber, the idea
of children living in military camps or fighting wars is
unconscionable. It is inhuman in the strictest sense of
the word: it robs its victims of a phase of their lives to
which every human being is entitled. I also know that
the Security Council, Special Representative Zerrougui,
UNICEF and the many individuals present here today
have done a lot of important work to combat the use of
child soldiers. The Security Council has given us tools
to better protect children affected by conflict and to
end and prevent the recruitment and the use of children.

The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has united the
countries that are taking action to end such practices in
their armies. Since the launch of the campaign, there
have been several positive developments: Chad recently
completed the requirements of its action plan, bringing
down the number of countries involved to seven. Just
a few weeks ago, Myanmar freed close to a hundred
children.

My commitment to the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign is rooted in my own experience growing up
in South Los Angeles, knowing many children whose
lives would be forever marred by gang violence. When
I started working with child soldiers 10 years ago and
heard their stories, I recognized the face of the trauma
that comes from having lived in conflict as a child. This
is a unique opportunity for me to make the statement
that it is unacceptable for children to become agents of
violence in any form.

What I want to talk about today is the work that
remains to be done. Until I started working with child
soldiers, I had not realized the depth of the problem
nor the complexity of its resolution. To begin with,
many different conflicts around the world engage child
soldiers, and the reasons why those children become
soldiers are often unique to each conflict. In Uganda,
the Lord's Resistance Army would kidnap children
from their villages, forcing them to kill those they love.
In some cultures, being a soldier is seen as a rite of
passage, and many children join, thinking that they will
have the honour of supporting their tribes. In South
Sudan, some children are coerced, while others go to
the military because they need food and shelter and
cannot find it any other way.

Though children may become soldiers for a variety
of reasons, the practice is singularly and universally
unacceptable, and must be ended. But there is one
common and stubborn challenge that arises whenever
we attempt to liberate children serving in armed groups,
and that is that reintegrating former child soldiers into
their families and communities is a long, complex and
resource-intensive process.

Supporting Governments in their efforts to end the
recruitment and use of child soldiers is a paramount and
necessary first step, but we must also devote adequate
resources to caring for these children once we bring
them home from war. We may take a child out of an
army, but unless we do more for him - help him
re-enter society, enrol him in a good school or teach
him a useful trade, we have not set him free. For so
many of those children, war and violence are all that
they have ever known, and if we do not take it upon
ourselves to teach them something new, then they are
just soldiers-in-waiting. And when another war breaks
out, only five or ten years in the future, they will be the
first ones recruited to go back to the battlefield.

We must act to prevent this. Not only because those
children deserve the chance to live normal, healthy
lives, but also because we have an opportunity to
prevent future violence. If we can make such children
emotionally whole again and restore a sense of normalcy
to their lives, then they will want to put down their arms
for good, and, instead of perpetuating a vicious cycle
of violence, they will be able to help build a peaceful
future for their country.

There was a former child soldier I met in Uganda.
He and his parents had been captured by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). The LRA trained the boy
as a soldier, and they forced his mother and father
into labour service. When his parents could not work
anymore, the boy looked on helplessly as the LRA
executed them, right in front of him. One day, he saw
an opportunity to escape. The boy ran from the camp,
found a place to bury his uniform, his gun and his army
gear, and wandered alone through the bush. He came
upon a family. They took him in, they fed him. The boy
told me that, in that moment, as he was sitting down
to eat dinner with those strangers, he suddenly felt so
afraid. Here he was, in that warm home with a normal
family, and he had no idea how to behave, how to talk
to them, how to eat like them. He left, found where he
had buried his gear and his weapon; he dug it all up, and
went back to the same LRA that had killed his parents.

This is not a parable; it is a true story about a real
boy. But it encapsulates the struggle that thousands of
other child soldiersjust like him face. Child soldiers are
trapped in a prison without walls. Even after their wars
are over, many of them cannot go home, because they
feel safer, more at home in an army camp than with a
loving family. That leads to a vicious cycle of violence
where, during today's wars, the seeds of tomorrow's
battles are sown, because we have created a generation
of soldiers-in-waiting, for whom war is more normal
than peace.

That is true of girls I have met as well, many of
whom were forced to commit unspeakable acts of
violence, or were coerced into sexual slavery. I visited
an internally displaced persons camp a few years ago
and spoke with a girl who had been a child soldier and,
because of that, was completely ostracized when she
returned to civilization. It was a crowded camp, acres
of mud huts all around, and not a soul would talk to
her. "They say I am crazy," she said, "and I may be,
because I do things, and I do not know why. They say I
am stupid, and I may be, because I do not know how to
do the things that everyone else can do."
I am not telling these stories to suggest that there is
no hope for such children. On the contrary, I have been
moved beyond words by the work that so many dedicated
individuals have done for former child soldiers. In Gulu
in Uganda, Sister Rosemary Nyirumbe has created
a home for girls and women whose lives have been
shattered by violence and sexual exploitation. She cares
for them and teaches them. She makes them whole
again. Okello Sam, a former child soldier himself, has
opened a school where he educates and rehabilitates
children who have been soldiers and victims of war. I
have seen students at those schools transformed from
soldiers back into children. And I have watched as they
have grown up to be dynamic, intelligent, and hopeful
young men and women who will be voices for peace
and change in their communities and will help end the
cycles of violence that have existed for so long in these
regions.

More programmes of that kind and more support for
existing ones are needed. UNICEF in particular works
with hundreds of non-governmental organizations that
provide services to former child soldiers and children
affected by conflict. It is essential that the Council
and the international community devote the resources
needed to heal such children in the present and to make
sure that they do not become soldiers again in the
future. It is that same underlying philosophy - that
we must educate and rehabilitate the victims of today's
violence to prevent tomorrow's conflicts - that has
been at the centre of the work that my foundation, the
Whitaker Peace and Development Initiative, has carried
out in Uganda, South Sudan, Mexico, and soon in other
countries, too.

I have watched as old patterns of violence and
discrimination have been broken. When we started our
programme in South Sudan in 2012, we recruited youths
from all of the region's major ethnic groups. When the
fighting broke out last December, I was heart-broken to
learn that so many of our youths were impacted by the
conflict. But I was also incredibly proud when I read
their reports and saw that they were using their training
to reach across ethnic lines, to contact each other and
to coordinate their efforts as they travelled around the
country advocating for peace.

They have shown me the beauty of the spirit of
the people of South Sudan. They give me hope, hope
that even the most vicious cycles of violence, the most
intractable conflicts can be stopped. I have seen the
transformative power that peace and diversity education
can have on young people. But for most children in war-
torn regions, and especially for former child soldiers,
those lessons do not come naturally. Rather, it is
incumbent on all ofus to muster the will and devote the
resources to create safe environments for these children
and former child soldiers so that they can receive those
lessons and move forward with their lives.

Helping children rebuild their lives after such
unfathomable traumas is central to the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign. Reintegration is a part of each
and every action plan signed by Governments with
the United Nations. For the children living in those
countries, the actions we have promised cannot come
soon enough. By the end of 2016, we want to be able to
tell children not only that they will grow up protected
from recruitment and use by Government forces in
conflict, but also that current child soldiers will be
cared for when they are brought home.

The objective is ambitious, but not unrealistic.
In the last two years, we have coalesced around this
issue in unprecedented ways and have made important
strides towards ending the use of child soldiers around
the world. Countries that have long been among the
most egregious violators are now showing a true will
to reform. The Security Council and the international
community must continue their support for such
efforts without compromise or exception, and, just as
important, we must provide the resources necessary to
put in place and strengthen the programmes we need to
truly rebuild these children's lives.

It is impossible for us to comprehend the magnitude
of a child soldier's pain - how deep his wounds, how
heavy her burden. How alone such children must feel
when they return from the battlefield to a world they do
not recognize. Unless we are there to meet them with
open arms, open homes and open schools, their wars
will never end, and neither will ours.

