Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to
welcome Foreign Minister Popolizio Bardales, Foreign
Minister Edmond, Minister Leite Magalhaes to the
Security Council.

We warmly congratulate the Republic of Peru
on convening today's meeting and on assuming the
Council presidency for a second time. We also welcome
the precise and detailed information provided by the
briefers, which has allowed us to edify ourselves on the
matter before us today. We also take this opportunity to
acknowledge the actions taken by the United Nations
system to build peace and the hard work of civilians,
military and police in countries in conflict.

A peacekeeping mission's transition to another
type of mission necessarily implies a systematic
reduction of military, police and civilian personnel. In
order for such reductions not to impede the progress
made, all necessary actions must be taken based on
a coherent analysis of the root causes of the problem
and the opportunities for and the limitations of a State
to take on the responsibilities previously shouldered
by the outgoing mission. If a country lacks certain
economic, political and security conditions, in addition
to institutional capacity, the withdrawal of a mission
will lead to a high-risk situation and, in the worst
case, to a recurrence of the prior calamitous situation.
I repeat: if a country lacks certain economic, political
and security conditions, in addition to institutional
capacity, the withdrawal of a mission will lead to a high-
risk situation and, in the worst case, to a recurrence of
the prior calamitous situation.

The handover to a political mission needs to include
due attention to the various options for dealing with
major challenges, such as security and governance, in
order to ensure an effective transition. The deadlines
for transitions should be the result of careful political
and operational assessments, with particular attention
paid to balancing factors such as political demand,
financial pressure and sustaining peace. A political
mission must be directly involved in creating the State
capacities necessary for coordinating economic and
social development initiatives. We believe that the
latter is essential if we wish to improve living standards
in the most vulnerable areas. It is a crucial step towards
addressing the origins of social problems generated by
violence and instability.

Actions required during transitions include
adaptation to the needs of host countries and the
integration of vulnerable groups, such as women and
youth, which are important both as agents of change
and in sustaining peace. Moreover, we must foster
joint actions that are linked to the United Nations
system. Furthermore, it is important to stress the need
for adequate financial resources for programmes that
support peace and development, and not forget to
allow for appropriate flexibility in periods of certain
political instability.

In terms of economic sustainability, such
institutions as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund fulfil fundamental tasks through their
initiatives. These entities ensure that host countries
have the capacity and resources for maintaining
peace through their technical-assistance programmes,
judicial-reform projects and social-coherence policies.
Trust funds constitute a useful tool for channelling
donations to emergency projects and for providing
essential budgetary support for the post-conflict stage.
We must also strengthenjoint strategic alliances among
the United Nations, bilateral and international donors,
multilateral financial institutions and the private sector.

In addition, a fundamental aspect for our delegation
is the vulnerability caused by both climate change and
natural disasters, which are common to many conflict
zones. Some countries are characterized by fragile
ecosystems that generate precarious conditions, causing
human displacement and threatening peace, stability
and security. These are some of the many challenges
to take into account when designing exit strategies and
thereby avoid the escalation and recurrence of conflict.
We recognize the excellent work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and advocate its greater collaboration with
the Security Council.

Our central concern is that all due attention be paid
to countries emerging from conflict. We must use the
Security Council's convening power, so that key actors
and strategic alliances and regional and subregional
organizations can achieve positive outcomes. For
example, the African Union provides a context that
ensures consistency among initiatives undertaken at
the national level and allows for regular exchanges
of information.

Reconciliation is a key objective in building
sustainable peace. It undoubtedly contributes to the
prevention of relapses into violence, as it enables the
creation of interpersonal and group relationships in
society and between a State and its citizens. We are
aware that circumstances are not always the same,
so each society must take into account its specific
situation when analysing the nature of a conflict and
the character of its transition.

In conclusion, to resolve current structural
conflicts, we must move towards the recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction of countries in
conflict, which is the only way for them to lay the
foundations of sustainable development, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Furthermore, the participation of citizens in political
and economic processes for promoting equity and
preventing violence at all levels must be guaranteed.
Finally, we call for redoubled efforts to find political
and financial solutions that allow Governments to build
strong national institutions, which are an effective
guarantee oflasting peace.

