The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Qatar.

At the outset, I would like to join all my
colleagues in warmly thanking Mr. Ashraf Jehangir
Qazi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq, and Ambassador Wolcott Sanders for their
respective briefings to the Council.

This year, the situation in Iraq has been marked
by heightened violence and an unprecedented
deterioration in the security situation. Recently, the
number of victims that have fallen to this violence has
reached a hundred a day, a most alarming number. This
makes the Iraqi crisis one of the gravest security crises
in the world. Whatever name we give to the conflict,
there can be no doubt that the security situation in Iraq
is critical, not only because of the growing number of
victims of violence, but also because of the diverse
nature of the violence - terrorist, criminal or ethnic-
based - with one form more dangerous than the last.
We will nevertheless need to make every effort and
explore every avenue to put an end to violence and
restore stability and harmony in Iraq.

Qatar continues to reaffirm the need to respect
Iraq's territorial integrity and sovereignty, so that the
Iraqi people can recover its liberty and security. In
order to ensure that, we must pool national,
international and regional efforts to implement that
priority. The neighbouring countries can play a major
role in that regard by helping to stabilize Iraq. Like the
international community and the United Nations, they
should contribute to setting Iraq on the path towards
stabilization and reconstruction.

In that framework, we stress the importance and
usefulness of the International Compact with Iraq.
Effecting an immediate improvement in the basic
living conditions of the Iraqi people and addressing the
alarming humanitarian situation are just as important as
national reconciliation and strengthening the security
forces to ensure Iraq's stability. Beyond the need for a
participatory, transparent and inclusive political
process that would meet the aspirations of all sectors of
Iraqi society, efforts must be pursued to control the
deteriorating security situation, so that Iraq's own
security forces can maintain security in their own
country, a task now essentially assumed by the
Multinational Force. That goal is severely hampered by
the grave current situation in Iraq, which is a serious
obstacle to the efforts of UNAMI in reconstruction,
development and the protection of human rights and
the rule of law. We cannot leave Iraq to deal with this
crisis on its own.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

