Mr. Saudabayev (spoke in Russian): It is a great
pleasure for me to appear before the Council not only
as the head of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, but also as the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I would like to thank the United Nations and
its Security Council for their close ongoing attention to
the activities of the OSCE.

It is well known that the OSCE, with its 56
participating States, is the largest security structure in
2

the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. The unanimous
decision of all 56 OSCE participating States to
nominate the Republic of Kazakhstan to their
chairmanship was an objective acknowledgement of
the impressive accomplishments of our people, in the
short span of our independence, in the social, economic
and political development of our country under the
outstanding leadership of our first President,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev.

We further believe that their decision was no less
important for the organization itself as it is now, for the
first time, chaired by a Central Asian State and a post-
Soviet Republic. Much of the current OSCE
momentum stems from the emergence of the Asian
sector. The OSCE has thus demonstrated its overall
desire to bring the countries to the east and to the west
of Vienna closer together and to adapt itself to present-
day realities.

In his address to a meeting of the OSCE
Permanent Council in Vienna on 14 January 2010,
President Nazarbayev outlined the strategy and
priorities of Kazakhstan's chairmanship-in-office of the
OSCE. Above all, we will be firmly wedded to the
fundamental principles and values of the OSCE. The
current chairmanship sees its main task as promoting
full compliance with the fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. We
also intend to work to strengthen the OSCE in every
possible way and to enhance its effectiveness and its
ability to respond adequately to emerging challenges
and threats.

During our chairmanship, we are determined to
promote a balance between all three OSCE baskets -
political and military, economic and environmental,
and human - which will help to address not only the
symptoms but also the causes of security-related
problems.

To a great extent, the implementation of our
priorities will depend on our ability to overcome the
unfortunate crisis of trust created by the dividing lines
and vestiges of the cold war that still exist in the OSCE
area. In this regard, we attach high hopes to the
continuation of the Corfu process, which has revealed
general dissatisfaction with the current state of affairs
in the organization's zone of responsibility. We intend
to strengthen the role of the OSCE in the European
security architecture. In this context, we agree that
there is a need to discuss the Russian Federation's
initiative regarding a treaty on European security.
10-23090

The OSCE should become a meaningful platform
for common security in its zone of responsibility. A
relevant dialogue will provide us with an opportunity
to strengthen the OSCE's relations with the United
Nations, in accordance with the 1999 Platform for
Cooperative Security. We count on the contribution of
the United Nations and its structures to this process.

Kazakhstan, as a recognized leader in the
worldwide process of non-proliferation, will seek to
increase the OSCE's contribution to achieving the
goals of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). We
commend the outcomes of the Security Council summit
on nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament
held in September, which unanimously adopted
resolution 1887 (2009).

As the OSCE Chairman-in-Office, we welcome
the talks between the Russian Federation and the United
States on a new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. We
express our hope for a successful global nuclear security
summit and this year's Review Conference of States
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.

We reaffirm the OSCE's commitment to
preserving the European regime of conventional arms
control and confidence- and security-building
measures. It is our hope that, in 2010, there will be
progress towards the entry into force of the Agreement
on the Adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe.

At the OSCE Ministerial Council meeting in
Athens, the participating States agreed to deepen
cooperation in combating terrorism, the accumulation
and proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
illegal migration, and trafficking in weapons, drugs and
people. The OSCE is ready to contribute to the efforts
of the United Nations on those tracks and to identify
new ways to increase added value.

The upcoming conference on the prevention of
terrorism, to be held in Astana in October, will be a
tangible contribution to the efforts to address
transnational threats and challenges, including
terrorism, religious extremism, illicit drug trafficking
and organized crime. The OSCE will continue to
promote among its participating States the ratification
of relevant United Nations conventions and the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, such
as those on combating terrorism, the non-proliferation
10-23090
of weapons of mass destruction, and small arms and
light weapons.

Kazakhstan will make an effort to contribute, to
the best of its abilities, to the resolution of protracted
conflicts, three of which are in the post-Soviet area.
Given the history and cultural affinities shared among
Kazakhstan and all the parties to the conflicts, as well
as the high standing and trust enjoyed by President
Nazarbayev within the Commonwealth of Independent
States, we hope to lend some impetus to the efforts of
all our partners involved in that complex process.

That will be the purpose of my visit, in my
capacity as OSCE Chairman-in-Office, to the southern
Caucasus, scheduled for 15 February, where the OSCE
and the United Nations, together with the European
Union, will co-chair the Geneva talks. Further close
coordination among all three parties is of great
importance to efforts to promote stability in the
conflicts in the southern Caucasus and in the
establishment of conditions conducive to their peaceful
settlement.

In Kosovo, in the course of 2010, the OSCE
mission will continue to implement its mandate as an
integral part of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999). The OSCE commends the
outcomes of the regional conference of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held in Sarajevo on
14 December 2009, which adopted the Regional
Strategy of Intercultural Dialogue and Cooperation in
South-Eastern Europe.

The strengthening of coordination between the
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia in Ashgabat,
Turkmenistan, and OSCE field presence seems to be a
promising area of interaction in the Central Asian
region. Overall, the monitoring and identification of
any signals or portents of the potential escalation of
protracted conflicts, as well as the use of preventive
mechanisms of political consultations in the OSCE
framework, will become a key tool during our
chairmanship.

We believe that a more efficient use of
capabilities of such organizations as the OSCE would
help the United Nations and its Security Council to
more effectively prevent potential security threats and
respond to them. The OSCE and other regional
intergovernmental organizations, with their unique
3
resources and advantages and good understanding of
the situation on the ground, play an important role in
the security area. This point was highlighted at the
thematic debate of the Security Council in January
under the Chinese presidency, which produced a
fruitful exchange of views on advancing cooperation of
the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of global peace and
security.

A top priority for the Chairman-in-Office is, of
course, further involvement of the OSCE in the
stabilization of Afghanistan. We plan to focus the
organization's efforts on a better protection of
Afghanistan's borders with its Central Asian
neighbours, including through the training of Afghan
personnel at the OSCE Border Management Staff
College in Tajikistan and the OSCE State Customs
Service Training Centre in Kyrgyzstan.

Throughout these years, our country has actively
supported the International Security Assistance Force.
On 29 December 2009, we signed an agreement on
land transit of NATO cargo. Such agreements have
been signed with Spain, Germany, the United States
and France. At the same time, Kazakhstan is convinced
that it is impossible to ensure that country's transition
to a peaceful and constructive life through military
means alone. The time has come for a major expansion
of the human dimension of our common efforts, as
confirmed by the outcomes of the London Conference
on Afghanistan.

That is why Kazakhstan has allocated, over the
past several years, $4 million towards the
reconstruction of schools, hospitals and roads;
provided substantial food and other humanitarian
assistance; and made a $l-million contribution to a
special Islamic solidarity fund, part of which will be
used for Afghanistan's rehabilitation. We are also ready
to provide wheat, mineral fertilizers, agricultural
equipment, construction material and other goods.

In this regard, we call on international donors to
use Kazakhstan's significant potential in this regard.
The training of national personnel is essential to the
rehabilitation of Afghanistan and its future. This year,
we will begin implementing a Kazakh-Afghan
agreement that provides for the training of 1,000
Afghan professionals at Kazakhstan's educational
establishments. Despite the repercussions of the global
financial crisis, Kazakhstan has allocated $50 million
for that purpose.

In general, Kazakhstan intends to fully use the
capabilities and the potential of the OSCE. Close
interaction between our organization and the United
Nations, which is the main coordinator of international
operations in Afghanistan, is in our common interests.
All OSCE initiatives will be implemented in full
coordination with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and other entities.

As its current Chairman-in-Office, Kazakhstan
will also attach great importance to the development of
the OSCE's economic and environmental dimension,
while emphasizing the achievement of modest yet
tangible results and adding genuine value. In the
framework of the second basket, we intend to focus on
the development of the Eurasian region's transit-
transport potential and continental transport corridors,
which, we are convinced, will contribute to efforts by
participating States to overcome the global crisis.

The issue of environmental security in the OSCE
region is extremely important. In that regard, the
tragedy of the Aral Sea poses a critical challenge. In
that context, our efforts will focus on close cooperation
with the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe and the Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.

There is potential for cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations in the important new
area of energy security. In Athens, OSCE participating
States agreed to intensify dialogue on energy security
issues, including consultations with relevant
international and regional organizations in order to
define a complementary role for the OSCE.

We intend to continue to attach great importance
to the third basket of the OSCE's agenda - the human
dimension. Respect for and the protection of people's
fundamental rights and freedoms, the development of
democracy and combating all types of intolerance and
discrimination are all integral parts of comprehensive
security.

Drawing on our highly positive experience in
ensuring lasting peace and understanding in our
country, which includes more than 140 nationalities
professing 46 faiths, Kazakhstan intends to make
tolerance and intercultural dialogue a top priority of
our chairmanship. That will be the central topic of the
OSCE high-level conference on tolerance and
discrimination, which is scheduled to be held in Astana
from 29 to 30 June 2010. That issue is especially
topical in the light of the declaration of the year 2010
as the International Year for the Rapprochement of
Cultures.

In the context of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, it is imperative to ensure effective synergy
between OSCE activities and the work of other
international organizations - first and foremost the
United Nations, the Human Rights Council and the
Council of Europe - and their extensive system of
international legal instruments. In particular, the OSCE
expects close cooperation with the relevant structures
of the United Nations system on issues pertaining to
gender equality and the rule of law.

Finally, as a regional arrangement under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE
continues to be a source of experience for other
regional organizations. Over the past two years, the
OSCE has shared its experience with the African
Union, the League of the Arab States and the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia of the Regional Forum of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In the coming
months, our organization will continue its active
dialogue with its Asian and Mediterranean partners for
cooperation, including Japan, which currently has a
seat in the Security Council. In 2009, the OSCE
welcomed Australia as its twelfth partner for
cooperation, reflecting the organization's intention to
broaden dialogue with partners beyond its area of
responsibility in order to maintain international peace
and security.

Kazakhstan's chairmanship in 2010 will coincide
with a number of important dates, including the thirty-
fifth anniversary of the conclusion of the Helsinki
Final Act, the sixty-fifth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War and the twentieth anniversary of
both the Charter of Paris for a New Europe and the
Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the
Conference on the Human Dimension. It will also mark
11 years since the holding of the last OSCE summit, in
Istanbul.

Regrettably, the first decade of this new century
has not made our world a safer or better place. The
tragedy of 11 September 2001 changed our common
understanding of war. International terrorism has

presented the world with an enemy without address or
citizenship. The security architecture of Europe has
changed. Despite long-standing efforts, Afghanistan
continues to be a source of international terrorism and
a main supplier of illicit narcotics. Not only have
protracted conflicts not been resolved, but, regrettably,
new ones have emerged. All of us have witnessed the
most serious financial crisis to affect the world. Even
in the prosperous countries of Europe, inter-ethnic and
inter-faith tolerance has declined.

All of these issues are within the scope of the
OSCE's area of responsibility. These acute problems
require the concerted attention of the leaders of the
OSCE's participating States. It is for that reason that
President Nursultan Nazarbayev has proposed holding
an OSCE summit in 2010. Concrete recommendations
for the summit have been put forward in the documents
of the Athens ministerial meetings and endorsed by the
Permanent Council in Vienna. Leaders from a variety of
States 4 including France, the Holy See, Italy, Turkey,
the Russian Federation and other countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, and Spain -
have both backed that proposal and become actively
involved in the preparations for the summit.

This year, Kazakhstan also intends to continue
the sound tradition established by our predecessor
Greece of inviting ministers for foreign affairs from
OSCE participating States to an informal meeting at
Almaty to continue our free exchange of views on
topical issues and, ideally, to achieve consensus on the
agenda and date for the summit. We are convinced that
the convening of the summit fully responds to the
noble objective and ongoing efforts of the international
community as a whole to ensure comprehensive,
indivisible and lasting security at the global level and
to strengthen trust and cooperation among States.

I take this opportunity afforded to me today as
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE to appeal to the
members of the Security Council to demonstrate
strategic far-sightedness and political leadership in
supporting the convening of the summit, which would
open up a new era in the development of one of today's
major regional organizations.

In conclusion, I note that, over the 35 years of our
existence, the OSCE has established an unparalleled
system of collective, comprehensive and indivisible
security. Unfortunately, as President Nursultan
Nazarbayev has noted, the positive historical resources
of the OSCE have their limits. Today, it is simply not
possible to endlessly draw so-called red lines and play
zero-sum games.

First and foremost, there is a need to improve the
effectiveness of international organizations to meet
new global challenges. In the light of new threats and
challenges, our common objective is to make the
OSCE even more relevant, useful and effective. In that
regard, President Nursultan Nazarbayev's vision for
Kazakhstan's chairmanship of the OSCE is most
appropriate. He advocates the four Ts of trust,
traditions, transparency and tolerance. The focus of our
chairmanship-in-office is to improve interaction and
complementarity between the OSCE and the United
Nations in various fields. We genuinely hope to have
the support and cooperation of the Security Council,
and of the Organization as a whole.

