Mr. O'Brien: I wish an Eid Mubarak to you,
Mr. President, and to all.

I would like to start by thanking my good friend
and indeed my colleague, Special Representative and
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for all his tireless,
unstinting determination and skill in seeking to find a
way forward, above all, for the Syrian people who have
suffered so long.

In the violent, brutal chaotic world we live in
today, it is a sad, tragic and blunt truth that on this,
my last appearance in this role in this Chamber,
the Security Council, the highest body in the world
charged with preventing and resolving wars, conflicts
and the desperate human death, pain and suffering
directed caused by war and conflict, I am still urging
its members, in the name of our common humanity, to
find a way to stop the Syrian people from paying the
price of political failure.

Syria is a conflict with an atrocious, incalculable
human cost, one that has forced us to see the very
worst of human behaviour. It is a conflict that as a
consequence has consumed all of us without respite for
seven bloody years. When we pause to think even for
a moment that I say this knowing the sheer scale of the
needless man-made, violent, deliberate humanitarian
horror that has made 21 million Yemenis a sad lot
today, or the desperation with which Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, with the brave help
of humanitarian workers, are trying to avert famine
for 20 million of our fellow global citizens, or the
142 million people in 40 countries who need us tonight,
or the fact that month after month the unremitting
fearful plight of the Syrian people sears into our hearts
and outrages and torments our minds, I am bound to
reflect: "surely we can do better".

Some 27 reports of the Secretary-General on the
Syrian crisis have been submitted to the Security
Council since I took up this Office in June 2015, and
countless briefings presented both in this open Chamber
and in private consultations - in 27 months, a record
55 consultations, to be accurate, 30 on Syria alone.

The Security Council is fully on notice and has heard
in minute detail about the crisis as the deadliest years of
the Syrian conflict has unfolded. We are all witnesses

to the destruction of a country, its people, its children
and its future. We have endured the sight of people
dying of starvation or a child drowning and washed up
on the beach in his family's desperate, dangerous bid
to escape the scandalous ravages of Syria then, which
continue today; pictures of emaciated starving children
in the besieged town of Madaya; and harrowing images
ofbombs and mortars raining down on schools, medical
facilities and internally displaced settlements where
there are meant to be sanctuaries - on public markets
and, yes, on those trying to bring the citizens of Syria
hope and support: humanitarian and health workers and
aid convoys.

 

We watched the parties cynically, methodically,
take out every single medical facility in eastern
Aleppo, one by one, day after day, with babies dying in
their incubators due to oxygen interruptions following
such attacks. We have all been shocked by reports of
double-tap attacks, where a helicopter or a jet bombs a
building, then waits, just long enough, for rescue and
medical workers to arrive before attacking again. We
witnessed nothing less than an all-out effort by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to impose a
new Dark Age. We were at a loss for words at reports of
Yazidi girls scratching their faces out of fear of being
bought and sexually enslaved, and of reports of men
being thrown of tower blocks for being gay - and then
being stoned to death, even after surviving the fall. Just
last week, we were reminded of the biggest chemical
attack in Syria's war, which hit the sieged eastern
Ghouta four years ago.

Meeting after meeting, therefore, we have detailed
this destruction, and yet failed to see accountability
for any of the countless war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed on the ground. As I leave the
United Nations, despite every humanitarian's best
efforts in the United Nations and beyond, none of us
can escape a share in the shame that collectively we
have not put a stop to this despite at least 300,000,
even maybe 500,000, Syrians now killed, let alone the
millions injured, displaced or who have fled, petrified.

I call again, one final time, as the United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for members of
the Council to urgently refer the situation and the
people responsible for it in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. I also call on Member States to fully
support the International Impartial and Independent
Mechanism and ask, once more, the Syrian authorities
to finally grant access to the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
To fail to do this simply reinforces impunity and
encourages the perpetrators, whoever they are, to feel
unthreatened and undeterred from their malevolent,
dastardly inhuman actions.

Over the month of July and into August, however
hideous it remains in so many parts of Syria, to remain
true to the facts, I am the first to be glad to report
that we continue to see a reduction in violence in
some areas of the country following the 4 May Astana
memorandum on de-escalation. Of course, I welcome
that. The impact of this conflict on the basic needs
and dignity of ordinary Syrians every day is clear, and
efforts to push the so-called ISIL out of its strongholds
continue to come with a terrible cost ofkilling, injuring
and displacing scores of civilians.

In Raqqa governorate, and since the beginning of
the Euphrates Wrath Operation in November last year,
over 271,00 men, women and children - including an
estimated 75,000 people from Raqqa city - have been
displaced from their homes to other locations within
the governorate, as well as to Hassakeh, Aleppo, Deir
ez-Zor and Hama governorates. That comes on the
heels of an increasing number of reported civilian
casualties as military operations, including air strikes,
are intensifying as the area that the so-called ISIL holds
shrinks. Last week alone, reports indicated that over 30
civilians were killed in the Al-Sakhani neighbourhood,
while eight people from the same family lost their lives
in a separate attack in another part of the city.

Just days before, dozens more had reportedly been
killed and injured in Raqqa city due to airstrikes and
shelling. The United Nations estimates that an average
of 27 people are being killed in Raqqa every day. Up
to 25,000 civilians still remain trapped in the city and
are increasingly exposed to the crossfire of the ongoing
fighting. They risk being killed, either by airstrikes
or by ISIL snipers or mines if they try to flee, or of
being used as human shields if they remain. Can you
imagine being faced with that choice, clinging to your
young child's hand? It is a clear clarion call: in line
with international humanitarian law, the safety of those
trying to flee must be guaranteed, without excessive
screenings or restrictions on movement. Nothing is
more important than protecting civilians during this
conflict; that has always been the case.

Be in no doubt: the heinous fault lies with the
fighters and their masters on every side. But the
international community cannot hold its head up high
when it comes to protection. Again, I therefore urge all
parties fighting in Raqqa and across Syria to take every
possible measure, however difficult and constraining
they may feel it is on their military action, to spare
and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in
ever-increasing urban settings, which compounds the
mortal risk to the innocents - as required under the
obligations they freely entered into under international
humanitarian law, are bound by and to which they have
to be held to account.

Further to the south in Syria, the security and
protection of an estimated 4,000 Syrians in Hadalat
and 45,000 Syrians in Rukban - mainly women and
children - who remain stranded at the berm along
Syria's border with Jordan, continue to deteriorate.
Airstrikes have been reported in the area in recent
weeks, causing serious distress and panic among this
already displaced, very vulnerable population, stuck in
barren desert, fearing for their lives. The establishment
of a Government of Syria-controlled corridor from
Damascus to Iraq, north of the berm, has effectively
trapped the population, restricting the movement of
both people and goods to the area. Military action has
intensified, thereby heightening levels of insecurity
and exposing the civilian population in both Hadalat
and Rukban settlements to massively greater and
graver risks. Moreover, the last cycle of distribution
of humanitarian assistance was halted on 15 June, and
we urgently seek the resumption of the distribution of
lifesaving assistance. I visited Jordan multiple times,
where I had positive discussions with the authorities on
the berm, and appreciated their continued engagement
to see that those at the berm receive the support they
so desperately need. Under today's new threat, their
best chance is to be allowed to go, even if temporarily,
into Jordan.

Back in the north of Syria, in Idlib, the situation of
displaced people in the governorate remains a cause of
deep foreboding. As local agreements continue to be
reached with various non-State armed grouped across
Syria and in neighouring Lebanon - agreements that
I am bound to say are not in line with international
standards or humanitarian principles and often force
civilians to choose between remaining and fearing
for their safety, or evacuating to insecure areas they
have never been to - 1 million people have now been
displaced to the governorate. Even though airstrikes have
diminished at least somewhat since the de-escalation
memorandum was signed in May, the situation remains
perilous for those displaced who arrive into an area
unable to cope with such voluminous movement.

It is the heroic work of our partners from
non-governmental organizations (NGO), who provide
the main part of the response to Idlib cross-border
from Turkey, that is responsible for keeping people
alive. That has been challenged, however, as the former
Al-Nusra Front - as Mr. De Mistura said, a proscribed
terrorist organization, along with the so-called ISIL, on
the Security Council sanctions list group Hayat Tahrir
al-Sham - have been battling against other opposition
groups for control of parts of Idlib. The insecurity
during fighting forced some NGOs to stop their work
temporarily.

I am gravely concerned with the current brutal
push by Al-Nusra to control local councils and other
important institutions. I call on all parties to respect
humanitarian principles and ensure the independence
of those who are providing humanitarian assistance.
As Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has said, in Idlib
protection is key. And international humanitarian law
apply to all parties, not just States - vitally important
as that is in Syria as elsewhere - it also applies to all
fighters, factions, movements and non-State actors
everywhere. It applies to them all, to us all. That is what
my colleagues in the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights need, and must be
allowed, to do: gather, preserve, document and, one day,
present such evidence to an appropriate, accountable
tribunal in order to ensure that impunity is banished.

Let me now turn to inter-agency operations
aimed at besieged and hard-to-reach locations. On
19 July, the United Nations submitted its August and
September inter-agency convoy plan to the Syrian
authorities, which seeks to reach 1,231,000 people
across 36 locations. In their response, received
on 3 August following subsequent United Nations
efforts to clarify, the Syrian authorities affirmed
that the United Nations and its partners could deliver
multi-sectoral assistance to 1,638,114 people. The
authorities clarified, and even increased, the number
of beneficiaries - owing, in part at least, to persistent
United Nations engagement - and authorized more
people than requested for seven locations. That is
welcome news. But the key now is to turn those
requests and approvals for outreach to besieged and
hard-to-reach locations into actual deliveries to Syrians
in need. The team on the ground is working day and
night to make that a reality, including negotiating with
the Syrian authorities to turn partial approvals into full
approvals and - let me stress, with all the force at my
command - to put an end to the removal of medical
supplies, which continues.

It has finally been accepted that birthing kits are
not hostile weapons. What is in the minds of the brutes
who remove such items, and of the people at the highest
levels in the Syrian Government who order that to
happen? No wonder they have not allowed me back into
Syria since December 2015. Speaking truth to power
only hurts when the truth is shameful.
So far this month, humanitarian convoys have
delivered desperately needed lifesaving assistance to
the besieged towns of Douma, in rural Damascus, and
Barzeh. In total, 55,000 people in besieged locations
have received assistance: 35,000 people in Douma on
17 August were provided with multisectoral assistance,
and 20,000 people in Barzeh received food and nutrition
assistance on 26 August. The delivery to Douma
was notable in that it was the first convoy to proceed
into eastern Ghouta since the deployment of Russian
military police to the area as part of the de-escalation
area initiative. In addition, two inter-agency convoys
delivered lifesaving assistance to the area around
northern rural Hims, one to the hard-to-reach towns of
Talbiseh and Tlul Elhomor on 19 August, and a second
to Al-Rastan on 27 August. In total, 191,500 people in
need were provided with multisectoral assistance.

I am the first to acknowledge, as demonstrated
by concurrent developments in Astana, Amman and
Cairo in recent months, that there remain persistent
and determined efforts to reduce violence through
de-escalation agreements. I welcome those efforts,
and I hope the Astana guarantors will soon be able
to finalize the remaining operational and technical
modalities for all de-escalation areas and for promoting
confidence-building measures regarding the issues
of detainees, abductees and missing persons and
humanitarian demining. I urge all parties to work
together to consolidate and expand those ceasefires. I
alsowishtoreiteratethatanyreductioninhostilitiesmust
also generate concrete results for the safe, unimpeded
and sustained freedom of movement and humanitarian
access by the United Nations and our partners in full
conformity with international humanitarian law, that
is, in accordance with the principles of impartiality,
independence and neutrality, in order to relieve the
suffering and meet humanitarian needs wherever they
arise, and where we determine the beneficiaries, the
quantities and what is needed.

Access to areas identified for de-escalation, and
to many other areas across Syria where needs remain
high, still falls short of what is required. In particular,
in areas where there has been a decrease in fighting
there is no excuse for any side to restrict access. And
let me say it loud and clear yet again: humanitarian and
health workers are not a target.

I would like to reiterate our impartial appreciation
to the Russian Federation and to voice our support for its
initiative, presented in the Council on 9 August, aimed
at scaling up humanitarian operations in de-escalation
areas. Be assured that the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners have been actively working
on preparedness planning and remain committed
to scaling up operations and providing lifesaving
assistance to men, women and children in need in the
de-escalation areas and throughout the country, despite
the challenging and dangerous operational environment
on the ground.

In recent days, the deployment of convoys to
Douma, Barzeh, Al-Rastan, Talbiseh and Tlul Elhomor
has shown that, when there is sufficient political will,
with the active engagement of the Russian Federation
and other Member States, access to besieged and
hard-to-reach locations is possible. That said - and
I cannot stress this point strongly enough - the only
way of guaranteeing that the Russian initiative will be
a continuing success is by ensuring that administrative
delays on the part of the Government of Syria are lifted
once and for all.

We cannot keep waiting for the signing of the
necessary facilitation letters. Give us the letters, and
we will deploy. In fact, every month thousands of
facilitation letters have been readily signed for regular
programmes in Government-controlled areas - the
vast majority of those that have been requested. Yet
for access to cross-line areas, only a small percentage
of those areas approved by the Government actually
receive facilitation letters. Of course, that is not right.
It is outrageous and morally reprehensible, let alone in
breach of international humanitarian law. That must
change - and now. Non-State armed groups must also
provide the necessary security guarantees in an equally
timely manner. Otherwise, despite our very best
intentions, we will not be able to noticeably increase our
deliveries to areas where violence has ceased through
the de-escalation agreements. It is as simple as that.

I must also share my frustrations about the little
progress made in recent months in responding to the
needs of the many thousands of people still besieged
in Fo'ah, Kafraya and Yarmouk. Following months of
difficult negotiations, we were informed in mid-August
that an agreement had finally been reached between
the various parties for aid distributions to take place
simultaneously in those three locations. We loaded
our trucks on 17 August, only to off-load them again
a week later, on 23 August - the day on which we
were informed that the agreement was no more. That is
disgusting. It is scandalous and an outrage, and I urge
all Member States, in particular those with influence,
to do all they can to bring the parties to their senses. I
am told that a new agreement among the parties was
apparently reached on 27 August, but where is the
evidence? I have to be hopeful that this time we will
succeed in getting through. Thousands of people, for
the most part women and children, depend upon our
collective action.

As I draw to a close, let highlight a vital point. Ten
days ago we commemorated World Humanitarian Day,
where we took time to pay tribute to all the brave women
and men who have died in humanitarian service, in Syria
and around the world. Let us together honour them here
today, as well as those who continue to risk their lives
every day in Syria and elsewhere in their quest to help
others. Let us also stand in solidarity with the millions
of civilians in Syria whose lives have been destroyed
by the conflict, their dignity obliterated, their loved
ones killed, their towns reduced to rubble, their hope
for the future shattered. We stand in solidarity with
them to send a clear message to the world: civilians,
humanitarians and health workers, wherever they are,
are not a target.

As I take my leave, despite all the grave humanitarian
challenges being faced by our fellow human beings
today in over 40 countries, I remain inspired and
eternally grateful for the selfless, skilled, persistent,
brave and courageous work of the humanitarian and
health workers around the world - in the field as well
as those running organizations and coordinating, be
they in the United Nations or in international and local
non-governmental organizations and partners. They
have worked to save millions of lives and, in today's
world of overwhelmingly protracted, man-made
and avoidable conflict settings, to protect civilians
wherever possible.

Yes, we have to have safe, unimpeded access and the
absolute right to principled humanitarian relief through
action in line with international humanitarian law to
meet the needs of the vulnerable. And yes, we will need
more and more of the continuing generosity of an ever-
broadening number of donors of financial resources.
And yes, that is best done, for the scale necessary
to meet the exponentially rising demand, through
coordinated United Nations and multilateral channels,
as fully endorsed at the World Humanitarian Summit.

I leave with a heavy heart, however. As I survey
this famous horseshoe table, I see the 15 members of
the Security Council who represent the world's hopes
for peace and security and are charged, even while
representing their own capitals and their respective,
competing perspectives, with rising above those separate
interests to reach the collective responsibility for the
interests of all the peoples of the world by recognizing
and acting to put our common humanity and our
responsibility to our fellow global citizens first - their
lives and their protection - that is the humanitarian
imperative. That is our and Council members' collective
responsibility and collective accountability.

In Syria, Yemen, or the countless other areas where
we encounter the desperate man-made humanitarian
needs of people caught up in conflict crises, surely
what divides members in the Council cannot be more
important than what must unite them and us all - our
common humanity and our goal of relieving the suffering
of the world's most vulnerable. We must give hope and
a future to those women, men, elderly, sick and the
children - the young girls and boys - caught up in
crises, who deserve no less of a life than each member
sitting around this horseshoe table.

