Mr. Leon: Since the high-level meeting on Libya
that took place on the margins of the General Assembly
on 2 October, the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) convened what should have been a
final round of talks in Skhirat, Morocco, to facilitate
Libyan deliberations on the composition of the
presidency council that would lead the country's future
Government of national accord.

After four days of intensive consultations, which
concluded on 8 October, members of the Libyan political
process succeeded in forging consensus on a list of six
nominees, including a Prime Minister-designate, three
deputy Prime Ministers and two Senior Ministers. The
proposed composition of the presidency council was
seen as a means of securing the necessary consensus
and inclusivity that would allow for a Government of
national accord to assume office with the requisite
support and backing of all relevant political and security
stakeholders, as well as the Libyan public at large.
While the proposal was hailed as a major breakthrough
in the dialogue process, strong objections were voiced
in some quarters, notably from within the House of
Representatives, for what was perceived as inadequate
representation for the east, particularly Benghazi.

In the three weeks that followed the announcement
of the proposed composition of the presidency council,
the United Nations has consulted closely with parties
from across the political spectrum in an effort to
resolve outstanding concerns regarding representation.
In this regard, there appears to be growing support to

the idea of expanding the presidency council as a means
of consolidating and safeguarding Libya's historical
traditions of geographical and regional balance and
representation.

Despite the adoption of the 21 October constitutional
timeline by which we had hoped that a final political
settlement would be agreed and endorsed by the main
political stakeholders, there is yet to be a formal and
final pronouncement by either of the main political
stakeholders on the Libyan political agreement and
the proposed presidency council. Working closely with
representatives of the international community, the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya continued to
impress upon both the Libyan House of Representatives
and the Tripoli-based General National Congress the
need to urgently convene sessions that would allow
for a democratic vote on the political agreement and
proposals for the presidency council.

From the moment of its inception, the United
Nations-facilitated Libyan political dialogue process
has always been predicated on the assumption that it
would be inclusive of all parties and that any solution
put forward would have to be viable and comprehensive
such that it would bring to an end the bitter political
institutional divide that has been at the heart of the
conflict that has brought much destruction and suffering
to Libya and its people. While I have always remained
hopeful about the chances of Libya's leaders reaching
a peaceful agreement, I have had no illusions about the
difficulties and challenges that would likely face the
political dialogue process.

As I have noted on numerous occasions before the
Council, there can be no viable peace in Libya without
the constructive engagement and buy-in of all the
parties. Forging a meaningful consensus and arriving
at a balanced political agreement was likely to be a
protracted and difficult process. Success would always
be dependent on the parties' collective endorsement
of an agreement. Likewise, Libyan ownership of the
dialogue process and of its outcomes has been at the
heart of the United Nations mediation efforts. This is a
principle that is simply non-negotiable.

But the magnitude of the dangers facing Libya
should also not be underestimated. This is a message
that I continue to reiterate to all the parties in Libya,
including to the leaderships of both the House of
Representatives and the General National Congress.
The country's economic and finances are already
showing signs of fatigue and rapid decline. The absence
of effective authority is manifesting itself in growing
insecurity and criminality across many parts of the
country. The growing influence of terrorist and other
extremist groups is posing a direct threat to the very
authority of the Libyan State. The cruelty and barbarity
witnessed in areas under their control are an omen of
what may yet come unless there is united action to
contain and eliminate this growing threat.

Equally important is the scale of the human
suffering. The political and military conflict has
exacted a heavy toll on the Libyan people. Death and
displacement have become an all-too common theme,
particularly in Benghazi, which has for the longest
duration borne the brunt of the conflict in Libya.
Massive displacement of population, the destruction of
entire civilian neighbourhoods and vital infrastructure,
and large-scale human rights abuses that continue to
take place on a regular basis have scarred the city beyond
recognition. The cowardly targeting by terrorists of
peaceful demonstrators in the city on 23 October was
an urgent reminder of the need to expedite efforts
towards peace, and that restoring peace and stability
to Benghazi will be the first step towards stabilizing
Libya. Illegal migration and human trafficking, the
disruption to basic services and shortages in food and
medicines have also added another important dimension
to the human suffering unfolding in Libya.

I wish to take this opportunity to remind Libya's
leaders, particularly the leaderships of both the House
of Representatives and the General National Congress,
that they shoulder a political and moral responsibility
to draw the Libyan dialogue process to a successful
conclusion. There can be no further justification
for delaying any longer a vote by their respective
memberships on the outcome of the dialogue process.
In this regard, a majority of members within both the
House of Representatives and the General National
Congress have signed letters stating clearly their
determination to endorse the outcomes of the political
dialogue process. The respective leaderships of both
houses have an obligation to take note, uphold the
democratic principles which they have been entrusted
with, and facilitate a debate and vote on the issue in
accordance with existing rules of procedure and without
threat or intimidation.

In the interest of upholding the democratic process
and ensuring institutional unity, I urge the respective
leadership of the House of Representatives and of the
General National Congress to listen to calls within their
respective houses, and those of the Libyan people, and
to desist from any further attempts and manoeuvring
to obstruct the democratic process and undermine the
achievements of the dialogue process.

The same message has also been echoed across
the spectrum of Libya's political and civil society,
including by participants from the different tracks of
the Libyan political dialogue process, as well as by
numerous armed groups that have been party to the
military conflict over the past year. Among all there is
a growing sense of urgency and an insistence that the
country should no longer be held hostage to the narrow
interests of a few on either side of the political divide.

Libya's leaders have a unique opportunity to reach
a political settlement that spares their country and their
people further bloodshed and destruction. The political
agreement negotiated within the framework of the
dialogue process is the result of a year-long complex
process of negotiations and compromises that have
sought to create a viable middle ground on which all
Libyans can meet. The proposed agreement was never
intended to provide a panacea for all of Libya's problems,
but rather to lay out a set of structures and principles
that would guide the next phase of Libya's political
transition until such time as the constitution-making
process was completed. I therefore call on Libya's
leaders to uphold Libya's higher national interests and
safeguard their country's national unity, independence
and territorial integrity. They owe that to their country
and to the Libyan people.

The next few days will be critical to Libya's future.
While the United Nations will continue to encourage
the two main political stakeholders to formally endorse
the political agreement and the proposed composition
of the presidency council, it will also continue working
with the moderate voices from the different dialogue
tracks and from across Libya's political and civil society
spectrum, as well as those among security actors, for
the sake of forging a viable way forward.

The United Nations and the international
community must also be prepared to move quickly in
mobilizing support for a future Libyan Government of
national accord. The task facing any such Government
will be daunting, and the technical, human and material
resources needed to address existing challenges would
be beyond the capacities of Libya's much-weakened
State institutions. In reassuring Libya's leaders of
the international community's commitment and
determination to undertake every effort to provide

the requisite support and assistance to a future Libyan
Government of national accord, they must be reminded
that the onus is now on them to forge a new political
reality and bring about a decisive and permanent end
to their country's political turmoil and armed conflict.

