Mr. Nyamitwe (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Angola on
your leadership of the Security Council for the month
of March, and to thank you for organizing today's
briefing on the situation in Burundi. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General for his presence today and would
like to thank him, personally and on behalf of President
Nkurunziza and the people of Burundi, for his recent
visit to our country. I must also not fail to thank the
Security Council for its visit to Burundi in January. I
am also grateful to the other speakers for the quality of
their contributions to today's meeting, even while I am
sure they will understand if I cannot fully agree with the
statement by Mr. Al Hussein. One sometimes wonders
whether he understands the situation in our country,
since his statement has so many gaps, so many troubling
facts and, frankly speaking, so many contradictions. In
my statement, I would like to emphasize some essential
aspects of the political, security and human rights
situations in Burundi.

With regard to the political dialogue, we are aware
that the current political problems facing Burundians
can be solved only through an inclusive, open and
sincere dialogue among Burundians themselves, both
inside and outside the country, conducted correctly
and holistically. The Head of State has already
committed to undertaking that dialogue, and he already
communicated his willingness in that regard to the
Secretary-General during his visit on 3 February, and
to the high-level delegation of the African Union, led
by President Jacob Zuma of South Africa, which visited
Bujumbura in the wake of the unfortunate hearing of
25 February.

We are in complete agreement that it is clear that
a political solution must be preferred to a military one.
It is true that there are still parties in Burundi who
believe in a military solution, but we believe that they
are mistaken. One of the recommendations made at the
meeting of the Ministers of Defence of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region held on
10 February in Luanda called on all stakeholders to
engage in the inter-Burundian dialogue, which is the
best way to build peace and unity for the Burundian
people. Yes, the dialogue we want should be inclusive,
but we should nonetheless be able to express our oft-
repeated position that those who joined in the attempt
to overthrow our legitimate institutions on 13 May 2015
can obviously not be granted an opportunity to achieve
through dialogue what they failed to achieve through a
coup d'etat.

It is therefore understandable that the dialogue
cannot be used as a way to disguise or reinforce a culture
of impunity in Burundi or to trample on universally
recognized principles of democracy. Rather, dialogue
should be a way to consolidate peace and social justice.
We have therefore committed in good faith to such
a political dialogue, whose internal momentum is
well under way under the leadership of the National
Commission on the Inter-Burundian Dialogue, which
is working hard throughout the country to ensure that
no one is left out. In any case, all Burundian citizens
are invited to contribute to our national reconstruction.

With regard to national reconciliation, the President
of the Republic announced a week ago the official start
of the operational phase of the National Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in the presence of several
of our international, technical and financial partners.
As the Council is aware, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, which is chaired by a cleric, consists
of 11 members, of whom six are Hutu, four Tutsi and
one Twa, which corresponds to the quotas recognized
by the Arusha accord and confirmed by the 2005
Constitution. The Commission therefore symbolizes
political, ethnic, regional and gender inclusiveness.
It is tasked with preparing a programme for pardons,
reconciliation and reparation to be submitted to the
Government and Parliament of Burundi. Burundi must
take advantage of such an opportunity to work calmly
to build their country's future in order to ensure that the
events of the past can never be repeated. We are talking
about a huge work in progress - as the Arusha accord
foresaw - to which Burundi's Head of State attaches
enormous importance, and we will of course be very
happy if the international community would lend us
its assistance.

On the regional front, consultations are ongoing with
subregional facilitation in order to arrive at agreement
on important points for the next dialogue session with
those members of the diaspora who desire peace, with
full inclusivity, as was outlined in resolution 2248
(2015), adopted by the Security Council on 12 November
of last year. Among other things, those points concern
the effective identification of participants as well as the
items on the agenda, in accordance with the proposed
methodology, with which Burundi is in full agreement.
We are grateful to the former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, the new
facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, who is, as
the representative of Tanzania just mentioned, fully
involved in consultations in the region. The day before
yesterday he was received by President Museveni of
Uganda, yesterday he was received in President Kagame
of Rwanda and today he was received by President
Pierre Nkurunziza of Burundi. As I speak, I think he is
on his return journey.

With regard to security, I can confirm that overall
it is good. It is true that there are still some challenges
here and there, but overall the situation is good at the
national level and citizens see peaceful activities.
However, there are still some elements of the opposition
who are throwing grenades at peaceful citizens; I think
others have referred to that. Contrary to the information
provided by the opposition to the foreign press and
associated or supportive media, Burundi is not guilty
of those crimes. If you come to Burundi you will see
that the image that is being put out by the media is
not true at all. The good news is that the few cases of
criminality and local terrorism aimed at drawing the
attention of the international community are being
brought under control.

Several young people who were manipulated and
recruited into criminal groups gave themselves up to the
security services with weapons, ammunition and other
military paraphernalia, and this movement to renounce
violence continues. The criminal elements who turned
themselves in were turned over to the National Human
Rights Commission for their reintegration into their
communities of origin. They are cooperating and have
indicated certain locations where these opposition
groups have killed and buried citizens in common
graves. Today another common grave was found in a
zone that was under the control of the opposition for a
long time.

For us and for the Council it is clear that throwing
grenades into crowds is terrorism, which must be
treated and condemned as such. No ideology, no
political fight can justify such senseless acts that take
the lives of children and women, who have nothing to
do with the political situation in the country. We ask the
Security Council to condemn the opposition's violence
and terrorism, which contravenes the provisions of
resolution 2248 (2015).

In order to restore sustainable peace to our country,
we have placed the civilian population at the heart of
the Government's concerns. The process is under way
and the results have been satisfactory. Because of the
cooperation among the population, the police, the
justice sector and the administration, many weapons
have been seized from citizens.

In order to continue with the disarmament
process in transparency and cooperation, as the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission said earlier, there is a need for an
international presence. That is the reality with the
presence of African Union human rights and military
observers, whose numbers have now been increased to
100 in each of the two categories. Although we will
soon sign the memorandum of understanding, that has
already been agreed; of course, we now have to wait for
the personnel to be identified and sent to the country.

My country Burundi cannot remain silent. We will
never be able to remain silent while we are subject to
aggression. This clearly represents an existential threat.
This has to do with acts of aggression coming from
Rwanda, a neighbouring country with which Burundi
has much in common in terms of culture. Our languages
are not that dissimilar. Several credible reports have
already confirmed that Rwanda is facilitating the
recuitment, the training and the arming of Burundian
refugees in order to destabilize Burundi. I cannot give
the Council the full list, but if one wants to know more
you can read the report of the United Nations Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the reports of Refugees International and Human
Rights Watch. There is irrefutable proof available to
us going back to the beginning of the insurrection in
2015, as well as the testimonials of children who were
recuited and trained by Rwanda into the movement.
They refer to specific military sites.

We have also provided similar information to
institutions. The Head of State in Burundi took the
opportunity to mention that clearly to the Secretary-
General when he visited Burundi. It is something we
take very seriously. We cannot remain silent in that
regard. Let no one be under any illusions about that.
As long as the situation persists, we must talk about
it so that these activities stop. It is difficult today
to know who is behind these acts - with so much
information, proof and details available to Burundi
as well as to the international community. On several
occasions, Burundi has asked for an expanded joint
verification mission from the Conference on the Great
Lakes Region be sent to Burundi to clarify matters and
determine whether those allegations are well-founded
or not. That has not been the case; nevertheless, that has
not discouraged us in the least.

Through our Permanent Mission in New York,
Burundi has officially asked the President ofthe Security
Council to address the issue urgently, as it seriously
threatens international peace and security - not just
in Burundi and Rwanda, but also the whole region.
The time to act is now, as tomorrow will be too late.
Today our Government once again launches an appeal
to the Security Council to remind Rwanda that it has
international obligations in terms of refugees as well as
in terms of good neighbourliness. There are resolutions
and instruments to which it freely adhered that call
for respect for the peaceful coexistance of States in
accordance with international law. Its recruitment
activities must stop; the training and arming of negative
forces that are attacking Burundi must also stop. We
hope that that Council will accede to our request.

With regard to human rights, my delegation recalls
that Burundi attaches great importance to human
rights. We have adopted a zero-tolerance policy in
this area. We acknowledger that there are still cases
of human rights violations, as there are elsewhere. We
have established a judicial investigation commission
to shed light into certain allegations of human rights
violations from the beginning of the insurrection up
until today. The human rights path in Burundi is not a
rocky one; there are challenges, yes, but we have faith
that we can overcome them. The willingness is there. It
is palpable. The support of partners is needed to move
forward together on the path towards democracy.

We also recall that our Government has placed the
fight against impunity at the heart of its priorities. That
is done without concern for political affiliations. We
cooperate closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. He knows that
well, as does his office in Burundi. We have given them
free access to our services regarding transparency
issues. The same goes for the human rights observers
of the African Union, the number of which, as I just
mentioned, hasjust been increased. Ofcourse, we regret
the fact that certain reports do not necessarily reflect
the situation on the ground. We can say that this is more
or less to be expected, within certain limitations.

We have been just as cooperative with the human
rights experts of the United Nations who have just spent
time in our country. At the end of their mission a few
days ago, the experts held a press conference during
which they declared:

"We have observed a relative calm in Burundi.
We should point out that we have not noted a
disturbance. We have noticed a glimmer of hope,
a clear and shared will to engage and to move
forward to improve peace and security in Burundi.
Within the framework of our mission, we cannot
say that the situation in Burundi is an explosive
one - absolutely not."

With regard to the freedom ofexpression and ofcivil
society, I wish to inform all present that Burundi has a
good tradition of freedom of expression and very active
civil society that we wish to maintain. In that regard,
we have just authorized the re-opening of two private
radio stations that had been destroyed in the wake of the
attempted coup of 13 May 2015. I am speaking of Radio
Isanganiro and Rema Television and Radio, which have
already begun to broadcast. In addition to those two
radio stations, which have resumed their activities, the
National Communications Directorate has also just
authorized a private radio station, Izere FM.

With regard to socioeconomic development, my
delegation has the impression that the political concerns
of our partners have eclipsed the economic and social
needs of our population. Clearly, placing political
aspects before socioeconomic concerns is a factor that
could lead to increased stability in our country. The
two dimensions should receive equal attention from our
partners, whom we ask to resume cooperation with our
Government, which seeks to do the proper thing. We
ask our partners to seriously consider the appeal made
the President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, on behalf
of the African Union high-level delegation to Burundi,
with regard to the importance of resuming cooperation
as a factor for strengthening peace.

With regard to cooperation with the European
Union, my Government takes note of its recent
declaration relating to the suspencion of direct aid
of the European Union to Burundi. Contrary to what
Mr. Zeid said just now, we do not have the impression
that this decision is in accordance with article 96 of the
Cotonou Agreement. There are clearly two parties to
any agreement. No party cannot take advantage of its
greater strength, be it numeric or qualitative, to impose
on the other party its vision of the situation or, quite
frankly, its political preference. This is indeed a clear
violation of the Cotonou Agreement, which the African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries will at some
point have to review to ensure improved fairness, even
if there is no real equality, between the ACP countries
and the European Union. As I said, the Agreement is
not a one-way street.

The Burundian Government regrets the fact that
European Union has not taken into account positive
developments in the ongoing inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue or recently adopted human rights measures,
including the pardoning of more than 2,000 prisoners
and the cancellation of arrest warrants against certain
politicians, the liberation of a number of people who
had been detained with respect to the insurrection, and
the the re-opening of a number of private radio stations.
Despite this hasty and unfair decision, my Government
will continue wholeheartedly to redress the political
and security situations in the interests of the well-
being of the Burundian people, while bearing in mind
our sovereignty, territorial integrity and good relations
with our partners.

Regarding cooperation with the United Nations,
Burundi offers - I repeat, offers - its full
cooperation with the country team, the team of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General, as well
as the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Burundi remains available to the
Secretary-General to discuss and agree on the size
and mission of the Special Adviser's team provided for
under resolution 2248 (2016).

My delegation recalls that African Heads of State,
members of the African Union Peace and Security
Council (AUPSC), the high-level delegation of the
AfricanUnionledbySouthAfricanPresidentJacobZuma
and the Burundian people, through their Parliament,
rejected the option of an armed international presence
in Burundi, favouring the option of the inter-Burundian
political dialogue and observation missions. We clearly
reiterate our unequivocal position. The Head of State
reiterated this position to the Secretary-General during
their talks of 23 February in Bujumbura.

I would like to conclude my remarks with two
or three words. When the Council receives reports
on Burundi in New York, it gets the impression that
the country is on the precipice, as has often repeated
Mr. Zeid. This perception of the country has led some
institutions to make decisions that, in our opinion, were
unfortunate - such the as AUPSC decision to deploy
5,000 men. This decision was not based on realities on
the ground.

We do not at all feel that we have closed the door to
initiatives that would be willing to take the reality on
the ground into account. Whenever the Peacebuilding
Commission has sought to visit and see Burundi, it
has been able to do so without problem. The Security
Council has come and it has seen that Burundi was not

on the brink of genocide. I very sincerely and solemnly
urge those who would understand the reality on the
ground to come themselves to see it rather than rely on
reports that are sometimes not necessarily a reflection
of reality on the ground and seek or serve other
interests that are certainly contrary to the interests of
the Burundian people and the region in general.

My country, Burundi, my people, the people
of Burundi - Hutus, Tutsis and Twas together -
aspire to peace. Burundi absolutely aspires to peace.
The Burundian people have suffered in the past and
certainly would not wish to find themselves today or
in the coming years in the same conditions in which
they found themselves in 1965, 1969, 1972, 1993 and
beyond. That is why we invite not only members of
the Security Council, but also all the countries of the
region to work for the country to remain stable, so that
the institutions are stable and not disrupted, and to
help the Burundian people to realize their aspirations
to participate legitimately, like all other peoples of
the world, in all that globalization can offer today in
material terms, and to cushion the shocks that this same
globalization can bring to the peoples of the South.

