China voted in favour of the draft resolution on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) (S/2020/607). COVID-19 is the most severe global challenge facing the world today. The Security Council shoulders the primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security, and, at this critical moment, the Council is duty-bound to take action within its mandate to tackle the negative impact of COVID-19 on international peace and security. The adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) demonstrates the general consensus of Council members and the States Members of the United Nations in promoting more prominent roles for the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well as solidarity and cooperation in the fight against COVID-19. It shows the Council's leadership and its ability to act. It is an important outcome for the Council and the United Nations and a victory for multilateralism. China thanks France and Tunisia for their tireless efforts as co-penholders and appreciates the responsible and cooperative attitude of the vast majority of Council members. This resolution was not easily adopted. One country insisted on a unilateral stance, ignoring the call of the international community. It went back on its words and broke its promise and the consensus, and delayed the consultation process again and again. The Council was thus prevented from taking action to support the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan. That country has also refused to lift unilateral coercive measures against relevant countries, turning a blind eye to the call of the Secretary- General and countries around the world to do so. That has exacerbated the suffering of innocent civilians and deepened the humanitarian crisis in some countries and regions amid COVID-19. From the very beginning, China has been supportive of the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire and the Global Humanitarian Response Plan, and has voiced its support on various occasions. Most recently, China was one of the 172 Member States and observers that issued the joint statement of support for the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. China constructively engaged in consultations on the resolution, worked tirelessly with most of the Council members to build the widest possible consensus and showed maximum flexibility. As a result, we have managed to overcome all obstacles to ensure that the Council can send a positive message of solidarity and cooperation at this difficult time. China appreciates that the resolution refers to Assembly resolution 74/270, which reflects Member States' full recognition of the central role played by the United Nations and the World Health Organization in the global fight against COVID-19. In addition, China welcomes the inclusion of the concept of putting the people at the centre, which is conducive to addressing root causes of conflicts and is highly significant, as it reflects the demands and concerns of developing countries. China calls on the international community to seize the opportunity of the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) to encourage parties to conflict to respond to the Secretary-General's appeal fora global ceasefire, immediately cease hostilities, work together to combat COVID-19, save lives, commit to resolving disputes peacefully through political and diplomatic means, ensure access to humanitarian assistance and enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers. COVID-19 is the common enemy of humankind. In the face of that unprecedented test, all countries should put people at the centre, always put people's lives and health first and do their utmost to save lives. We must have a responsible attitude and adopt resolute measures to fight the virus. Moreover, we must be guided by science and reject politicizing, labelling and stigmatizing. The international community must cooperate and work together to combat COVID-19, and particularly to assist developing countries in that regard. China has consistently given top priority to people's lives. China has adopted the most comprehensive, thorough and stringent measures, which have helped to bring the outbreak under control at the lowest possible cost. At the same time, China is working for recovery in collaboration with the international community. China has provided support to more than 150 countries and international organizations, including all those on the Council's agenda. The Council's adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) once again proves that multilateralism is the only right choice in a world facing multiple challenges. Unilateralism, by contrast, has no support and will only come to a dead end. At this critical juncture, China firmly takes the side of multilateralism, the vast majority of Member States and fairness and justice. China calls upon all countries to envisage a global community with a shared future, advance multilateralism, strengthen solidarity and collaboration and uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the United Nations-centred international system to jointly create a better future for humankind.
