Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Thank you, Madam, for
permitting me to address the Council in Austria's
capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in order to
make a few remarks on the efforts to raise the issue of
children and armed conflict in the OSCE.

Permit me at the outset to thank the Jamaican
presidency for scheduling this important debate and for
your leadership, Madam, on this issue.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) for their
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General. The
report contains rich information on ongoing activities
and thinking on the protection of children in armed
conflict. Its many recommendations are most useful,
not only for the future work of the Security Council
and the United Nations, but also for regional
organizations such as the OSCE.

On behalf of the Chairman-in-Office of the
OSCE, the Austrian Foreign Minister, Benita Ferrero-
Waldner, I would like to use this opportunity to pay
tribute to the decisive role of Mr. Olara Otunnu in
advocating and recommending concrete action by the
OSCE. In the course of the past 10 months, he twice
addressed important OSCE forums on the protection of
children in armed conflict. I would also like to
acknowledge the important contribution of UNICEF to
the deliberations of the OSCE and express the interest
that Ms. Carol Bellamy will participate in an OSCE
meeting devoted to this issue in the near future. It is
our hope that the OSCE and UNICEF will develop
close partnerships and collaboration in the field. This
could also contribute to the preparations for next year's
special session of the General Assembly on the follow-
up to the World Summit for Children.

At the Istanbul OSCE Summit in November 1999,
the heads of State or Government of the participating
States of the OSCE committed themselves to actively
promoting children's rights and interests, especially in
conflict and post-conflict situations, to regularly
addressing the rights of children in the work of the
OSCE and to paying particular attention to the physical
and psychological well-being of children involved in or
affected by armed conflict. In the Charter for European
Security, signed at the Summit by heads of State or
Government, participating States express the will to
develop and implement measures to promote the rights
and interests of children in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations, including refugees and internally
displaced children, and to look at ways of preventing
forced or compulsory recruitment for use in armed
conflict of persons under 18 years of age.

As a consequence, this year's Human Dimension
Seminar of the OSCE, held in May in Warsaw, was
specifically devoted to the topic of children and armed
conflict in order to identify ways for the organization
to improve its protection framework for children and to
develop concrete policies and actions, in particular for
OSCE field operations. The Seminar was attended by
representatives of 47 participating States of the OSCE,
of international organizations and non-governmental
organizations, as well as of OSCE institutions and field
operations. For the first time in OSCE human
dimension events, the Seminar was conducted in an
interdimensional way, associating politico-military
topics and politico-military experts with its
proceedings, allowing for a useful dialogue between
the human-rights perspective and the politico-military
aspects of the issue of children and armed conflict.

A comprehensive report of the Seminar has been
published by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. The main
recommendations of the Seminar can be summarized as
follows.

The OSCE and its participating States should
ensure full respect for and implementation of
international standards and instruments for the
protection of children, in particular in conflict
situations.
The OSCE should integrate the protection of the
rights of the child, in particular of children affected by
armed conflict, into its activities and continue and
enhance cooperation and coordination with other
international organizations, national institutions and
non-governmental organizations, both at the political
level at headquarters and at the practical level in the
field. To this end, the Seminar recommended in
particular the following measures: the development of
OSCE policies and actions for the protection of
children affected by armed conflict; the designation of
focal points on children affected by armed conflict,
including in relevant field operations; the monitoring
and reporting on the protection of the rights of the
child in armed conflict situations by OSCE field
operations; the strengthening of OSCE expertise and
capacities in this area, including in its Rapid Expert
Assistance and Cooperation Teams; and the inclusion
of the rights of the child in training programmes for
members of OSCE field operations. OSCE bodies, in
particular the Chairman-in-Office, the Permanent
Council and the Forum for Security Cooperation, as
well as OSCE institutions, should regularly address the
rights of the child, in particular of children affected by
armed conflict; and the Forum for Security
Cooperation should continue its efforts in developing
concrete measures to stem the illegal flow of small
arms and light weapons in the OSCE area and to
include children's issues in the planned OSCE
document on these matters.

Two major initiatives are being pursued to follow
up on these recommendations. First, the Austrian
Chairperson-in-Office has already requested OSCE
field operations, as well as Secretariat units, to pay
more systematic attention to the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and to integrate the issue
into their work. This includes the provision of human
rights officers of field operations with checklists on
children's issues in order to stimulate awareness, action
and reporting, the inclusion of the rights of the child in
mission members induction courses or, for example, in
the curriculum of the OSCE Kosovo Police Service
School.

Secondly, a broad consensus emerged from the
Human Dimensions Seminar that the OSCE should
develop a comprehensive document outlining OSCE
policies and actions for the protection of children, with
special emphasis on those affected by armed conflict.
A first orientation discussion was held recently, and
negotiations will continue with a view to formally
adopting such an OSCE document at the next meeting
of the OSCS Ministerial Council, in November in
Vienna.

The Austrian Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE
will continue to work for the implementation of the
recommendations of the Seminar and undertake further
steps to develop and improve concrete policies and
measures to benefit children in conflict situations as
well as in potential and post-conflict situations. The
next Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, Romania, has
expressed its intention to continue these efforts.

It is clear that the OSCE and its field operations
do not have the means to effectively address all the
assistance and protection needs of children affected by
armed conflict in the OSCE region. The OSCE
therefore seeks to build and intensify partnerships with
others: international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and local initiatives. We are looking at
the United Nations and its agencies as key partners,
with long-standing experience and unique expertise in
these matters. Let us together make a concerted
effort to effectively address and thus to prevent the
serious impact of armed conflict on children.

