Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I wish to join previous speakers in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe and Ambassador Khalilzad
for their briefings.

Iraq continues to face challenges that involve
considerable risks to the region to the entire
international community. They include political,
security, humanitarian and economic challenges.

The humanitarian and security situation described
this morning is extremely disturbing, inasmuch as
continuing violence forces ever-larger numbers of
civilians to flee their homes. There are now more than
2 million internally displaced persons and more than
2 million refugees. In that vein, I wish to pay tribute to
neighbouring countries and their peoples, who, in
extraordinary conditions, have to date have taken in
these refugees; I make special mention of Jordan and
Syria.

For its part, France is supporting the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in assisting internally displaced persons and
refugees. In that context, it is now more necessary than
ever to work together to find solutions by supporting
the efforts of the Baghdad authorities. On Wednesday,
17 October, the President of the French Republic
reaffirmed to President Talabani during his visit to
Paris that France firmly supports the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq. Of course, the Iraqis
themselves understand that they must come together in
order to regain control of their own future and to put in
place institutions that can bring about a consensus that
will enable them to build a society of peace.

The key is a genuine process of national
reconciliation that is as inclusive as possible in order to
isolate the forces that threaten the unity, sovereignty
and stability of Iraq. Moreover, the States of the region
have an important role to play and should therefore
show sincere and complete willingness to contribute to
stability and reconstruction in Iraq. France supports the
process involving neighbouring countries that led to
the establishment of thematic working groups, and
hopes that this process will lead to tangible results at
the ministerial meeting in the beginning of November
in Istanbul, where Mr. Kouchner, our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, will participate.

In the context of a withdrawal horizon for foreign
forces, the international community through the United
Nations should strengthen its own mobilization. We
support strengthening the role of the United Nations

Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which
permitted the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007). After
the high-level meeting of 22 September, the first
proposals contained in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2007/608) - strengthening of staffing in Baghdad
and Arbil, a United Nations presence in Basra, setting
up a follow-up mechanism of the neighbouring
countries process - all of these proposals open the
door to strengthening the different areas where the
United Nations plays a role.

In the political area, there is a possibility to
contribute to dialogue and national reconciliation. We
are also thinking about what could be done to assist the
grave humanitarian situation, to strengthen the
protection of civilians, to enforce respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and to fight
against impunity. The initial responsibility lies, of
course, with the Iraqi Government, as it is not only the
protection of their own people that is involved, but also
the protection of United Nations staff and associated
staff. It is a disturbing situation as we have seen in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/608). It is
urgent to act.

In terms of economics, there is the International
Compact with Iraq. In this respect, we should recall
that in order for international assistance and
cooperation to be effective and in order for economic
growth to be a permanent fixture in Iraq, the authorities
must establish mechanisms and rules of management
that allow for good governance.

This strengthening of the United Nations
presence on the ground should obviously bear in mind
the constraints having to do with security. Here I would
like to pay tribute to the work done by UNAMI, as well
as the humanitarian workers. They are operating under
conditions that make it very difficult and dangerous to
contribute to the protection of civilians and to provide
assistance to people in need.

France supports and will continue to support the
United Nations in this difficult undertaking. My
country also intends to contribute to thinking done
within the European Union, encouraging it to become
more resolutely involved in Iraq through specific
initiatives.
As Bernard Kouchner indicated in New York on
22 September, France will become involved in
particular in supporting the health sector and justice, in
this latter case through the training of magistrates in
Iraq. Starting in the next few weeks, we will launch the
first initiatives in the northern part of the country with
an increase in France's consular presence.

With everyone's joint efforts, the people of Iraq
will be able to find the peace and security that they are
entitled in a State that is unified, free and democratic.
We are positively committed to this.

