Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your work
as President of the Security Council during the month
of May.

I should also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his briefing and for his intensive
work since he assumed his post.

The topic of today's debate is particularly
relevant not only for the Security Council, but also for
all States Members of the United Nations, and we
therefore appreciate the convening of this debate.

The decrease in violence indices in Colombia
continues to be the subject of wide recognition. At the
same time, and especially in some regions of the
country, threats persist that affect certain sectors of the
population and prevent them from enjoying their
rights. The actions of illegal armed groups, drug
trafficking and terrorism are the core negative factors
jeopardizing the rights, personal freedom and property
of those citizens. As was pointed out by Under-
Secretary-General Holmes, those groups continue to
perpetrate serious infractions, including mass
displacements, against civilians.

For the Government of Colombia, the protection
of civilians and strict compliance with international
humanitarian law and other relevant international
norms are absolute priority objectives. My Government
rejects any action against civilians that violates those
norms.

Freedom and human rights can be fully realized
when order, security and the rule of law are
guaranteed. The Government of Colombia, guided by
that principle and by its democratic security policy, is
persevering in its efforts to protect all its citizens and
guarantee the enjoyment of their rights.

The results achieved in the five years of
implementation of the democratic security policy in
Colombia have generated a virtuous circle in which
security contributes to a rising level of confidence in

the country and fosters private and social investment,
which in turn helps to improve the living conditions
and security of the population. Compared to the
situation in 2002, in 2007 there was a substantial
decrease in the rates of homicide, which were reduced
by more than 40 per cent; the killing of union
members, which dropped by 92 per cent; and extortive
kidnapping, which fell by more than 86 per cent.

More than 46,000 people have been demobilized
from illegal armed groups, individually or collectively.
Through the special programme for the protection of
union members, human rights activists and other
threatened persons, some 9,500 persons have received
protection. As of January 2008, none of the union
members under protection, who represent some
20.7 per cent of the total number of persons in the
programme, had been a Victim of violence.

In 2007, the number of new cases of persons
displaced by violence remained below 60 per cent
compared to the figures of 2002. Some 82 per cent of
all households included in the registry of displaced
persons have received humanitarian emergency
assistance, and more than 38,000 families have
received State support in the process of return or
resettlement. The programme supporting those affected
by displacement applies a comprehensive support
strategy to families by promoting income-generating
activities and socio-economic stabilization.

The Government of Colombia is guided by the
core premise that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians rests with the State. In turn, every
State may appeal for international support when it is
deemed necessary. In that context, the United Nations
and the international community in general have a role
to play in support of national protection efforts. If
humanitarian assistance is to be trustworthy and
predictable, it must be undertaken in conformity with
the United Nations Charter and the principles it
enshrines.

During the debate that took place in November
2007, my delegation expressed some opinions on the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, among them that to create a
Security Council working group on the issue. We are of
the opinion that the existing institutional structures are
sufficient to allow the United Nations to address issues
concerning the protection of civilians in an adequate
and effective manner. Rather than create new entities,
the work must be aimed at supporting efforts to protect
civilians in specific situations and take the specific
conditions of each case into account.

It is equally necessary to maintain an adequate
level of cooperation between the Security Council and
other relevant organs of the United Nations. Such
coordination is all the more productive when the
Council operates within the limits of its competence. In
that respect, we must support efforts to improve the
operational and legal framework of the United Nations
in the protection of civilians, and the role of the
General Assembly as the organ competent to adopt
policy guidelines in the humanitarian field.

The protection of civilians is a noble objective
consonant with the human values of our Organization.
Action in that field must consequently transcend
individual interests and be legitimized as strictly
humanitarian work. Only thus can assistance to the
civil population be effective and fully accomplished.

