Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): We speak here
today not only as a member of the Security Council but
also as a participant in the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) - the only European
participant and, apart from China, the only participant
among Council members. Thus, we feel a special
responsibility for the careful and realistic formulation of
the mandate of UNOMIL.

We have seen in other peace-keeping operations the
difficulties that follow from a fuzzy mandate, and last
year our own men had to escape danger in Liberia under
rather dramatic circumstances. But political developments
have led to a change in circumstances, and that is what
we are reacting to here. I shall not comment on the new
conditions, as we have done so in this Chamber on a
previous occasion. I do, however, wish to point out that
the way ahead will not be problem-free - certainly not
on the military side.

The disengagement, assembly and demobilization of
combatants and their reintegration into civilian life will
not proceed without hitches. Experience from
Mozambique, which continues to impress us,
demonstrates several flashpoints.

First, there is the importance of providing
combatants with an incentive to come out of the bush and
allow themselves to be disarmed. In Mozambique, this
incentive took the form of a guaranteed income for a
certain period. In Liberia, we are more or less relying on
combatants being tired of war and on their being
sufficiently controlled by their commanders.

 

Secondly, there is the importance of rapid processing
of combatants once they are on assembly sites. A prolonged
stay, especially if in miserable conditions, leads not only to
demoralization but, worse - as in Mozambique - to
revolt and mutinies.

Thirdly, there is the importance of effective control of
weapons. In Mozambique, large quantities of rusty, useless,
non-functioning weapons were turned in early in the
process, the good stuff being withheld. Parallel to that,
every now and then a hidden cache of arms was discovered.

Fourthly, there is the importance of the speedy and
effective reintegration of combatants into civilian life. Any
delays will, in conjunction with the proliferation of arms,
lead to banditry. The Secretary-General clearly highlights
this danger in paragraph 47 of his report, but no clear
countermeasures are envisaged.

Through the Cease-fire Monitoring Group of
ECOWAS (ECOMOG), African States have borne the brunt
of support for peace in Liberia. Frankly, we are therefore
doubly surprised by their low turnout here today. We note,
however, that, in proportion to the populations of Liberia
and Mozambique, ECOMOG is to be 10 times as strong as
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique was. We
have heard no satisfactory explanation of this difference in
strength between the two forces. Needless to say, the size
of ECOMOG has an immediate bearing on the volume of
financial, logistical and other assistance that Member States
are urged, in paragraph 7 of the draft resolution, to provide.

Having highlighted several potential problems of the
coming period, my delegation is nevertheless satisfied that
the UNOMIL mandate for the current conditions is outlined
fairly clearly and cleanly. We shall therefore vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

