Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
as my Government did yesterday morning, I would
like to echo my delegation's firm condemnation of
the terrorist attack in Saint Petersburg, which resulted
in many deaths, numerous injuries and considerable
property damage. Our sympathy, solidarity and
condolences go out to the families of the victims and
to the Government and the people of Russia. Senegal
echoes the appeal just made by the Charge d'affaires
of the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for
greater and more coordinated voluntary mobilization in
the fight against terrorism, whoever its perpetrators.

On behalf of the delegation of Senegal, Madam
President, I warmly congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council. I assure
you of our full cooperation. I also thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting on the
important issue of Darfur. I also thank and congratulate
Mr. Matthew Rycroft and his entire team for an active
and productive presidency during the month of March.
I am very pleased to see my dear friend and colleague
Mr. Mamabolo, former Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations and current Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). His
concise and Clear briefing shed light on the situation, as
did the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/250) and the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) (see S/2017/22).

Senegal wishes to pay well-deserved tribute to
UNAMID, which has teams on all fronts in Darfur
working to tackle the security challenges, support the
political process and facilitate access to humanitarian
aid. We also pay tribute to the troop-contributing
countries for their commitment to peace in Darfur. I
should recall that Senegal has deployed 800 military
troops, two l40-person police units, eight observer
officials and eight police officers - a total of
1,096 people.

As for the security situation, the delegation of
Senegal welcomes the fact that the Government and
several armed groups are respecting the ceasefire and
the cessation of hostilities, with the notable exception of
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction. Such
confidence-building measures must be commended and
strengthened. Although there continue to be sporadic
intercommunal clashes, their intensity, on the whole,
has diminished.

The Senegalese delegation nonetheless wishes to
deplore the numerous human rights violations reported
in Darfur, which target in particular internally displaced
persons (IDPs), women and children. We call for the
voluntary and secure return of IDPs, which requires a
safe environment and a long-lasting commitment by all
parties to reconciliation and recovery. In that context,

my delegation welcomes the holding of the national
dialogue and encourages the effective implementation
of the recommendations arising therefrom so that the
Government and the opposition can reach a common
understanding so as to bring about a lasting solution to
the conflict and a lasting peace.

Concerning the relationship between UNAMID and
the Sudanese Government, we welcome the progress
that has been made with regard to the issuing of Visas
and the releasing of containers, particularly those
containing food rations. That is thanks to the efforts
of the Sudanese authorities, which have, inter alia,
appointed a focal point who will bear responsibility for
these issues. That said, some containers remain held
up in Port Sudan, which leads to difficulties for troop-
contributing countries, my own included, in importing
spare parts for key equipment. In order to alleviate this
situation, we call for greater cooperation on the part of
the Sudanese authorities so that these containers can
be released.

With regard to transferring UNAMID tasks to the
United Nations country team and the handover process,
we look forward to seeing the joint report of the African
Union and the United Nations on the strategic review
that is under way, in particular as concerns ways of
reconfiguring UNAMID, bearing in mind the positive
evolution of events on the ground. It is in that spirit
that the delegation of Senegal reiterates its support and
extends once again its congratulations to UNAMID, to
the United Nations country team and to the humanitarian
personnel involved for the outstanding work they are
doing in order to usher in lasting peace in Darfur.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
commending the work that the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel is doing to promote the
political process by facilitating direct, inclusive
negotiations. We pay tribute to their outstanding
mediator, President Thabo Mbeki - Mr. Mamabolo's
compatriot - who held a very fruitful interactive
dialogue with the Security Council last February, under
the Swedish presidency.

