The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests that the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Regional Integration and Francophone World of the
Central African Republic be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the Minister to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I have also received a letter from the
representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a warn
welcome to His Excellency General Antoine Gambi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and
Francophone World of the Central African Republic.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gambi
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
2

rules of procedure to Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/409, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Youssef Mahmoud. I now give the floor
to Mr. Mahmoud.


