Mr. Bwanali (Malawi): Allow me, Sir, to start by
congratulating your country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. My
delegation is particularly pleased to see you in the Chair,
and we are confident that the deliberations of the Council
will be ably and effectively guided and that fruitful results
will be achieved. We wish the representative of your

 

country well as he carries out the many tasks that will
come before him during his tenure.

My delegation also wishes to congratulate his
predecessor in office for a marvellous job done during the
month of January.

I have the honour to speak before the Security Council
as leader of a delegation of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Council of Ministers, made up of Foreign
Ministers from Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South
Africa and Zambia and representatives of Senegal and
Guinea-Bissau. In doing so, I should like to declare our full
support for the position of the Angolan Government, as so
clearly set out by its Foreign Minister, Mr. Venancio de
Moura, on the subject now being considered by the
Council. However, each of the Ministers in my delegation
will be free to address the Security Council individually on
the issue under discussion. I wish also to acknowledge the
presence in our delegation of the representative of the
current Chairman of the OAU, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia, who is also a member of our delegation.

We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General to the Council, which provides a very
clear, comprehensive and detailed account of the
developments that have taken place since the initialling of
the Lusaka Protocol on 31 October 1994. We are
particularly encouraged by the Secretary-General's
assessment and conclusions indicating that, despite some
infringements, the cease-fire provided for in the peace
agreement signed on 20 November 1994 is generally being
observed by all parties and that significant progress has
been achieved in the implementation of the Angolan peace
processes.

We concur with the Secretary-General's assessment.
However, it is the view of the OAU Council of Ministers
that these achievements need buttressing if the fragile peace
process in Angola is to be sustained. It is in this context
that my delegation has been mandated to come and convey
to the Security Council Africa's grave concern that, unless
urgent and appropriate measures are taken by the
international community, particularly the United Nations, to
sustain the current momentum, the entire peace process in
Angola could be seriously threatened.

There is an English saying, "once bitten, twice shy".
And in the case of Angola, this saying, vis-a-vis
international involvement, would seem a propos. Indeed,
we can still recall how, nearly four years ago, when
everything seemed to be going well and peace appeared to
be holding, suddenly the guns came alive and, in a flash,
Angola slid back into a war even more vicious than that
previously experienced.

We can thus appreciate the concerns of those who
urge caution against any increased international
involvement until peace has been firmly established in
Angola. However, we are convinced that the situation is
different this time around and that the Angolan people are
tired of war.

It is now 80 days exactly since the Lusaka Protocol
was signed and 78 since the cease-fire came into effect.
In that period, the Angolan people have demonstrated
their earnest desire for peace, as confirmed by the
generally agreed assessment that, despite minor
infractions, the cease-fire is holding. Meanwhile, the two
parties - the Government of Angola and UNITA -
have continued their efforts to implement the other
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. For example, the military
commanders have met several times in the context of the
Joint Commission and, as the Foreign Minister of Angola
informed us today, the UNITA leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
has now unconditionally agreed to meet the President of
Angola, Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos.

There is therefore a need for a clear demonstration
of firm international support and solidarity for the people
of Angola as they seek to build and consolidate the peace
based on the Lusaka Protocol. It is for this reason that my
delegation has come to urge the Council to facilitate the
speedy establishment and deployment of the enlarged
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), one of the mechanisms provided for in
the Lusaka Protocol. In this connection, we are
encouraged by the apparent consensus amongst members
of the Security Council on the need for the speedy
establishment and deployment of UNAVEM. III.

We have taken careful note of the concerns
expressed in the light of past experiences, especially in
respect of UNAVEM. I, that we must "do it right this
time". In this context, reference has been made to
paragraph 32 of the Secretary-General's report. Whilst we
concur fully with the need to do it right this time, it is
our view that the speedy deployment of the mechanisms
provided for in the Lusaka Protocol would serve as a
confidence-builder and encourage the parties concerned to
move forwards even further in implementing the
"Acordos de Paz". It would also help to secure the
prevailing cease-fire, without which the fragile peace
process in Angola could collapse, with dire consequences.

 

It is our conviction, therefore, that the speedy establishment
of UNAVEM. III is the best way to ensure that, this time
around, we can "do it right".

Before concluding, I wish to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's appreciation and gratitude for the
sympathetic understanding and cooperation we have
received from all those with whom we have had the chance
to hold consultations on the matter before this meeting. We
especially appreciate the understanding with which our
particular concerns in respect of the enabling draft
resolution - which the Council will be considering later
today - were received. We believe that this cooperation
has facilitated the presentation to the Council of an enabling
draft resolution which, whilst possessing some difficult
elements here and there, generally takes account of the
concerns of all the parties. It has been our concern that the
enabling resolution should not have so many
conditionalities that it becomes itself an impediment to the
advancement of the peace process. We believe that the draft
resolution before the Council today can be adopted by
consensus and we hope that it will be so adopted.
Members of the Council are called upon to take this
historic decision, one with enormous implications for the
future of political developments in Angola. We believe that
time and circumstances have presented the international
community with a rare opportunity to help bring about
permanent peace in Angola. It is in this respect that the
OAU Council of Ministers decided to send a delegation to
New York.

If this opportunity is allowed to slip away, posterity
will judge us very harshly. We owe it to the present and
future generations of Angolans to do right by them. It is
now all in the hands of the Council.

