The President: I now give the floor to the Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola.

Mr. Fowler (Canada), Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) concerning the situation in Angola: My comments
this morning will relate exclusively to my visit to Angola
last week from 8 to 16 January. While brevity makes
sense, particularly given our late start this morning, there
are lessons learned from my visit which I hope members
of the Council will agree deserve due consideration.

The objectives of my visit were threefold. The first
was to consult with the Government of Angola on
developments regarding the application worldwide of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA. The second
was to visit the areas and see the military equipment
recently captured from UNITA. The third was to meet
with individuals who had defected from UNITA or been
captured in recent fighting.

 

I met with six individuals for more than 15 hours,
including General Jasinto Bandua, who had overall
responsibility for UNITA's logistics from 1995 to 1998 and
had also been in charge of Mr. Savimbi's private office.
We met with Colonel Kangunga "Kalia", who had served
as a representative of UNITA in posts in West and Central
Africa. We also met with Colonel Kangunga's brother,
another colonel, who had been responsible for Mr.
Savimbi's communications network. We met with
Lieutenant-Colonel J ose-Antonio Gil, who was responsible
for air movements in and out of Andulo, UNITA's main
airstrip, and for air control in the central highlands. We met
with Mr. Sakaita, an adult son of Mr. Savimbi, and with a
junior officer who had been sent abroad by UNITA for
military training.

Angolan officials were not present at these meetings,
which, at Mr. Miranda's suggestion, took place at the
headquarters of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA) so that we and they would feel at ease.
Four of the individuals requested by me were requested at
extremely short notice and in each instance the Government
located the individual we wished to meet, wherever that
officer was serving in Angola, and arranged to have him
flown to Luanda specifically for the meeting.

In response to my very specific questions, each of the
six confirmed on video that they were speaking freely and
that they had not been coached or otherwise influenced in
what they chose to say. My own impression is that these
individuals offered their testimony freely and that, in most
cases, they welcomed the opportunity to bear witness.

In the course of the testimony of these very well-
placed witnesses, we did receive very specific information
relating to violations and violators of United Nations
sanctions. Today, I will not name names because I do not
wish to pre-empt the report of the expert panel, in which
members of the Council have invested heavily. In
presenting that report to the Council in March, however, I
do expect to bring this information to the Council's
attention, in company with specific recommendations as to
how such persistent flouting of the will of the Council can
be stopped and, thus, how Savimbi's lifeline to the outside
world can be severed. The expert panels, two members of
which were with me throughout my visit to Angola, will
look closely at the information we received last week and
will try to corroborate it with other information it has
developed from other sources in the course of preparing the
report it is to submit to me next month.

What I would like to do today is to show brief
excerpts of the videotaped testimony, in which former
members of UNITA offer information on how UNITA
operated in areas relevant to the sanctions regime.
Through the good offices of the excellent News and
Media Services Division of the Department of Public
Information, we have reduced those 15 hours to 27
minutes of highlights for the Council today. Let me be
clear: I am not presenting conclusions, nor am I
necessarily endorsing the information we shall shortly
hear. What I am doing is sharing fascinating testimony
which, in some instances, indicates that UNITA's method
of operating may be different from what I- and I
presume the members of the Council - had commonly
assumed.

For example, the testimony suggests the following:

UNITA does not operate an extensive financial
network abroad and occasionally has severe problems
with liquidity. Some quantities of money are held by
various heads of Government on Savimbi's behalf.
UNITA otherwise sells or barters parcels of rough
diamonds from time to time to cover specific operating
expenses or to procure specific armaments.

UNITA procures weapons through a small number
of weapons brokers - international arms merchants -
rather than through direct contact with Governments.
These weapons dealers are often responsible for making
transportation arrangements for weapons sold - in effect,
"f.o.b. Andulo" - as well as for finding buyers for the
rough diamonds for which the weapons are bartered.

UNITA does not use mercenaries for fighting, but
does employ foreign trainers. They, too, are often hired
by the arms dealers.

UNITA's petroleum supplies are in very short supply
and their replenishment is an absolute priority for
Savimbi.

UNITA used the period of partial implementation of
the Lusaka peace accord to replenish its armaments, to
procure and store large quantities of petroleum and to
otherwise prepare for war.

As with the detailed information regarding specific
individuals and countries involved in the violation of the
sanctions, the expert panels will need to consider whether
this more general information can be confirmed in light
of the other information available to them.

 

The conclusion I draw from my meetings is that
sanctions are beginning to have a real impact on UNITA's
capacity to pursue its military objectives. Sanctions are
having an effect, for example, by impairing UNITA's
ability to transport the weapons systems and the fuel it
needs in Angola and by reducing the number of people
prepared to offer support to UNITA in violation of the
sanctions. When this is coupled with the Angolan
Govemment's recent military successes, the overall impact
upon UNITA's capacity to wage war has been significant
indeed.

It would be premature to suggest that this war of three
decades' duration is at an end, but it may be nearing the
beginning of the end. We in the international community
must therefore do all we can to help bring this end about,
including through the rigorous application of sanctions, to
ensure that UNITA is not allowed to rearm, resupply or
otherwise remain a military, rather than a political, force.
Throughout my visit, the Government of Angola could
not have been more accommodating or welcoming. I extend
thanks, in this regard, to the Angolan officials with us
today, including the Vice-Minister of External Relations,
Mr. Chicoti, whom I was not able to meet in Luanda and
am therefore glad to see here; the Director-General for
International Organizations, Ambassador Correia; and, of
course, Ambassador Van Dunem "Mbinda", Minister
Counsellor Coelho Da Cruz and other colleagues at the
Permanent Mission of Angola, who made this visit possible.

Allow me also to thank you, Sir, and United Nations
colleagues in Luanda and here in New York for truly
outstanding support. The Department of Public Information
technicians who travelled with me were enterprising and
indefatigable and the staff at MONUA headquarters
provided assistance well beyond what could reasonably
have been expected by me.

A video will now be shown - one which has been
thrown together in the 36 hours since my return rather than
over the two or three months which a more polished
production would normally require.

A videotape was shown in the Council Chamber.

After meeting extensively with Foreign Minister
Miranda and President Dos Santos, Mr. Angel and I,
accompanied by the Vice-Chairman and the Rapporteur of
the expert panel, travelled inland to witness firsthand the
ravages of the Angolan civil war and to visit the recently
captured UNITA capital of Andulo. Members of the
Council will know that the cities of the central highlands
of Angola have borne the brunt of this long and
devastating war.

We visited the principal capital of Huambo, where
nothing in that once beautiful city remains undamaged.
We visited a camp containing about 25,000 internally
displaced Angolan refugees, and a new, more permanent
development designed by the Government to relieve the
pressure on these desperate and long-suffering people.
The relief agencies are doing their best in appalling
circumstances, but the challenge of coming to grips with
the plight of two million internally displaced persons in
the midst of the ever-threatening civil war is immense.

I think that, aside from a film crew, we were the
first foreigners to visit Andulo since the war began a year
ago. That city, captured by Government forces last
October, was Savimbi's base of operations, and UNITA
still has forces only 50 kilometres away.

Just before Christmas, I asked the Government of
Angola if, accompanied by members of the panel, I could
examine the weapons seized and talk to UNITA soldiers.
The air strip at Andulo was the principal site at which
Security-Council-imposed sanctions prohibiting the supply
of weapons and fuel to UNITA have been routinely and
grossly violated - up to, that is, mid-October, when the
Angolan army captured these weapons and denied UNITA
its most important access to war materiel.

The long dirt strip at Andulo routinely handles some
of the largest transport aircraft in the world, which
brought in tanks such as T-64s and T-55s; armoured
fighting vehicles such as BMP-2s; multiple-launch rocket
systems; towed and self-propelled heavy artillery; a full
range of anti-aircraft guns and missiles; a myriad of
mortar systems of all calibres; anti-tank weapons; mines
from Claymores to small, sophisticated anti-personnel
devices; and medium- and small-calibre weapons systems.
Andulo was the centre of UNITA power, and Savimbi
began constructing his large underground bunker and
squirrelling away fuel throughout the period of United
Nations supervised peace, in preparation for the war to
which he seems always to have planned to return in order
to win what he had failed to achieve in the United
Nations supervised elections of 1992.

Once we returned to Rwanda, we met the Minister
of Defence, the Minister of Finance and the Chief of the
Defence Staff, General Do Matos, and we were able to
meet the senior officers whom I mentioned earlier. We

 

also, of course, met the officers I listed earlier, and their
testimony follows on the video tape.

>l<>l<>l<

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): My name is Jasinto Ricardo
Bandua. I was working very closely with Savimbi; I
was in his military office. At the same time, I held the
post of chief of logistics for strategic equipment.
UNITA bought a great deal of materiel, and many
items including tanks, troop-carriers, cannons, mortars,
mortar grenades, launching pads for missiles and
ammunition of various calibres. UNITA also bought
many accessories for tanks, which made it possible for
UNITA to refurbish tanks it had captured in the
course of the 16 years of war.

"So let me repeat that during the 16 years of
struggle, when there were incursions by South African
forces in southern Angola in the Cunene area, those
forces offered most of the Soviet equipment captured
to UNITA because it was not in line with their
military doctrine. This included anti-aircraft guns and
reactive long-range guns. Throughout the peace
process, UNITA was refurbishing all this equipment.
Added to the materiel it had imported, this equipment
greatly increased UNITA's mechanized assets for the
force it was organizing. In other words, what UNITA
purchased, what it refurbished, and what it had hidden
amounted to a great deal of equipment.

>l<>l<>l<

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): My name is Jose-Antonio Gil
and I am 32 years old. I was in the commander in
charge of air operations. The major objective of that
centre was to intercept all communications from the
Angolan air force. UNITA received 15 to 20 flights a
day, including IL-76s, Antonov 72s and Antonov 32s,
carrying T-74 tanks, BMP-2s, BM-2ls, BM-27s and
other equipment for infantry troops.

"Voice: Had you personally seen the equipment

you mention?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese): Yes.

>l<>l=>l<

"Voice: My name is Alcides Kangunga, also
known as Kalia. UNITA does not contact its
contractors. There are people whom we just call the
international market in weapons. We do not know
who is the boss behind it, but there are
intermediaries, who are in contact with UNITA.
Those guys, who are kept in secret - unfortunately,
I was not in that camp and I do not know exactly
who - are the people who are in contact with the
one who comes to UNITA, for example. When they
come, if UNITA agrees with them, the rest is
between those guys and the other one: UNITA does
not know who. For the payment, UNITA says,
'Okay, you know this history of sanctions'. As there
are sanctions against UNITA, we do not use banks;
we have no more money outside; we have no
dollars. But we have products; we have diamonds.
Bring me the price of the materiel. UNITA chooses;
they propose the kind of materiel they need. They
establish contact with their agents.

UNITA does not control it. After, they come with
the prices. Also, UNITA does not contact only one
intermediator. It chooses the best price. After finding
the one whose price is the best, they say, 'Okay,
the way to pay this is just to negotiate. You have it.'
But they also have the diamonds. If he says, 'Okay,
for this materiel, just give me $2 million. Do you
have an expert who knows how to buy diamonds?',
they go to look for their experts. That process is
carried out. At the time when there were airfields in
Angola, the expert just came to Angola.

"Mr. Fowler: And the payment was made in
diamonds?

"Voice: They receive those diamonds. They
count them and evaluate the price, and just say,
'Look, $2 million. You agree that the debt
amounted to $2 million.'

"Mr. Fowler: So UNITA has its diamond
expert there, too?

"Voice: Exactly.
"Mr. Fowler: The arms dealer has his expert
in diamonds and UN ITA has its expert in diamonds,

and they agree on what is $2 million?

"Voice: Exactly. When UNITA and the liaison
man agree, they just have in their own charge the

 

transport of the diamonds. And they know how to sell
them. UNITA is no longer inside. The only thing that
UNITA needs is the materiel.

"Mr. Fowler: So you are saying that UNITA did
not talk to Governments about buying weapons; they
just talked to middlemen?

"Voice: Exactly.

"Mr. Fowler: And these middlemen often
presented themselves to UNITA in competition with
each other, and UNITA was able in effect to have an
auction - it was able to choose the best price among
the people who were competing to sell?

"Voice: Exactly.

"Mr. Fowler: What about the transport?

"Voice: Transport is another competition.

"Mr. Fowler: Did the arms merchant arrange the
transport?

"Voice: The one who wins the challenge
sometimes also comes with a proposition. He will say,
'Okay, that is my price. If you agree with this price
I will just put the materiel where you want it to be.'

>l<>l<>l<

"Mr. Fowler: General, we will continue with this
discussion about how UNITA meets its fuel
requirements. We have just agreed, I think, that it is
not done by guys with one drum on the back of a
truck. We know that there were large air shipments.

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): From 1996, the time that I
began to be involved in the purchase of fuel, until
December 1998, it amounted to 2.3 million litres. This
was just imports or acquisitions. Also, as we bought,
we used part. When the fighting erupted, UNITA had
about half a million litres.

"Mr. Fowler: In December 1998?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): November. I was in charge; I
was controlling this. The armoured vehicles consumed
a lot, and the movement of troops was another drain
on fuel. By January, UNITA was at less than
100,000 litres. That was within one and a half
months.

"Mr. Fowler: That was 500,000 to 100,000?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Below 100,000. From then on,
Savimbi was compelled to start acquiring fuel. This
became the first major priority. So the aircraft that
arrived was only to bring fuel - nothing else. And
that is when the countries that were quoted were
offering their contribution - to allow the sale of
fuel by using their countries.

"Mr. Fowler: Fuel arrived in drums or in
bladders?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): In drums.

"Mr. Fowler: Do you have any idea of the
volume?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Yes. There were planes with
20,000 litres in drums. Then the Ilyushin brought in
50,000 in containers."

