Mr. Bin Abdulla (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): We would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

The Council is meeting at a time when international
peace and security are in jeopardy. Yes, international peace
and security are truly endangered, especially as the Holy
City of Jerusalem - enshrined by Almighty God and
having been visited by the Prophet Mohammed - is
witnessing bloodshed. Blood has been shed at the place
where the prophets gathered behind Prophet Mohammed, in
the presence of Jesus Christ, Moses, Abraham and all the
other prophets. We are truly saddened at the events that are
taking place in that Holy Land.
We ask Almighty God to accept the martyrs of this
Earth, to take them into Heaven and give patience to their
families. At the same time, we would like to extend our
condolences to the families of those Israelis who were
killed. They are also victims of Israel's misguided policy.
They too are the victims of a useless policy of aggression
and provocation.

You, Sir, are now the highest authority in the
international community, and we are meeting today after
witnessing the fact that more bloodshed, violence and
hatred can be avoided only through a resumption of the
peace process. That path to peace was supported by the
international community at the Madrid Conference, and
great efforts and resources were expended on it, with a
View to reaching agreement between the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples.

This morning I heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Israel say that Israel does not agree to any preconditions.
Israel is committed to those preconditions. Those are the
agreements that the State of Israel has committed to
through its previous Government. This morning Mr. Farouk
Kaddumi summarized for the Council how these
agreements have been reneged on. Now, the issue is in the
hands of the Security Council, whose five permanent
members have the authority and the ability to adopt
resolutions.

This morning, the United Kingdom Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs presented some
ideas and proposals for dealing with the situation. The
Council could adopt those ideas and proposals. It is up to
the Council to ask Israel to reconsider its policy.

This is about a tunnel that has existed for two
thousand years. Generations upon generations have passed
through that Holy Land and the tunnel has never been a
source of hatred or bloodshed. What is its importance
today? Do we need it? Have we come together here to
talk about a tourist attraction? The tunnel leads to the Al-
Aqsa Mosque, one of the holiest Muslim sites. Are
members of the Council aware of the Muslim belief that
those who perish in defending that Holy Land are martyrs
and ascend directly to heaven? We are dealing here with
a serious and delicate issue.

If members of the Council are unable to reach
agreement on a draft resolution urging Israel to reverse its
policy, which is within the power and competence of the
Council to do, they can at the very least give advice.

I do not believe that one can deny the Palestinian
people their legitimate right to self-defence, a right that is
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. When they come
out to demonstrate their rejection of the actions taken by
the Israeli Government - and I say "the Israeli
Government", not the people of Israel - they are
exercising the legitimate right of self-defence.

In the present instance, where is the democracy
about which we hear so much? Is it in behalf of
democracy that innocent people are killed and tanks sent
into the streets of the Holy City? No, that is not
democracy.

I repeat: the Security Council must issue a warning
to the Israeli Government. I wish it every success in its
task.

