Mr. Malloch Brown: Mr. President, I wish to
thank all your colleagues, who have shown such
interest in this subject and asked such thoughtful and
difficult questions, in some cases. Let me also just echo
what my colleague Jim Morris said: just because the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) does not have a nameplate at this table, I do
not think that we should forget to express tremendous
gratitude to Kenzo Oshima and all his colleagues in
OCHA, and particularly to the Humanitarian
Coordinator, who, of course, also reports through the
oil for food programme and Mr. Benon Sevan. That
whole coordination mechanism has, I think, proved
absolutely critical to all of our efforts.

Turning now to the questions posed to us, a
number of Council members, starting with the
Ambassador of Germany, asked whom we are working
with. Well, we are working with municipal authorities,
local community leaders of different kinds, directors-
general of national ministries. We have found many
very good local national partners. We are also, as Jim
Morris just said, coordinating, I think, extremely
effectively with ORHA and the coalition forces, which
have gone out of their way to try to engage us in
coordination discussions. I think that there is two-way
coordination with both local and national Iraqi
authorities and with the coalition forces, and we all are
very pleased with how that is going.

The Ambassador of Cameroon raised the question
of the link between the humanitarian response and
reconstruction needs. This was a theme to which many
other representatives returned during the meeting.

A colleague from the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) has just equipped me with a wonderful
way of entering this discussion, which is to consider
this first humanitarian phase as an effort to return the
Iraqis' standard of living to what it was in 2000, before
recent events began, and to consider the subsequent
reconstruction effort an attempt to return the Iraqis'
standard of living to what it was 20 years ago, before
the cycle of violence and conflict which has consumed
that country since the Iraq-Iran war.

To give the Council a sense of this, before that
war, according to the data from UNDP's Human
Development Index, Iraq enjoyed a standard of living
which put it next door to Iran - in other words, a
standard of living of a middle-income oil-producing
country. By the time of current events, Iraq's Human
Development Index rating had dropped next door to
that of Lesotho, a poor, landlocked least-developed
country. Therefore the scale of reconstruction in terms
of improving the social indicators - the lives of
ordinary Iraqi men, women and children - is really
considerable, and I think that that, in a sense, will be
the critical second phase of our intervention.

Let me also say that I think that the
reconstruction activities will be characterized by an
effort to focus on how the Iraqis themselves, using
their own resources and their own human capacities,
can take the lead in their own reconstruction. We do
not envisage the same huge requirement for external
resources, despite the great size of the challenge, that
one had seen during this initial humanitarian phase in
terms of scale. The resources may be more externally,
but, as a proportion of global development spending,
they are unlikely to be as dominant as they have been
as a proportion of humanitarian spending in recent
months, because this is a country that, once its
economy is operating properly again, is a rich country
with huge human talent able to take a major role in its
reconstruction.

We were also asked about what is available to us
under the oil for food programme. As with our
colleagues in the World Food Programme and the other
agencies, we are able to make very considerable use of
that programme. Under the 3 June deadline, before the
current resolution, we had already identified something
like $270 million of contracts which we felt could be
delivered within the allowable dates up to 3 June and
which provided critical priority items in the electricity
and other sectors.

We now, with the six-month extension, are
looking at further contracts with a value of another
$250 million. We therefore want to stress that there are
major items in the pipeline which are relevant to the
infrastructure sectors that we have been addressing.
That is rather offset by the fact that we do not believe
that we will be able to complete more than half of the
major ongoing electricity rehabilitation programme that
we are undertaking in the north of the country, which
has something like $860 million outstanding of work to
do, within the remaining six months of the programme.

We were also asked by the representative of
Angola to what extent resolution 1483 (2003) changes
UNDP's role and mandate. I think that UNDP's role
and mandate are not expressly changed by this Security
Council resolution, but it is by the Secretary-General's
management follow-up, if you like, to that resolution.

First, through my role as Chairman of the United
Nations Development Group (UNDG), I expect, as I
said in my opening statement, to coordinate the
activities of that Group on needs assessment and the
planning of reconstruction; to ensure that those efforts
are made in partnership with the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and in partnership
with interested donors who wish to participate in these
activities; and to ensure that all the undertakings that
UNDG members make fully reflect the emerging
priorities of the Iraqis themselves.

Secondly, as Administrator of UNDP, clearly, I
will be focusing UNDP's efforts not just on the
continuing infrastructure-rehabilitation role we take on
because of the exceptional expertise we have in Iraq
because of our role under the oil-for-food programme,
but I will also be focusing them on the whole
democratic governance mandate, which has become the
core of UNDP's global practice. Obviously, we will be
seeking to support the emergence of Iraqi government
through working on issues such as governance, the
strengthening and modernizing of public
administration, assistance on rule of law issues,
transitional justice, public sector reform and other key
issues where we feel that we can offer support.
Obviously, we have huge sub-practice areas also in
issues such as elections and the strengthening of
parliament. So, as those become relevant in Iraq's
future, we would expect to provide technical assistance
in these areas as well.

We were asked the question of both how long it
would take to complete the reconstruction and how
much it would cost. We have been on record for some
months as saying it will be an extremely expensive
reconstruction operation, but we very much hope that
methods can be found to finance it as much as possible
through Iraqi resources, through oil revenue and other
income sources available to the Government: first to
the Authority and later to an Iraqi Government. With
our colleagues in the World Bank, we will obviously be
seeking to propose financing mechanisms that
maximize the use of internal Iraqi resources and
minimize the calls on finite amounts of world
development assistance. But I do not think we should
hide the fact that there will, nevertheless, be a major
call on international donor resources for this
extraordinary undertaking that lies ahead of all of us.

I was specifically asked about the dredging
operation in Umm Qasr, Let me just very quickly say
that it is financed both out of a Japanese contribution
and from three oil-for-food contributions that we have
been able to utilize. Between them, this amounts to
something like $43 million. Under these contracts, we
are able to pay for heavy dredging of the port. At the
moment, the food that the World Food Programme
(WFP) is delivering has to be unloaded into small boats
before it can be taken to the actual harbourside to be
unloaded. Once this dredging programme begins, in a
week's time, it is going to be possible, after about a
month of dredging, to bring big ships directly to the
portside and in so doing accelerate the unloading and
distribution of food in a quite dramatic way.

Also under one of the oil-for-food contracts -
and there are several others in addition to the dredging
ones I have mentioned - we will be able to utilize a
contract to remove 19 shipwrecks that are blocking
entry to the port. We will be able to drag those ships
out in the coming weeks. As to how quickly it will all
be done, as one of my colleagues observed, dredging
ships move slowly, and they are sailing at stately speed
towards Umm Qasr as we speak, from the various
countries in which we contracted them.

Let me just say a word on the United Kingdom's
concern about the coordination of humanitarian and
reconstruction issues. It is our view that, with the
cooperation of interested parties, we would hope,
perhaps on the sidelines of the meeting on the revision
of the humanitarian appeal in June, to hold a first
planning session on reconstruction. We hope that
would then allow for extensive work over the summer
months here on needs assessment, according to a set of
partnerships, principals and approaches agreed at that
meeting. This would allow us to return, perhaps by
September, with the elements of a reconstruction
programme, one that would likely continue to evolve
over time, as more authoritative Iraqi voices emerge to
broaden the discussion of reconstruction priorities and
as a continued process of information and data-
gathering allows us to further refine needs as we move
forward. But it will be absolutely vital that both the
humanitarian assistance and the reconstruction work
are on the United Nations side, planned very much
together; it is very much Kenzo Oshima's and my
objective to keep these two processes - the
humanitarian process that he leads here at Headquarters
and the reconstruction process that I will lead -
closely tied together so that they can move forward
together.

In response to the question posed by the
representative of Mexico about the United Nations
capacity to manage this reconstruction, unfortunately
we have had a lot of test runs. Post-conflict work has
emerged for both UNDP and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) as critical parts of our
global activities. In the case of UNDP, there are now
some 50 to 60 countries where our Bureau of Crisis
Prevention and Recovery is engaged in a variety of
activities. We obviously had a deep immersion in post-
conflict planning and recovery in Afghanistan just a
year ago. But I think that, critically, beyond the
capacities of the United Nations institutions
themselves, it is the partnerships that we have made

with others - particularly in this case with the
World Bank and the other international financial
institutions - which have made us now into such a

formidable force in this area, particularly when we are
with a coalition - perhaps I should not use the term
coalition - but with a group of donors who also are
committed to this process. I think we can mount the
kind of effort on the scale required by this situation.

I think the Ambassador's second question also
provides part of the answer, which is the strength of
Iraqi institutions, particularly civil society institutions,
in playing their part. It was a comment by my
colleagues who served in Iraq before this conflict, and
who have returned since, that one of the things that
gets so lost in the press coverage of the country is the
enormous resilience of civil society organizations, both
religious and secular, which in the absence of political
freedom to express a point of view became the critical
social glue of the society. And I think that utilizing
these institutions as partners in the reconstruction is
absolutely critical.

I think that in saying these things I have not
touched on the issue of security. I can only echo the
point made by so many of my own colleagues and then
picked up by others that, of course, it remains a
tremendously difficult issue and one that will have to
be addressed effectively.

We were asked about demining, which in a sense
is a dimension of security. We have sent a demining
expert over there to work with colleagues from the
United Nations Mine Action Service, the United
Nations Office of Project Services and other parts of
the United Nations. We are trying to get a handle on
the demining problem. This is one area where, clearly,
we need to work closely with the Authority, which has
several hundred thousand deminers there at the
moment. This is obviously something in which the
military are very well trained, so we do not want to
duplicate what the coalition forces are doing. On the
other hand, we would very much like to build a
national mine-clearing centre for the long term. So, we
will be working with the Authority on how that can be
done.

Finally, on the question of our relationship with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, let
me just say that, obviously, he is going to be very much
the lead figure for all of us in Iraq. The kinds of things
that we have been talking about today -
reconstruction planning and such - are the support
that all of us from headquarters will give to that
individual and the country team. But, just as Lakhdar
Brahimi was our leader for Afghanistan, we look to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to play
this same role for all of us in Iraq in the months ahead.
