Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like first and foremost to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the excellent timing of the choice
of topic for this morning's debate, which is taking
place just a few days after the closing of the twenty-
second Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 22)
and the adoption of the Marrakech Action Proclamation.

For two weeks, the States Members of the United
Nations had the opportunity to discuss, inter alia,
the issue of water, one of the natural resources most
affected by climate change and the repercussions of
whose use go beyond ecosystem disruption to become a
sources of conflict in societies.

Consensus on this issue has been established on the
fact that, inter alia, water and sanitation are key to the
achievement of many of the Sustainable Development
Goals and are inextricably linked to climate change,
agriculture, food security, health, energy, education,
and, above all, to international peace and security.

For the first time in the history of the COP process,
an Action Day for Water was held in Marrakech, a
day that was devoted entirely to drawing attention
to the water sector and to providing solutions for the
implementation of the Paris agreement. The goal is to
ensure the central place of the issue of water not only
in climate negotiations but also through civil-society
action and private-sector engagement.

The Action Day for Water made it possible to
launch an initiative on water for Africa, which was
rolled out by Morocco with the support of the African
Development Bank, with the foal of resolving the
problem of climate justice throughout the continent
by mobilizing international political, financial and
institutional partners to improve water-service supply
in Africa.

Water scarcity and water stress due to climate
change are harbingers of conflict and suffering, in
particular in Africa. According to the United Nations,
by 2025 25 African countries will likely suffer from
water shortages and or stress. In the Mediterranean
region, 20 million persons currently lack access to
safe drinking water, particularly in the countries of the
south and the east, and 80 million inhabitants of the
Mediterranean will experience water scarcity by 2025.

On a global scale, we are expecting a 40 per cent
shortfall in water supply by 2030, and by 2050, the
demand for water is estimated to have increased by
55 per cent. This reduction in available resources goes
hand in hand with strong spatial inequalities at all
levels. Entire regions of the planet are faced with water
stress, and, conversely, some 10 States share 60 per cent
of available water resources.

Tensions can be exacerbated when rivers constitute
borders between States; in those instances where
two States have to share a single water resource; and
whenever an increase in the use of water drawn from
a single source or from resources available in a given
region comes into play.

Moreover, the use of subterranean water resources
could trigger additional theatres for water conflict in the
near future. These are glaringly unnerving projections
that mean that we have a shared responsibility to
address water-related tensions at this, the dawn of the
third millennium.

The spectre of future water-related wars is regularly
raised by the media and certain politicians, for good
or for ill. But in reality, historians agree that there are
very few examples of wars that were directly triggered
by water. Rather than being a source of conflict in the
majority of cases, water seems to have been but one
element thereof; in some cases it can be a pretext for
conflict, but more often it is the result ofa tipping point
being reached in a buildup ofhistorical resentment or is
due to geographical factors.

Nonetheless, we cannot but acknowledge that
water can be used as a method of pressure and a tool
of war during conflict. The history of humanity is
replete with examples of this in all regions of the world,
where water is a tool or a target in times of conflict.
This is all the more true when water-supply systems
are modern and connected to electric-supply networks,
thus enhancing their vulnerability in times of conflict
as they become a principal target. Water, which is often
seen as the source of many conflicts in water-conflict
areas, could also become a promoter ofpeace, thanks to
the evolution of technology, an increased willingness to
preserve our water resources and the establishment of
international jurisdictions.

Managing and reconciling water affairs in an
equitable and sustainable way and working to turn
interdependence into cooperation and mutual advantages
is intrinsically linked to the proper governance of water
both within countries and at the international level.
Here I would note that the two Additional Protocols of
1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which prohibit
attacking, destroying or removing goods vital to the
survival of the civilian population, such as drinking-
water facilities and reserves and irrigation structures,
represent considerable progress. However, these two
Protocols have not been ratified by all States, and new
forms of conflict are not yet enshrined in international
humanitarian law. Apart from the rather feeble role of
the International Criminal Court, there is no effective
international institution in terms of the implementation
of the provisions of the Protocols.

Another challenge lies in working on the ground
through innovative technical solutions. Increasing
availability when supply is inadequate can involve the
long-distance transfer of water, even if very costly.
Alternative techniques can be explored, such as
those aimed at conserving water, including improved
management so as to increase the effectiveness of the
resource's use in various areas. Moreover, we should
take action with regard to demand and not only supply.
That involves reducing waste and misuse and improving
the efficiency of the use of water.

Improving international cooperation in managing
tensions and conflicts over sharing water resources will
necessarily entail strengthening capacities for regional
dialogue. Cooperation among States on water makes
it possible to establish a climate of trust and lay the
foundation for cooperation in other areas. As illustrated
by numerous examples, water can therefore become a
catalyst for independence and cooperation.

On the occasion of COP 22, Morocco and Senegal
organized a meeting that brought together 50 African
ministers and sought to reach an agreement among
African countries regarding concrete measures to
confront the principal security threats posed by climate
change, including the decrease in water availability. To
that end, the Marrakech proclamation seeks to achieve
sustainability, stability and security in Africa and calls
for a "3S task force" to ensure that member States work
towards preventing the dangerous effects of climate
change on unstable and fragile areas. It also calls upon
the African Union, its regional economic communities
and all the relevant supranational institutions to secure
natural resources and ensure sustainable and safe means
of subsistence. It is that kind of interregional cooperation
initiative that should be encouraged and duplicated for
the well-being of Africa and all humankind.

