The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

China supports resolution 2202 (2015), which
the Security Council just adopted. The meeting of
the leaders of Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine
in Minsk resulted in an agreement on a series of
important issues pertaining to the Ukrainian crisis.
China welcomes that fact and views it positively. The
agreement reached by the four leaders in Minsk helps
to ease tensions in eastern Ukraine and to promote the
process of a political solution to the Ukrainian crisis.
The agreement was hard-won and we hope that it will
be valued and effectively implemented by all parties.

The Council should also scale up its support so that
this agreement can be an important watershed moment
in the efforts to de-escalate tensions in eastern Ukraine
and help restore peace and stability in the country at an
early date. Resolution 2202 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously, is an illustration of the international
community's support for the fruitful diplomatic efforts
of the four leaders and for a political solution to the
Ukrainian issue.

In addressing the Ukraine issue, we must stay the
course of a political solution. The problem of Ukraine
has historical complexities and present realities. A
fundamental and long-term solution of this issue must
both accommodate the legitimate interests and concerns
of all all regions and all ethnic groups throughout
Ukraine and address the legitimate concerns of all
the relevant parties so that a balance of interests can
be achieved. We hope that all parties will make joint
efforts to implement the agreement and search for a
political solution that is comprehensive, balanced and
long-lasting in order to achieve peace, security, stability
and development in Ukraine and the region as a whole.

China stands ready to continue to play an active
and constructive role in promoting a political solution
to the issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

