Mr. Wigwe (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and especially on the admirable way
you have been conducting the affairs of the Council.

I should also express my delight to be able to
address this body on the issue of post-conflict
peacebuilding, with particular reference to the
Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard, Nigeria
fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

My delegation wishes to express confidence in
the leadership of Angola as the Chair of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as in the members of its Bureau.
In the same vein, we wish to commend the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its commitment.

The Commission has performed well in the
circumstances, given that, as a new body, it was bound
to pass through initial difficulties. It successfully
organized two country-specific meetings, which
identified an agreed set of priority areas in the two
countries under consideration. The country-specific
meetings proved enriching and rewarding both for the
members of the Commission and for the relevant
actors.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission raised the hope that the international
community had at last found the appropriate device to
fill the gap between the end to conflict and
consolidation of peace in countries emerging from
conflict. Six months after the establishment of the
Commission, we can look back with a sense of
satisfaction that the body has fared well and produced
the kind of outcome most delegations looked forward
to. The countries under consideration assumed
ownership of the set of priority areas identified and, in
the end, have become beneficiaries of the
Peacebuilding Fund. However, we would like to
highlight the following points in order to improve on
the gains and experience of the past six months.
First, country-specific meetings, by their
composition and nature, offer the best forum to bring
the Commission closer to the beneficiaries of its work.
Consequently, the Commission should encourage
greater interaction with relevant actors on the ground.

Secondly, the Organizational Committee should
meet more regularly to ensure that decisions taken are
promptly pursued.

Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission should
devote more time to resource mobilization.

Fourthly, members of the Commission should
undertake visits to countries under consideration. In
that connection, we note that, obviously, the political
significance of such visits cannot be overemphasized.

Finally, the Commission should be results-
oriented, especially as its success will be measured
against the difference it makes to the lives of people in
countries emerging from conflict.

