Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation, too, would like to express its
satisfaction that the Secretary-General came to today's
meeting of the Security Council. We are grateful to
Mr. Guehenno, Mr. Ngongi and Mr. Solana for their
contributions to the Council's work today. We wish to
express particular thanks to Mr. Ngongi. Only a few
weeks ago, the members of the Security Council saw
him in action. He carried out an enormous amount of
positive work, and he deserves the highest praise.

The Russian Federation welcomes the
establishment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
of a Transitional Government of national unity. The
country has entered upon a new and very important
stage of the peace process that began with the 1999
Lusaka Agreement and which acquired a
comprehensive nature in the agreements concluded in
Sun City and Pretoria. The Government has assumed
responsibility towards the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the international
community for the restoration of constitutional order to
the country. Its work will not be easy. The most
important thing is that all political forces that have
become part of the Government should be guided
solely by comprehensive national interests focused on
collaborative efforts to restore the country from its
ruins, ashes and isolation. The millions of Congolese
lives sacrificed in this conflict requires us to do so.

The country's new leadership will have to draw
up a specific programme of action for the transition
period. Among the objectives of greatest priority are a
timetable for the preparation and holding of elections at
various levels, the full restoration of State institutions,
the reform of the army and security forces, the
establishment of control over natural resources, the
rehabilitation of the economy and social life and the
restoration of friendly relations with all neighbouring
States.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) is a separate issue; its successful resolution will
determine the fate of the peace process. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is awash in
weapons. In the light of that reality, there should be a
review of the disarmament programmes. We cannot
rely solely on the voluntary handover of weapons; as
we see it, participation by the national army in that
work would do an enormous service to Congolese
society. Naturally, such activity must be monitored by
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
must be carried out with assistance from donor
countries.

My delegation agrees with the view - already
expressed here - that it is very important that the
international community and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, not weaken their
support for the transitional structures of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during this historic period for
that country. This is dictated by Security Council
decisions and by the recommendations of numerous
Council missions to that country and to the region. We
also bear our share of responsibility for ensuring the
success of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Congolese Government
has every right to count on our assistance.

Now I should like to say a few words about the
situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are grateful to the Government of
France, to other States of the European Union and to
other countries that have undertaken the dangerous task
of stopping the bloodshed in Bunia. We understand that
the involvement of the Multinational Forces - given
the strict terms for its stay in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo - is an emergency measure. Moreover,
the Force is not in a position by themselves to ensure
security and stability for Ituri in such a brief period of
time. The major objective here is to accomplish the
timely replacement of the Multinational Force with a
strengthened United Nations presence. We need to
prevent the emergence of a security vacuum and to
ensure a smooth transition in that replacement.

We support the observations and
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
most recent report on MONUC (S/2003/566) aimed at
adapting the Mission's mandate to the current reality in
the country. We shall be prepared to adopt a draft
resolution with new tasks for the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Congo.

One more important note: atrocious crimes
against humanity have been perpetrated in Bunia, in
Ituri and in other regions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Security Council has not forgotten
about them. The criminals must be punished, and they
will be punished. Here, we shall not yield.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
ask a question of the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who will speak during today's
meeting. International forums, intergovernmental
agencies and non-governmental organizations are now
undertaking specific efforts to put an end to impunity
for mass violations of human rights and of the norms of
international humanitarian law - crimes being
committed against the Congolese people. Does the
Transitional Government of national unity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo intend to undertake
national measures to prosecute such criminals? I ask
that question because, during the Security Council
missions to Central Africa and West Africa, we asked
heads of State or Government and leaders of armed
groups a similar question. They assured us that they
had absolutely nothing to do with those acts and were
not participating in them, but they did not always
express a readiness to prosecute those crimes and to
punish the perpetrators. Therefore, I eagerly await the
ambassador's answer.

In conclusion, we should like to note that peace in
the Congo depends to a great extent on the regional
environment. The success of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo creates new opportunities for
cooperation among the countries in that region of
Africa with regard to such critical problems as
providing for the security of international borders.
Here, too, the United Nations can provide the
necessary assistance. The establishment of a
transitional Government for the Congo is one of the
basic prerequisites for the convening of an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. A
solution to the problem related to the ceasefire and the
conclusion of the transitional period in Burundi must
launch such a regional process. The drafting and
signing by interested States of a declaration on good-
neighbourly relations could become an important
foundation for that regional project.

