Mr. Kubis (Slovakia): Allow me at the outset to
express my deep gratitude to the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing today's meeting on security
sector reform (SSR) - which we deem to be a critical
topic for the entire United Nations system i as well as
for giving my country, Slovakia, an opportunity to
address the Security Council on this topic, which we
adopted as our horizontal priority during our work as a
Security Council member in 2006 and 2007. I hope and
believe that today's Security Council meeting will
prove to be yet another useful opportunity not only to
discuss this issue but also to provide new impetus and
guidance in promoting it.
I also extend my warm thanks to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for introducing in person his
report entitled "Securing peace and development: the
role of the United Nations in supporting security sector
reform" (8/2008/39) and for his valuable remarks.

Slovakia is very pleased with the comprehensive
nature of the Secretary-General's report presented
today and believes that it is an important milestone in
systematizing and strengthening United Nations
support for SSR. We are convinced that the report is a
good basis for further discussions on this issue among
United Nations Member States. In this context, we are
pleased to note that, as expected, the report has been
issued with two symbols and is thus a document both
of the General Assembly and of the Security Council.
We believe that both the General Assembly and the
Security Council and their relevant subsidiary bodies
should address the report within the scope of their
prerogatives under the United Nations Charter.

Reforming the security sector, particularly in
post-conflict environments, is critical to consolidating
peace and stability; promoting poverty reduction and
economic and social development, the rule of law,
justice and good governance; extending legitimate
State authority and civilian management of the security
and justice sectors, centred on people's needs; and
preventing countries from relapsing into conflict. SSR
is often one of the most critical elements of long-term
efforts to lay the foundation for peace consolidation,
which could subsequently, among other things, enable
the timely withdrawal of international peacekeepers.
SSR is often a crucial component, if not the crucial
component, of an exit strategy.

To accomplish this, we believe that there is a
growing need for adequate capacity within the United
Nations system to be able to respond more effectively
to the requests of individual Member States for support
in the area of security sector reform. In this context, we
strongly support the recommendations of the Secretary-
General to establish clear field mechanisms for the
coordination and implementation of security sector
reform mandates, as well as a United Nations inter-
agency security sector reform support unit to provide
technical guidance and training, and to promote best
practices and a holistic and coherent United Nations
approach to security sector reform.

Based on our experience of promoting the issue
of security sector reform within the United Nations
08-33544
system and studying specific cases of carrying out SSR
programmes, I would like to use this opportunity to
highlight several security sector reform-related
principles that we consider particularly crucial.

The first is national ownership and leadership,
which simply cannot be overemphasized. SSR always
has to be a nationally-owned process that is rooted in
the particular needs and conditions of the country in
question. National authorities must be involved in all
aspects and phases of SSR and must be in the lead. It is
the sovereign right and the primary responsibility of
the country concerned to determine the national
approach and priorities of SSR.

Secondly, there is a need for a holistic, coherent
and comprehensive United Nations approach to SSR.
The United Nations has been involved in various
SSR-related projects and activities for many years. But
what is still missing is a systematic, comprehensive
and well-coordinated United Nations approach to SSR.
We should spare no effort in order to achieve that goal.
We believe that we are on the right track, but much
more remains to be done, both by the Secretariat, by
other members of the United Nations family and by
Member States.

Thirdly, there is a need to define basic United
Nations principles and guidelines for SSR. As the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in paragraph 48
of his report, this could "ensure that peacekeeping
operations and United Nations country teams engaged
in reform receive practical guidance and assistance",
which they so often call for on the ground. We believe
that such principles and guidelines should be
elaborated on the basis of existing best practices and
lessons learned. The Secretary-General's report
provides us with a very good basis and, indeed, with
the outline of a framework for this. It is now up to us,
the Member States, to further elaborate principles and
guidelines and to achieve consensus on them.

Fourthly, there is a need for continued United
Nations capacity-building. If the United Nations wants
to deliver better and to be able to adequately respond to
the numerous requests that it receives from individual
Member States, it needs to strengthen its own
capacities and to ensure that it can deliver better and in
a highly professional manner in the most critical areas.
We see the path towards that goal mainly in
strengthening the inter-agency approach, including by
creating an inter-agency SSR support unit.
08-33544

All of that should enable us to work more
actively and effectively for better coordination of all
United Nations activities - with the central role to be
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on the ground - and of international efforts
and for better management of available international
capacities, linking them more closely with national
SSR strategies, policies and capacities, thus reinforcing
the principles of national ownership and leadership.
Therefore, while the United Nations-focused measures
and approaches recommended in the Secretary-
General's report are not a goal per se, they would, if
supported, help all of us to be more effective and
successful on the ground in addressing the realities
existing there.

In February 2007, the open debate on SSR (see S/PV.5632) and the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2007/3) helped attract growing interest
among Member States in the topic of security sector
reform and to raise awareness about it. This was also
reflected in the very positive response to the Slovak
initiative to create a United Nations Group of Friends
of SSR, which now has more than 30 members from all
geographic regions, with various experiences in
implementing SSR or supporting it in the field.

Since last year's open debate in the Security
Council, tangible progress has been achieved in
introducing this issue into the agendas of relevant
United Nations bodies. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has been the first to address
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General,
within the scope of its mandate, and we note with
satisfaction the fruitful discussion that it held in March.
It clearly demonstrated the relevance of this topic to the
wider United Nations membership as well as the
challenges on the way forward. We believe that another
instrumental United Nations body that will play a key
role in this area is the Peacebuilding Commission,
which has, commendably, included security sector
reform within the integrated peacebuilding strategies for
the countries on its agenda. We strongly support this.

Among the many tangible results and concrete
proofs of the understanding, assistance and cooperation
achieved in the realm of SSR was the International
Workshop on Enhancing United Nations Support for
Security Sector Reform in Africa, held in Cape Town,
South Africa, on 7 and 8 November 2007, which
Slovakia organized jointly with South Africa. That
event and its outcome, in the form of a Co-chairs'
5
statement, significantly contributed to the efforts aimed
at developing an SSR concept within the United
Nations based on specific and unique African
experience. It was also very helpful in gaining a better
understanding of the nature and scope of SSR among
African countries, for many of which this issue is of
such critical importance. The workshop was also very
instrumental in ensuring a wider and more systematic
approach to SSR on the part of important regional and
subregional partners of the United Nations, in
particular the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community, but also, inter alia,
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. This was also shown
during the subsequent joint Slovak-South African
presentation of workshop outcomes at the African
Union Summit in Addis Ababa, on 29 January 2008.

Let me also add that the Cape Town workshop
was the beginning of, and an important element in, a
regional and subregional approach that we have always
promoted. We have also been emphasizing the
importance of a bottom-up approach to SSR processes
within the United Nations - processes that must be
demand-driven and must always be tailored to the
specific needs and conditions of the countries or
regions concerned. In our opinion, that is the best way
to identify effective and functioning mechanisms for
United Nations support for SSR. We hope that the Cape
Town workshop will be followed by similar events in

other parts of the world - for example, in Asia and
Latin America - to which Slovakia is ready to
contribute.

Let me conclude by emphasizing once again the
great need on the ground for increased and enhanced
United Nations support for SSR. Over the past several
months of our intensive engagement in the area of
SSR, we have had ample opportunities to hear such
calls and requests, which have come both from national
authorities and from United Nations and other
international representatives working on a daily basis
on the ground. We also believe that, including through
today's discussion, the Security Council can make
further important contributions in that regard.

Finally, I want to assure members that Slovakia
remains actively engaged in and committed to the
cause of security sector reform within the United
Nations framework and elsewhere. We stand ready to
continue assisting in practical terms in any way
6
necessary. I can assure the Council and the Secretary-
General of our full and continuing support in SSR-
related efforts.

