Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We are
meeting today as the great tragedy in Syria continues to
unfold, despite the announcement in September by the
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America,
that they had reached an accord that included a cessation
ofhostilities throughout Syria as a whole and in Aleppo
in particular. That announcement revived hopes that
the violence would decrease and that it would facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need
throughout the country. But the continued fighting and
the failure by the Security Council over the past few
years to address the grave situation in Syria dealt a
heavy blow to the hopes of the Syrian people and the
international community that the end of this massacre
was nearing an end.

Lebanon therefore calls for the Security Council
and the International Syria Support Group to redouble
their efforts to end the hostilities in order to restart
negotiations among the Syrian parties in Geneva, with
a view to achieving a lasting political solution, on the
basis of the resolutions of the Security Council, that
would fulfil the aspirations of the Syrian people to live
in safety and dignity in a united, sovereign State.

In response to this terrible, widespread tragedy
and the displacement of millions of our Syrian brothers
from their cities and villages, the United Nations
brought together last September Government leaders
and representatives of civil-society organizations in the
context of two high-level meetings in order to discuss
the wide-scale movements of refugees and migrants.
The United Nations is no stranger to dealing with mass
movements of refugees and migrants. It has coped
with one of the oldest, long-running human tragedies
from the very beginning: the tragedy that usurped the
Palestinian people's territory, forcibly uprooted them
from their land and caused hundreds of thousands of
them to become refugees in neighbouring countries,
including my country, Lebanon.

Perhaps the aggressive Israeli practices that have
been documented in the scores of reports issued by
the United Nations and its organs, as well as in those
issued by human rights bodies, are the most compelling
testimonials oflsrael's persistent disregard for the norms
and principles of international law and its defiance of
the resolutions of the Security Council and the General

Assembly. There has been no answer to the requests

made by the various investigation commissions to look
into practices in the occupied Palestinian territories, or
to the appeals made by the Secretary-General.

The State of Palestine is continuing to build up
its constitutional institutions and its international
legitimacy, despite the fact that its occupied territories
continue to be developed by Israeli settlers, according
to the briefing given by Mr. Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General. He
informed us that the Israeli authorities, from early June
through the end of August, had approved 1,000 housing
units in East Jerusalem and 735 in the West Bank.

The settlements have been a major obstacle to the
peace process, and the continuing settlement policy
has undermined the two-State solution. This has been
universally condemned by all Member States. The most
recent example was the strong condemnation by the
United States Administration of the Israeli authorities'
decision to build 298 settlement housing units in the
West Bank.

Israel continues with its illegitimate practices,
flouting its responsibilities as occupying Power.
The Office for the Coordination of Human Affairs
reported that the Israeli authorities have destroyed 726
Palestinian homes since the beginning of the year. That
coincided with an unprecedented increase in violence
by Israeli police and army personnel against Palestinian
civilians and the adoption of the "shoot to kill" policy.

Time and again, we have cautioned against the
increasing terrorism by Israeli settlers as well as the
practice of arbitrary detention. We have always stressed
that Jerusalem, with all its holy sites, including the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, will continue to be the capital of all
the faithful. We have called for an end to the Israeli
attempts, which have been condemned, to change the
pluralistic character of the city of Jerusalem. It should
not be made exclusive to any one religion.

In this regard, we cannot but underline the
resolution adopted by UNESCO in this regard.

In closing, I wish to reiterate to the Council, which
is meeting today in a formal setting, what the Executive
Director ofthe Israeli organization B'Tselem, Mr. Hagai
El-Ad, said at the informal Arria Formula Council
meeting last Friday, so that his words can be recorded
in the annals of the Council:
(spoke in English)

"The reality facing the international community is
this: absence of action not only effectively gives the
oppressor a licence to proceed without having to
suffer too many repercussions, but also gives the
oppressor the power to decide when will be the
right time to start considering alternatives. 'Wait',
demands Israel, 'now is not the right time'. But
'wait' has almost always meant 'never', responds
Martin Luther King Jr.: 'The time is always right to
do what is right'. That time is now: the time to, at
long last, take action. The Security Council has more
than just power: it has a moral responsibility and a
real opportunity to act with a sense of urgency".

