Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to express our
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting today, and to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his informative briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. Ireland fully subscribes to the detailed
statement which will be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, as the presidency of the
European Union. I would like to highlight some issues
which we consider to be of particular significance.

We continue to believe that full implementation
of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) must
remain the aim of the international community in
Kosovo. We welcome the substantial progress made in
this regard and believe that the Security Council must
sustain a positive momentum in the implementation of
the resolution.

Last month, we welcomed Mr. Hans Haekkerup
as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Since
then, Mr. Haekkerup has had an opportunity to consult
widely with actors in the region and to further develop
his approach. While we understand the impatience of
people in the region to push ahead with elections, we
fully support Mr. Haekkerup's view regarding the need
to establish a legal and administrative framework
before such elections can take place.

Last month, we had the opportunity to receive a
briefing from the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
who confirmed that eight months of conceptual and
technical preparation are needed. Ireland believes that
this is essential in order to define the mandate and
composition of a Kosovo-wide assembly, to fully
implement the results of last year's local elections and
to complete voter registration, so that all ethnic groups
will be properly represented in the next elections. It
will also be necessary to define an executive body
which will be accountable to the assembly.

Like our partners in the European Union and
others in this Chamber, we are concerned about recent
incidents within Kosovo, mainly in the area of
Mitrovica, as described earlier by Mr. Guehenno. Such
violence and use of inciteful rhetoric can only have
negative consequences, and we urge political leaders in
Kosovo to take more responsibility for developing a
peaceful and tolerant society. We condemn the attacks
on international personnel. The international
community must be allowed to fulfil its duties without
being subjected to such unacceptable violence.

My delegation is also extremely concerned about
the violence in southern Serbia. We repeat our strong
condemnation of this violence, which endangers not
only the Presevo Valley, but the overall security of the
region. We commend the efforts ofthe Kosovo Force to
prevent an escalation of the situation, as well as the
restraint shown by the Yugoslav authorities and their
commitment to respect the Military-Technical
Agreement and the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999). Ireland believes that the international
community must address this problem in a sensible and
resolute manner. We welcome the development of
recent initiatives that stress the need for a long-term,
comprehensive settlement, including that put forward
recently by the Yugoslav authorities, which we are
studying carefully with our European Union partners.

Ireland believes that the recent political changes
within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will
continue to have a positive effect on the stability and
prosperity of the region as a whole. However, we note
that the situation of Kosovar Albanian political
prisoners held in Serbia is not yet fully resolved,
despite the welcome adoption of the amnesty law. We
applaud the efforts of UNMIK as outlined by Mr.
Guehenno in this regard, and we join with others in
calling for appropriate legal channels to be found for
the speedy release of these people, many of whom have
been held in detention for over two years. We believe
that a swift conclusion to this issue would be an
important step towards reconciliation.

Progress must also be made regarding missing
persons, as well as in facilitating the return by Kosovo
Serbs and others to their homes in Kosovo. We urge all
Governments of the region to develop further
confidence-building measures and to work towards
peace, based on democratic principles and full respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and equality
of all citizens and national communities.

In conclusion, we affirm that Ireland will remain
fully supportive of the efforts of the Secretary-General
in Kosovo.

