Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Indonesian presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this briefing on
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel). I welcome
the presence among us this morning of Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso
and President of the Council of Ministers of the G-5
Sahel. My delegation also thanks Mr. Pierre Buyoya,
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez
and Mr. Yury Fedotov for their informative briefings
and the pertinent recommendations contained therein.

The West African subregion is the target ofterrorist
acts of horrific and growing violence, carried out by
jihadist hordes, whose members demonstrate each
day their choice to renounce their humanity. This can
be seen in the numerous attacks against populations
and places of worship, followed by the massacre of
worshippers at prayer and mass carnage in Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger, countries very close to mine,
both geographically and emotionally. Only a few days
ago, two French tourists were abducted from Pendjari
National Park in Benin and taken to Burkina Faso,
then, thankfully, later liberated by commandos from
contingents of the Burkina Faso Armed Forces and
French Special Forces, whose professionalism has been
unanimously recognized. cote d'Ivoire would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the two French
soldiers and the Beninese tour guide who lost their lives.

This tragic event has three major lessons for us:
the transnational nature of the terrorist threat, the
potential links between cross-border criminal networks
and terrorist groups and, above all, the urgent need
for all involved in the fight against terrorism to join
efforts so as to respond in a manner commensurate with
these phenomena. In this respect, the meeting recently
convened in Accraby the President Nana Akufo-Ado,
which brought together Burkina Faso, President of the
Conference ofHeads of State of G-5 Sahel, Ghana, C6te
d'Ivoire, Benin and Togo, reflected the acute awareness
of that need. It is therefore reasonable to welcome this
new awareness and hope that it continues to grow.
Indeed, we welcome the significant progress that the
meeting has already generated.

Despite these complex challenges and in a context
of weak national economic performance, the G-5 Sahel
States have to date spared no effort to bring about
the full operationalization of the Joint Force, which
has undoubtedly added value in the fight against
cross-border criminal networks and terrorist groups
in the Sahel. Their ongoing efforts, supported by the
United Nations and bilateral and institutional partners,
including the European Union, have facilitated
encouraging progress in the consolidation of the Joint
Force. cote d'Ivoire therefore welcomes the positive
trends identified in the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l9/371), including the increase in force strength of
Joint Force to 75 per cent ofits operational capacity; the
ongoing efforts to address issues relating to training and
the provision of appropriate equipment; the progress
made in the implementation of the civilian and police
components and, with the assistance of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the human rights compliance framework; the
advances made in defining rules of engagement, a code
of conduct and procedures for interaction with civilian
populations; and the restructuring of the Permanent
Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel. cote d'Ivoire welcomes
those significant advances and shares the Secretary-
General's views with respect to the persistence of
challenges related to, inter alia, the financing of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, support for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017), and humanitarian, economic and social
development issues in the Sahel region.

With regard to the financing of the Joint Force,
my country unconditionally endorses the terms of the
communique of the Conference of Heads of State of
G-S Sahel urging G-S Sahel partners to honour their
financial pledges. Despite the financial and logistical
efforts already made by bilateral and multilateral
partners, cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that only
predictable and sustainable funding under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations will ensure the
effectiveness of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. My country
is of the view that the Secretary-General's proposal for
the establishment of a support office funded through
assessed contributions and independent of MINUSMA
would undoubtedly be a useful tool for predictable and
sustainable financing in support of the Joint Force.

Moreover, in view of the difficulties encountered
in conducting operations under way, it is clear that a
review is needed to amend the technical agreement
relating to MINUSMA support for the Joint Force. As
recommended by the G-5 Sahel Council of Ministers,
such a review should allow for determining the
possibility of extending the scope of the assistance
provided by MINUSMA.

In order for it to be effective over time, the security
response provided by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force must
be part of a broader approach, taking into account the
structural foundations of the current insecurity and
instability in the Sahel region. Cote d'Ivoire remains
convinced that security initiatives in the Sahel will
have a significant and lasting impact only if the fight
against poverty and the effects of climate change,
improved governance and access to basic social
services and economic opportunities remain our major
priorities. In this regard, my country welcomes the
adoption by the States members of the G-5 Sahel of the
Priority Investment Programme, which will enable the
financing of 40 developmental projects. To that end,
the G-5 Sahel hopes that the financing pledges made at
the Nouakchott donors conference held on 6 December
2018 will be fulfilled as soon as possible, with a View to
bringing the benefits of inclusive economic development
to the people of the region. It is nevertheless necessary
to ensure complementarity and coherence among the
G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme and other
development initiatives, in particular those of the Sahel
Alliance, in order to avoid wasting resources.

Cote d'Ivoire shares the Secretary-General's
assessment of a deterioration of the security situation
in the Sahel region, with a possible spillover effect
on coastal West African countries. In considering the
full scope of the threat, those countries have agreed to
strengthen their cooperation in combating terrorism and
cross-border organized crime within the framework of
the Accra initiative. Cote d'Ivoire believes that, as part
of a preventive approach, the Accra initiative deserves
support and should be synergized with the work of the
G-5 Sahel by building bridges of cooperation in the
military and intelligence areas.

Cross-border criminal networks and terrorist armed
groups clearly pose constant threats to peace, stability
and development in the Sahel region and throughout
West Africa. In addition, as we confront the hydra's
head of terrorism, our determination to preserve the
humanist values of peace, fraternity, solidarity and
tolerance, which are the foundations of our societies,
must therefore be firm. Our support for the G-5 Sahel
must be just as strong. The eradication of terrorism is
undoubtedly a long-term shared endeavour, which will
require patience and consistency in our efforts. It will
also require the United Nations and all development
partners to maintain and strengthen the momentum of
support and solidarity with the States members of the
G-5 Sahel.

