Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish, of
course, to thank the delegation of Gabon for having
organized this discussion. A few days ago, when
President Ali Bongo came to New York, he outlined his
detailed plan for the prevention of conflicts. The
problem of small arms and light weapons that we are
addressing today is naturally closely linked to that.

The illicit manufacture and distribution of small
arms and light weapons and of ammunition is one of
the major threats to international peace and security.
Millions of people have been their victims since 1945.
Clearly, it is in this area that, if any progress is to be
made, the issues of disarmament would be dealt with
most fruitfully when it comes to security for all human
beings.

Central Africa, sorely tried by conflicts for many
years and Victim of unstable land and sea borders, is
particularly exposed. The example of the Lord's
Resistance Army, composed of several hundred rebels,
reveals the ability of armed groups to despoil entire
regions and sow terror and desolation.

Apart from the impact on the physical safety of
the people of Central Africa, small arms and light
weapons have a long-term negative impact on the
economic and social development of a region already
beset by numerous development challenges. The
trafficking in small arms and light weapons also
contributes to prolonging conflicts. Illicit deliveries of
arms in unstable areas are detrimental to efforts to
achieve a negotiated settlement of conflicts and thus
make peace difficult to achieve. They also impede the
efforts of the Security Council and regional
organizations in Central Africa.

The struggle against the illegal distribution of
small arms and light weapons is an unequal combat.
There is indeed a considerable disproportion between
the several hundred thousand dollars that are sufficient
to arm a rebel group and the human and financial costs
for States and the international community of
peacekeeping and disarmament operations or further
initiatives for security sector reform. Those are the
instruments available to us to end a crisis. Thus it is of
capital importance that the problem of the distribution
of small arms and light weapons be attacked at its root.

To fight the trafficking, it is necessary to
mobilize States of origin and transit of these arms. That
means enhanced surveillance of manufacturers and
brokers and of air and maritime companies that are
knowingly involved in the flow of illegal arms.

In order to prevent the circulation of such
weapons from fuelling conflict, the Security Council
has set up sanctions and embargo regimes, the
implementation of which is of capital importance. We
urge all States to cooperate with the sanctions
committees to ensure their follow-up.

The international community has also established
legal tools to buttress the action of Central African
States, and we must encourage their full
implementation. I refer, inter alia, to the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
international disarmament conventions. We also lend
our full support to the initiative of the Economic
Community of Central African States for the
establishment of a register of small arms and light
weapons on a regional basis.

The future arms trade treaty, which we very much
hope for and for which my country is sparing no effort,
will also be an essential tool in stopping the
destabilizing flood of arms. France counts on the
support of its partners in the upcoming deadlines and in
View of the conference in 2012 to draw up the treaty.

Initiatives to prevent conflicts and to maintain
and keep peace also contribute to reducing the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons. Disarmament,
demobilization and resettlement programmes, for
example, make it possible to reduce the number of
arms in circulation. Supporting security sector reform
helps strengthen the abilities of States to combat arms
trafficking.

May I conclude by recalling that, in the fight
against the dissemination of small arms and light
weapons, my country has played its role. Since 2006
France has launched a series of regional initiatives in
the framework of the Wassenaar Arrangement, the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
and the European Union to prevent arms trafficking by
private air companies. Regular reports submitted by
European Union member States regarding
implementation of the United Nations Programme on
Small Arms provide an interesting experience with
regard to actions that the Economic Community of
Central African States intends to undertake at the
institutional level within the framework of its
subregional initiative. Finally, within the framework of
European Union and Africa, we contribute, together
with our European partners, to enhancing the capacities
of African States to combat that trafficking by
supporting the African training centre.

