Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zannier, for his briefing. We welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremic, and also listened attentively to the
statement made by Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

While at present the overall situation in Kosovo
is calm, it remains complex and fragile. We are
concerned in particular at the inter-communal tensions
in Kosovo. China hopes that the parties concerned will
make joint efforts to maintain stability and avoid any
acts that could cause tensions to escalate.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We have always believed that the
situation in Kosovo has a bearing on peace, security
and stability, not only in the Balkans but also in Europe
as a whole. It is up to the parties themselves to find
solutions that are acceptable to both sides within the
framework of United Nations resolutions and through
negotiations.

Since March 2011, there have been dialogues
between Belgrade and Pristina. We welcome this
development and hope that the two sides will maintain
a constructive engagement aimed at reaching
consensus on a wide range of issues. China appreciates
the positive role that the European Union and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) have played in facilitating dialogue
between the parties.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
valid and an important legal basis for a solution to the
situation in Kosovo. China encourages UNMIK to
continue its work, in keeping with the mandate given it
by the Security Council, and to play a greater role in
resolving the situation in Kosovo.

China is concerned at the issue of illegal
trafficking in human organs, as mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281). No act in
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law can be condoned. China shares
Serbia's legitimate concerns and supports the
investigation into this matter by the United Nations.

