Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(8/2013/671).

At the outset, like my colleagues, I would like
to highlight the serious situation of insecurity in the
Central African Republic, where abuses and violations
of human rights are a daily and alarming reality, not
to mention the growing tensions and intercommunal
strife with religious connotations that is spreading
throughout the country.

The estimate of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees shows that some
400,000 people have been displaced from their homes
in itself constitutes a desperate plea for help. In
addition, the situation has already affected the entire
subregion. More than 63,000 people have had to seek
refuge in neighbouring countries, generating increased
humanitarian problems and needs and causing tensions
in bordering countries. While the deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic is a positive development,
we must recall that the crisis is complex and requires a
broad and comprehensive solution that addresses more
than just the security situation. The Security Council
should consider without delay but in depth what steps to
take to stabilize the situation in the country if we wish
to avoid irreversible damage and human suffering and
loss of life.

With regard to illegal elephant poaching and the
trafficking of ivory, we share the Secretary-General's
concerns that these activities fuel the international
criminal economy and finance transnational organized
crime and the many armed groups that are active in the
region, such as the Lord's Resistance Army. I would
also point to the flow of arms and combatants across
porous borders from the Sahel region down towards
the Central African subregion. Given the information
received by Mr. Moussa, and as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General on the existence of "a well-
known corridor for illicit trade, passing from Darfur to
the Central African Republic" (S/2013/67], para. 11), we
urge the authorities to take effective measures to close
this corridor. The arms embargo and sanctions pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) must be strictly enforced.

Mr. Michel Djotodia, head of the transitional
Government of the Central African Republic, has said
that he would take extraordinary measures to remedy
the critical situation of former Se'leka fighters. I believe
that the Security Council should strive to understand
what such extraordinary measures would consist of.
Influential voices from a number of organizations and
States - including Mr. Dieng on 1 November at the
Council's Arria Formula meeting - are describing the
situation as pre-genocidal.

Argentina welcomes the efforts of the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central African
States to fight the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). We
commend the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in support of
regional efforts to prevent conflict, promote justice
and the rule of law, and strengthen peace and security
in countries of Central Africa. We note the optimism
expressed in the Secretary-General's report before us
(S/2013/671) about the decline in LRA attacks as a
result of the regional efforts led by the African Union
through the Regional Task Force. However, we must
recognize that a number of issues remain pending and
topical. Joseph Kony and other LRA leaders continue
to evade justice. Attacks, kidnappings and the killing
of civilians continue alongside human rights violations,
especially against women and children. Impunity
cannot be tolerated.

Finally, we call upon UNOCA to pursue its efforts
and in particular to support activities to disarm,
demobilize, repatriate, reintegrate and resettle LRA
elements and to cooperate in ending this threat once
and for all through a long-term solution.

