Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup. We hope that his participation in our
discussion today - our last such discussion before the
Kosovo-wide elections - will help with the successful
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) in all its
aspects.

Like many other members of the Security
Council, we consider the prospects for the success of
the Kosovo-wide elections, scheduled for
17 November, to be contingent upon proper
preparations for them and the direct participation of the
leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

During the short period of time before the
elections take place, we need to make additional efforts
to resolve a number of problems relating to the security
of the non-Albanian population. We need to make it
possible for all national communities to participate in
the vote and ensure the return of refugees and
displaced persons so that they, too, are able to take
part.

As we have noted many times, the participation
of Serbs and other minorities in the elections will not
depend on whether they are requested to take part by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Their
registration - although it is an important factor - is
not necessarily an indication that they will participate
in the vote. In order to ensure such participation, it will
be necessary to ensure that the proper conditions are
met.

We fully share the concern of the Secretary-
General, expressed in his most recent report to the
Security Council on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
regarding the ongoing incidents of ethnically motivated
violence against the non-Albanian population of
Kosovo. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General referred to that issue today. That very
unfavourable situation is also reflected in a joint report
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe mission in
Kosovo, which was recently published in Pristina. That
report stresses, in particular, that there is still an
unacceptably high level of ethnic intolerance,
discrimination and violence in the province, as well as
inadequate security and insufficient freedom of
movement. As a result, members of the non-Albanian
population are continuing to leave their homes.
In such conditions, there is a growing danger that
the elections may not be democratic in nature and will
merely legitimize extremist forces and attempts to
bring about the secession of Kosovo from the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and to create a mono-ethnic
State entity in Europe. That must not be allowed to
happen.

We believe that the leadership of UNMIK has a
special responsibility in this regard. It is important that
the stated objectives of the work of the Mission be
matched by practical action. We hope in particular that
the administrative decision prohibiting the participation
in the elections of extremist candidates from two
Albanian parties, which was signed by Mr. Haekkerup
on 24 September, will be strictly complied with and
monitored. This could, to some extent, mitigate the
serious mistake that was made earlier - that is, the
registration of those parties to participate in the
elections.

The establishment by the leadership of UNMIK
of full cooperation with the authorities of Yugoslavia
should be fully supported. We fully agree with the
comments made on 17 September in this Chamber by
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covie, that it will
not be possible to resolve the Kosovo problem unless
the leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
genuinely involved in the process.

Taken together with other measures, the
conclusion of a status-of-forces agreement between
UNMIK and KFOR and the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is a step in the right direction.
We welcomed the recent decision of the Security
Council to lift the military embargo against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We are pleased that the
Security Council has demonstrated trust in the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which has been cooperating constructively with the
international community in restoring peace and
stability in the Balkans.

With regard to preventing illegal deliveries of
arms to Albanian terrorists in Kosovo and from Kosovo
to neighbouring countries, in particular Macedonia, we
would like to stress that responsibility for this
continues to lie with UNMIK and KFOR, as stressed in
resolution 1367 (2001). The urgency of this task has
been heightened in the light of reports of the seizure in
neighbouring countries of large consignments of
weapons and of reports that Albanian militants in the
Balkans have long-standing contacts with Osama bin
Laden. There must be no pandering to terrorists and
extremists, and the international presence in Kosovo
must scrupulously comply with the task entrusted to it.

In a broader political context, Russia attaches
great importance to the creation of a legal basis for
stability in the Balkans in the form of legally binding
agreements between the States of the region, with
appropriate international guarantees being provided.

In conclusion, we believe that the presidential
statement to be adopted later today will send a
powerful signal to the Kosovo leaders, on the eve of
the 17 November elections, that a stable future for
Kosovo can be built only on the basis of the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

