Mr. Satoh (Japan): As we recall the devastation
in East Timor a year ago, we realize how much has
been achieved since then. Considerable progress has
been made in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
East Timor, and preparations for its independence have
come a long way. We commend the efforts of the staff
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET), under the able leadership of
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, particularly in light of the
difficult conditions under which they have had to work.

The situation surrounding East Timor, however, is
at a critical juncture. The increased militia activities
have claimed the lives of several UNTAET
peacekeeping personnel, who have tirelessly dedicated
themselves to ensuring security in East Timor. The
brutal and appalling murder on 6 September of the
three staff members of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Atambua has forced the UNHCR to suspend its
humanitarian activities and evacuate its personnel from
West Timor.

The task of nation building in East Timor,
daunting in itself, must not be undermined by militia
incursions. Urgent action is needed to restore law and
order in West Timor and to address the plight of
refugees, who are no longer receiving assistance from
international agencies. The key task in addressing all
these problems, as I have stated on previous occasions,
is the elimination of violent militia activities, in both
East Timor and West Timor. To this end, the militias
must be disarmed and disbanded in West Timor, and
the perpetrators of the heinous murder of the UNHCR
workers must be brought to justice. As is made clear in
resolution 1319 (2000), only the Government of
Indonesia is in a position to effectively address the
situation.

Japan therefore welcomes the ongoing,
determined efforts of the Indonesian Government to
disarm the militias. While we understand the
complexity of this task, we sincerely hope that the
Indonesian Government's effort will bring tangible
results, which in turn will pave the way to a solution of
the refugee problem.

At the same time, it is incumbent upon the
international community to support the efforts of the
Government of Indonesia, particularly in light of the
domestic difficulties confronting the Government in its
effort to advance democracy and to maintain its
territorial integrity. In this context, the dispatch of a
Security Council mission has to be well thought out.
We trust that the Council will be able to send a mission
in a manner that will facilitate a solution of the
problems by the Indonesian Government.

The refugee programme also requires intensified
efforts. More than 150,000 refugees have returned to
East Timor, thanks to the efforts of the UNHCR and the
Indonesian Government. But in recent months
repatriation has come to a halt. We therefore welcome
the Indonesian Government's commitment to formulate
and implement a comprehensive plan of action, in close
consultation with the UNHCR and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM). I would like to
stress that the plan must be definitive and viable. It
must also be responsive to the will of each refugee. Its
implementation will surely be an enormous and
difficult undertaking, and if the Indonesian authorities
are in need of assistance the international community
should not hesitate to provide support. Japan for its
part is ready to contribute to the best of its ability.

Humanitarian activities, particularly those of the
UNHCR and the IOM, must be enabled to resume in
West Timor. But this will only be possible if the safety
of humanitarian workers is assured. Japan has always
stressed the importance of protecting the lives of
international personnel, but, most regrettably, it is the
personnel working for humanitarian agencies such as
the UNHCR that have been repeatedly exposed to
danger. The recent death of a UNHCR staff member in
Guinea reminds us again. We therefore urge the
Government of Indonesia to make every effort to
ensure the safety and security of the humanitarian
workers. We also call on the United Nations agencies
to take every possible precaution to secure the safety of
their personnel.

Our efforts to overcome the immediate challenges
that I have stressed today must all lead to our long-
term goal of successful and peaceful nation-building in
East Timor.

Most importantly, every effort should be made to
promote national reconciliation through dialogue
among East Timorese. The disarming and disbanding
of the militias is a prerequisite for achieving this
objective. We commend the efforts made by UNTAET
to facilitate such dialogue and hope they will continue.
The Indonesian Government too has an important role
to play in such endeavours. International assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of East Timor also
plays a vital role, since this reconciliation process will
have a greater chance of success if the people of East
Timor have brighter economic and social prospects.

Japan remains unchanged in its commitment to do
its part in providing such assistance.

