Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to welcome the holding of the annual
meeting of the Security Council on the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), born
of the shared Vision of 55 countries in Europe, North
America and Asia of peace through cooperation.

On this important occasion, my delegation
welcomes the participation of the Chairperson-in-
Office of the OSCE, Mr. Sebastian Kurz and Austrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Integration, whom I
thank for his remarkable briefing.

Following up on the public debate that the Security
Council held yesterday on conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886), this morning's meeting provides an
opportunity to look at the political and security situation
in the Euro-Asian area. Bearing in mind its experience
of two world wars in the space of one generation, Europe
has met the challenges of its time by establishing
an architecture for cooperation in the area of early
warning, conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction. The various events that
have marked the life of the OSCE since the signing of
the Helsinki Accord show, as if that were necessary,
the relevance of its mission in the light of the scale and
the serious nature of the challenges facing it. For that
reason, I would like to commend the commitment of the
Austrian chairmanship to bringing together the efforts
of all its members with a view to resolving ongoing
crises and conflicts, re-establishing mutual trust and
limiting the growth of violent extremism and terrorism.

The Austrian chairmanship of the OSCE comes at
a time when Europe is experiencing its most troubled
times since the end of the Cold War. From Ukraine to
Nagorno Karabakh, from Georgia to Transnistria, the
OSCE is encountering serious challenges, in addition
to cross-border challenges that include radicalization,
terrorism, arms control, crime, cybercrime, migration
and trafficking in drugs, weapons and human beings.
For that reason, I share the view of the presidency that
a strong OSCE is the very foundation of a safe Europe.
Senegal is convinced that the peaceful settlement of
conflicts throughout the world must be welcomed.
We therefore also welcome the approach to conflicts
through dialogue and cooperation, particularly between
neighbouring countries.

The situation in eastern Ukraine is very serious.
Following three years of conflict with a heavy loss of
life totalling 10,000 persons, it is obvious that there can
be no military solution to that conflict. It is therefore
absolutely vital to enhance efforts to implement the
Minsk agreements, endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 2202 (2015). My delegation therefore
expresses its support for the Trilateral Contact Group
on Ukraine and the Normandy format, and we commend
their tireless efforts to find a political solution to
the conflict.

Similarly, the Nagorno Karabakh conflict must be
at the heart of OSCE's work. We are convinced that the
OSCE will continue to work to convene a conference
that could serve as the basis for a peaceful negotiated
settlement of the crisis, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions. To that end, we must
step up efforts to ensure that a cessation of hostilities
agreement is reached and a peace process established
under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group, in the
interest of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of States.

I would also like to stress the importance of
pursuing the peace efforts to resolve the Transnistria
conflict in the 5+2 negotiation format, on the one hand,
and the Geneva international discussions seeking to
resolve the Georgian conflict, on the other. We should
also mention the need to deal with radicalization and
violent extremism. We know that 10,000 persons from
the OSCE region have gone to serve as foreign terrorist
fighters. The priority must therefore be to prevent that
phenomenon from deteriorating, as it undermines the
very foundations of our societies.

Although the challenges are complex and
enormous, they can still be resolved by a continent that
has all the necessary tools to prevent conflicts and to
maintain and establish peace, provided that the parties
accept to resolve the ongoing conflicts while respecting
international law. We would like to commend the idea
of enhancing the partnership between the OSCE and the
United Nations, whose support would be very valuable
in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to express Senegal's
support for the ideal underlying the Helsinki Final
Act, namely, to establish a Euro-Atlantic and Atlantic-
Asian region that is one of shared values of freedom,
democracy and justice.

