Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like at the outset to welcome
Mr. Romano Prodi and to thank him for his presence
with us today. We wish also to thank him and his panel
for their laudable efforts in preparing the report
(A/2008/813) and drafting its recommendations. These
efforts have enabled us to meet on several occasions,
including today. We also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/470) before us and for
the efforts he and his colleagues in the Secretariat have
undertaken to prepare the report and the assessment
contained therein.

More than two years ago, the Security Council
began to take a serious look at ways in which the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) can find a
predictable, guaranteed and sustainable source of
funding for AU peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations and the AU formed a joint panel, led by
Mr. Romano Prodi, former Prime Minister of Italy, to
study the issue. On 31 December 2008, following a in-
depth and detailed study, the panel issued its report
(see S/2008/813), which recommended a number of
practical steps aimed at converting the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation through the use of the United
Nations regular budget for six months.

In a presidential statement dated 18 March 2009
(S/PRST/2009/3), the Security Council, under the
Libyan presidency, requested the Secretary-General to
submit a report on practical ways to provide effective
support for the African Union and to include in it a
detailed assessment of the recommendations contained
in the report of the African Union-United Nations
panel. The African Union Peace and Security Council,
in its communique dated 13 March 2009, stated that the
panel's report was an important step in the efforts to
enhance the AU's capacity to address the challenges
facing the African continent in the area of peace and
security. It also emphasized the need for continued
efforts to find predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding for AU peacekeeping operations. In the report
before us (S/2009/470), the Secretary-General states
that the AU Commission repeatedly emphasized that
need during its consultations with the Secretariat.

Clearly, there is an ongoing effort to support the
African Union in building its own capacities. While we
appreciate that acknowledged effort, it requires
continuous assessment. The main problem - securing
sustained, predictable and flexible funding for African
peacekeeping - continues to completely elude us. It
cannot be solved through voluntary contributions
unless States with the capacity to do so commit
themselves to making specific contributions to the AU
Peace Fund for several years. However, because we
doubt that that will happen, we remain convinced that
funding from the United Nations regular budget is the
best option, at least with regard to AMISOM. We
believe that making it a United Nations mission as
soon as possible is crucial to the restoration of peace
and stability in Somalia and throughout the Horn of
Africa region.

While some here might say that the Libyan
delegation is being radical in its demands, reality
shows otherwise. Our emphasis on the requests and
needs ofAfrica is based on the following.

First, accelerating the restoration of peace and
security in Somalia is essential to restoring stability in
the Horn of Africa and to enhancing the credibility of
and strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union.

Secondly, the United Nations spends huge
amounts of money on peacekeeping operations in areas
in which there are fewer threats to international peace
and security and to the lives of civilians than in
Somalia. Somalia must not be treated differently.

Thirdly, a number of States that object to the use
of the United Nations regular budget in Somalia spend
hundreds of millions of dollars every year on their
maritime presences off Somalia's coast. Had those
resources been allocated to funding and developing
AMISOM. so that it could meet United Nations
standards and reach its authorized strength, the
Government of Somalia could have extended its
authority throughout the country and the phenomenon
of piracy off the Somali coast, which necessitated those
foreign maritime presences, would have disappeared.

Within its limited capacities, the African Union is
attempting to meet the needs of its peacekeeping
operations through its Peace Fund, which has been
receiving 6 per cent of the AU's regular budget. On
31 August 2009, during the special session that it held
in Tripoli on the consideration and resolution of
conflicts in Africa and the promotion of sustainable
peace, the AU decided to raise that amount to 12 per
cent. We hope that the Fund's donor base will be
expanded and that States able to do so will generously
contribute to the Fund until a consensus can be reached
within the Security Council on how to find a
predictable and sustainable source of funding for AU
peacekeeping operations that will enable them to meet
United Nations standards and reach their authorized
strength.

We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations to
enhance the capacities of the AU. We also appreciate
the support provided to AMISOM. by the United
Nations and donors, and we hope that that support will
continue and grow until AMISOM. becomes a United
Nations mission.

We must not forget that responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security rests
first and foremost with the Security Council. The
activities of the African Union are meant to support the
role entrusted to the Security Council in Chapter VIII
of the Charter. Therefore, promoting partnership and
shouldering its responsibility towards African Union
peacekeeping operations are duties mandated by the
Charter, and the Council must carry out those duties
and responsibilities without hesitation.

