Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Sir, most sincerely for
convening this important meeting and for leading the
work of the Council so skilfully and wisely. We also
thank your predecessor, the representative of the
Russian Federation.

My delegation further wishes to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for his
briefing. We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/277) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the recommendations contained
therein.

Jordan supports the recommendation made by the
delegation of Costa Rica on behalf of the States
members of the Human Security Network.

Over the past 10 years, the Council has developed
the concept of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which has become one of the principal
substantive thematic issues on its agenda. Despite
some positive developments, a number of persistent
challenges are hindering us from achieving our aim of
protecting civilians, especially children, women and
people with special needs. Jordan agrees that these
challenges include enhancing respect for international
law by parties to conflicts, including non-State armed
groups and especially in military operations;
strengthening protection by improving the
effectiveness and resources of peacekeeping operations
and other missions; facilitating access to humanitarian
assistance; and ensuring accountability for violations
of the law.

When we talk of the need to protect civilians in
armed conflicts, the case of Gaza stands out among the
ongoing concerns of our family of nations. We must
apply the concept of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict fairly and comprehensively. As the
United Nations family has failed to implement this
concept in the course of military operations and armed
aggression, we should at least apply it following such
operations. The two principal preconditions of human
security, and the central tenets of the Human Security
Network, are freedom from fear and freedom from
want. The protection of all should be a priority for all
United Nations Member States, united under the
Charter, in which we affirm our deep faith in human
dignity and values and basic human rights, the most
important of which is the essential right to life.

The suffering of Palestinian civilians in the Gaza
Strip did not stop with the end of the Israeli aggression,
but persists under the restrictions on the delivery of
relief and assistance imposed by Israel. This ongoing
suffering has had an impact on social, economic and
human activities in Gaza. Israel continues to prevent
the delivery of basic construction materials for
rebuilding the infrastructure and water and sanitary
facilities. The border crossings remain restricted,
hindering early recovery efforts. If for some reason all
of this did not fall under the principle of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, the principle itself would
have to be reviewed and redefined.

Jordan calls for full respect for humanitarian law
and international human rights. It also upholds the
distinction between civilians and combatants and the
international instruments related thereto, and insists
that all parties respect the principle of legitimate self-
defence against armed aggression. Innocent civilians
must not be deliberately or indiscriminately targeted in
attacks. International humanitarian law tells us how
people should be treated if they are not taking part
directly in military operations. States should show their
moral commitment by using their genuine political will
to change the harsh realities on the ground experienced
by civilians in armed conflict, including in cases of
foreign occupation, where the victims are always
civilians.

We agree with the Secretary-General that
peacekeeping operations include components that
enable them to have a direct impact on the protection
of civilians. Jordan supports the inclusion of civilian
protection mandates in all peacekeeping mandates.
This should apply in particular to those civilians who
are threatened by physical violence - without
undermining the primary responsibility of the host
country to protect civilians. Jordan is pleased that the
report has proposed that peacekeeping operations assist
host States with such missions, in order to create a
climate of peace and security.

Successful protection of civilians requires a
certain number of components. Those include a
comprehensive approach, clarity in the mission
mandates adopted by the Security Council, support to
missions from the standpoint of resources, training and
concepts of operations.

It is important to understand that the protection of
civilians is not solely a military task. All components
of a peacekeeping operation should help with the
obligation to protect, as entrusted to the mission.
Finally, my delegation would like to state its
readiness to take part in the efforts to develop the
concept of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and to work with all parties concerned, and it
welcomes the creation of a group of experts on the
protection of civilians, as well as the convening of this
meeting.
