Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you personally, Mr. President, as well as
your team, our colleagues from Kazakhstan, on your
very successful presidency during the month of January.
We express our gratitude and commend your efficient
and professional conduct of the work of the Security
Council. We particularly appreciate your transparency
in dealing with the media, as demonstrated by your
presentation, on many occasions, of communiques to
the press.

This month was busy, but it was also very
productive, as the Council dealt with important issues
for international peace and security. We held two
high-level events dedicated to important topics, and
the Council undertook a visit to Afghanistan, which
was a way to gain a first-hand understanding of the
country's needs and priorities and an opportunity to
show solidarity with the people of Afghanistan.

Let me now concentrate on three topics that Poland
considers important for our activities in the Council.

My first point relates to the role of preventive
diplomacy, which was rightfully underlined during
several meetings this month. On 18 January, the
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2018/1,
on conflict prevention. For the first time since 2015, the
Council also adopted a press statement (SC/13179) in
which it commended the activities ofthe United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, which can be seen as a positive development. I
also believe that presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3,
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, which was adopted yesterday, will be a useful
tool for maintaining stability in the region.

Secondly, let me mention briefly the issue
that is at the forefront of Poland's activities in the
Security Council, namely, the role of international
law in maintaining peace and security. We see the
need for further development of legal instruments in
international relations and for the ability to enforce
them. In that regard, the high-level briefing on
non-proliferation and confidence-building measures,
which was held two weeks ago (see S/PV.8160), was
most timely and important.

Thirdly, let me also highlight the need for
maintaining the Council's unity and ownership, which
was demonstrated in yesterday's adoption of resolutions
and presidential statements. We will need this level of
unity during the upcoming months when discussing the
most serious challenges to peace and security, but also
humanitarian situations.

January was also a month of deadly terrorist attacks
in Afghanistan and Mali. Such tragic events show us
how much the Council's activities and unity are needed,
and we have to deliver.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank our
colleagues from Kazakhstan and express our gratitude
to them.

(spoke in Arabic)

I wish Kuwait every success during its presidency
of the Council next month.

