Mr. Erdos (Hungary) (interpretation from French):
First allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the work you
have accomplished this month as President of the Security
Council.

Hungary associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the Presidency of the European Union with
regard to the problem of Kosovo. Like the entire
international community, it is following with particular
attention the serious events that are taking place in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As a neighbouring country,
Hungary feels increasingly anxious about the evolving
situation in Kosovo. Tension in this region of Yugoslavia
is a new and disturbing source of destabilization, all the
more dramatic given that nearby we are witnessing the very
welcome economic and political consolidation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, while in Croatia the process of the
peaceful reintegration of Eastern Slavonia is progressing
successfully.

It is important to underline that the reasons for the
crisis in Kosovo are not new and that they should have
been addressed long ago. The authorities in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia should have taken necessary
measures much earlier to prevent the current explosion of
violence. Repeated omissions in this area have led to a
situation that threatens to ignite the whole region, which is
already very volatile.

Hungary considers Kosovo an integral part of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It feels that it is only on
the basis of this principle that the future of the region can
be settled. On the other hand, it is also important to find a
lasting solution to the question of the status of Kosovo and
the problems relating to the enjoyment of human rights by
the Albanian community, which has been living there for
centuries. We believe that it is precisely the lack of
appropriate attention over the years to the rights of
minorities and to their legitimate claims that has led to the
present situation. Having said that, we condemn recourse to
violence and terrorism, whoever the perpetrators. Such
actions can hardly bring about calm or lead to a genuine
solution.

The modalities for arrangements relating to the status
of Kosovo will certainly depend on the outcome of a
substantive dialogue, which we hope will begin without
delay, between the authorities in Belgrade and the
representatives of the Kosovar Albanians, with external
participation. If it is to be acceptable to the parties, this
outcome will have to be in conformity with the standards
set by various relevant international instruments. In the
meantime, patient but methodical work to introduce the
greatest possible number of confidence measures, in order
to create a climate conducive to such a dialogue, must
continue relentlessly. It is reason on all sides, rather than
blind impulse, that must prevail.

Hungary cannot accept that the problem of Kosovo
should be dealt with as a strictly internal matter. This
argument would not even deserve mention here if recent
conflicts in this part of Europe had not reached such
horrifying proportions. Given the tragedy and bloodshed
that has swept over so many people, with 200,000 killed
and 2 million exiled, I do not believe that I need to
elaborate. Our essential task, here at the United Nations
and in other international multilateral forums, consists
precisely in preventing a deterioration of events in
Kosovo such as took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

To that end, the Government of Yugoslavia must
admit the futility of arguing against the international
community's offers of assistance. Belgrade must look
forward rather than backward; it must base its policy not
on the events of yesterday, not on old historical
animosities that all of us - all of us - in Europe,
including in Central and Eastern Europe, have
experienced, but on a vision of tomorrow, on the
interdependence and coexistence of communities of
differing ethnic and religious origins. It is important that
the Yugoslav authorities should sit at the negotiating table
with representatives of the Kosovar Albanian community
to resolve, peacefully and politically, the problems that
face them.

It is indispensable that they should permit the return
to Yugoslavia of long-term missions of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and that they
should recognize not only in words but in deeds the
importance of full respect for the rights of minorities and
of their participation in public life. This would go a long
way towards halting the wave of violence and terrorism
that is spreading over Kosovo. To do this, the

 

Government of Yugoslavia will have to accept the logic of
granting to non-Serb ethnic communities in Yugoslavia
rights similar to those that it demands for Serb populations
living outside its territory.

To overcome the crisis, one must avoid the pitfalls of
anti-Albanian - and anti-Serb - nationalist passions,
which only poison the situation in Kosovo. Rather than
offering vague promises and so-called concessions on
matters of secondary importance, there must be a focus on
the real issues, on matters that are of primary importance,
without any delay or procrastination. In that context, we
welcome the progress that has recently been made. Only in
this way can Yugoslavia improve its international position.

As a country directly affected by the situation on our
borders, and having maintained fruitful, excellent relations
with our neighbour to the south, Hungary ventures to hope
that the day will soon come when we can welcome to
international forums a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that
is at peace with itself and with the various ethnic and
religious communities living on its territory.

The resolution that the Security Council has just
adopted will help begin the process needed to identify the
elements of a long-term political solution for Kosovo.

