Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I wish to congratulate
the United Kingdom delegation for its wise steering of
the Security Council with an experienced hand during
the month of August. During this very busy month, on
more than a dozen occasions, the Council was called
upon to react on an emergency basis, including today,
to unfolding situations affecting international peace
and security - Iraq, Libya and Ukraine, to mention
but a few.

The debate on the protection of humanitarian
personnel (see S/PV.7244) was particularly timely and
important. Resolution 2171 (2014) encapsulates United
Nations efforts in the fields of conflict prevention and
mediation. Council members visited the International
Criminal Court in The Hague for the first time.
Council members delivered clear messages to the South
Sudanese leaders to cease violence in the face of the
looming famine and the disintegration of their State
(see S/PV.7250).

As was stressed in the open debate on conflict
prevention (see S/PV.7247), the Council is currently
grappling with an unprecedented number of bloody
conflicts and four level-3 humanitarian emergencies.
Lifesaving activities chronically run short of funds. The
international community needs to make a qualitative
leap forward in the area of conflict prevention and make
better use of early warning, mediation and ensuring
accountability.

In recent days, the Middle East has seen some
of the most dramatic efforts ever made at mediation.
Lithuania welcomed the announcement of an open-
ended ceasefire for Gaza brokered under the auspices
of Egypt. Lithuania will support an international
mechanism to address the modalities of the ceasefire
and looks forward to a serious discussion of the matter
in the Security Council.

In Iraq, early warning proved insufficient to stop
radical and violent extremists and terrorists, who swept
through the country, violently expelling communities
that had cohabited along the Euphrates and the Tigris
Rivers since Roman times. Resolution 2170 (2014) sets
forth initial measures against the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other individual
groups associated with Al-Qaida. The effectiveness
of the sanctions will depend on the swift and coherent
actions taken by States Members of the United Nations,
in particular the States of the region.

Throughout the month, the Council, no less than
five times, addressed the situation in the east of
Ukraine, as unrelenting escalation along the Russian-
Ukrainian border continued. Unequivocally strong
calls, including from the majority of Council members,
called on the Russian Federation to cease its support
for illegal armed groups, respect Ukrainian sovereignty
and territorial integrity and seek political solutions.
Today we heard many Council members ask Russia
to withdraw its troops from Ukraine (see S/PV.7253).
However, those calls have fallen on deaf ears.

Month after month, reports from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe have attested
to egregious human rights violations in territories
controlled by pro-Russian militias. Earlier this month,
United Nations Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie
spoke of the sharply deteriorating human rights situation
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, where illegal but
professional foreign fighters have been engaged in
abductions, detentions, torture and executions. The
Lithuanian Honorary Consul in Luhansk, Mykola
Zelenec, was kidnapped by such fighters and was found
executed by them last week. In the last month, civilian
casualties almost doubled in those areas.

Lastly, I would like to say a few words about
sanctions regimes. Increasingly, United Nations
sanctions regimes are becoming more complex, as
more United Nations peacekeeping operations are
called on to cooperate with expert groups and provide
assistance to national Governments. The effectiveness
of sanctions hinges on many factors, including the
willingness and capacity of neighbouring States to
implement them. As Chair of the Yemen and Central
African Republic Sanctions Committees, Lithuania
has repeatedly encouraged the neighbouring States of
Yemen and the Central African Republic to work with
the United Nations Sanctions Committees and groups
of experts. The United Nations is ready to provide
assistance, expertise and advice.

Reacting to the alarming situation there, the
Security Council has also strengthened sanctions with
respect to Libya. Unsecured arms and ammunition
proliferate freely in Libya and beyond. We need to
support Libya and the region in their efforts to address
those issues. We would welcome the Secretary-General
providing the Council with possible options as to how
the United Nations system could assist Libya and its
neighbours in order enhance the implementation of the
arms embargo.

In conclusion, let me once again thank the United
Kingdom delegation for its dedicated work in the
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
We wish the incoming United States presidency the
best of success.

