Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania):
Madam President, I thank you for convening this
timely debate on post-conflict peacebuilding and
institution-building. The United Republic of Tanzania
fully supports the concept of and need for institution-
building and sees it as an indispensable requirement for
preventing post-conflict communities from relapsing
into conflict. I have trust and confidence in your
leadership qualities, Mr. President, so I have no doubt
that you will stir this debate to a fruitful conclusion.

We welcome the statement of the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission, His Excellency
Ambassador Peter Wittig, Permanent Representative of
Germany; that of the Non-Aligned Movement, read by
the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen; and the joint
statement of the Chairs of the country-specific

configurations for Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Burundi, read by His Excellency
Ambassador Jan Grauls, Permanent Representative of
Belgium.

Speaking from past and recent experience, the
United Republic of Tanzania supported in practical
ways the successful processes that ended conflicts in
southern Africa and the Great Lakes region. The vision
of my country has always been to see the
transformation of post-conflict societies into a space of
sustainable peace and security of States and peoples,
stability as well as shared growth and development.
That wisdom is, as a matter of fact, enshrined in the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, adopted in November 2004.

The former Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Kofi Annan, once said that there is no security
without development and no development without
security. We draw inspiration from the wisdom of both
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration and the dictum of Kofi
Annan. In order realize that inspiration in the Great
Lakes region, where peacebuilding processes are
ongoing - and, indeed, elsewhere - institution-
building is critical. It is also critical that such
institutions lead ultimately to lifting living standards of
the people in the post-conflict stages. That way they
can also attain the Millennium Development Goals and
reach desirable human development indices.

"Peace-building: institution-building" will benefit
not only post-conflict societies but also the entire
world and the international community. The United
Republic of Tanzania says so because, as experienced
in the Great Lakes region and elsewhere, local wars
suck in other countries from near and far. Thus
preventing conflicts and the recurrence of conflicts is
beneficial to all humankind.

It is desirable and paramount that all Member
States and the international community provide support
of every kind to institution-building in post-conflict
societies and their neighbours in order to establish,
consolidate and promote good governance, democracy,
rule of law, respect for human rights, security and
stability, as well as economic growth, development and
integration. Where that cannot be done by supporting
individual States, it should be accomplished through
subregional and regional approaches.

