Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Tiirk, for his detailed briefing on the latest
developments in the peace process in Bougainville.
Since the signing of the Bougainville peace agreement,
the peace process in Bougainville is going smoothly.
Recently, the various parties to the peace agreement
have reached a preliminary agreement on the final fate
of collected weapons. Consultations on the draft
constitution are well under way. The new Bougainville
government has also delegated its control of policing
powers in Bougainville to the Bougainville local
authorities.

All these positive developments are quite
encouraging. China wishes to express its appreciation
for the good political will demonstrated by the new
Government of Papua New Guinea as well as the
parties to the Bougainville peace process. We hope that
the parties concerned will continue their efforts to
achieve comprehensive implementation of the Peace
Agreement and to achieve lasting peace under stability
in Bougainville at an early date.
The United Nations has always followed closely
and supported the peace process in Bougainville and
has played a unique role. Ambassador Sinclair, as well
as the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB), have done an excellent job and have won
the trust and the respect of the parties to the
Bougainville peace process. We wish to pay our tribute
to those efforts. At present, the disposal of weapons
and the drafting of the constitution have entered a
critical stage and the various conditions for producing
an autonomous government through elections are
basically in place.

We understand the wish of the Government of
Papua New Guinea that UNPOB continue to take part
in the peace process in Bougainville. We believe that,
under the current circumstances, there is still a need for
an appropriate United Nations presence in
Bougainville, because it is of great importance for
ensuring the success of the Bougainville peace process.
Peace and development in Bougainville go hand in
hand.

While promoting the political process in
Bougainville, we also call upon the various United
Nations agencies and donor countries to give timely
attention and support to post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction in Bougainville, to help the local
authorities of Bougainville strengthen their capacities
for construction and to help ex-combatants start a new
life as soon as possible.

