The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France; I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland, Romania and Slovakia have asked to associate
themselves with this statement.

The decision by the Israeli authorities to expropriate
53 hectares of land in East Jerusalem, Beit Hanina and
Beit Safafa, land that would be used for the construction
of new housing for the Ramot and Gilo settlements, is of
grave concern to the European Union. Indeed, this step,
which is causing considerable commotion both within the
Arab world and outside it, is contrary to the spirit of the
Declaration of Principles signed by Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization on 13 September 1993
and is likely to jeopardize the peace process. Certain
statements attributed to the Israeli Minister for Housing
announcing new expropriations in the months to come are
strengthening our feeling of disquiet.

The European Union has listened carefully to the
explanations given to it by the Israeli authorities,
particularly during a de'marche on Sunday, 7 May by the
European troika. Unfortunately, the Union notes that the
information given it is not such as to change the
description of the decision by the Israeli Government; the
decision is for expropriations, i.e., an act whereby the
public authority demonstrates in all its strength the
sovereignty that it claims. In this way, the Israeli
authorities seem to be reaffirming their de facto hold on
Jerusalem and are blatantly modifying the status quo in
that city, whereas the spirit of the Declaration of
Principles is to maintain the situation as it stands so long
as negotiations on the final settlement have not been
concluded. Everyone knows the extreme sensitivity of the
question of Jerusalem. Everyone recalls that the

 

annexation of Jerusalem was condemned by the
international community and has still not been
acknowledged. The process of building peace assumes that
Israel, whose population also sets great store by that city,
takes those factors into account.

The reason given to justify these expropriations is of
just as much concern to us. The European Union has
repeated many times that the settlements, which are illegal
under international law and particularly under the Fourth
Geneva Convention, jeopardize the establishment of a
foundation for lasting, peaceful coexistence between Israelis
and Palestinians. The European Union told the Israeli
authorities so again during a de'marche on 4 January last.
That point was repeated just recently during the formal
meeting of the Security Council on this item on
28 February last. In fact, the expropriations that were
announced were designed to develop such settlements. This
is a regrettable decision, because a total stoppage of work
on new settlements is absolutely essential for progress in
the peace process.

For those reasons, we feel that it is legitimate to
demand the withdrawal of the expropriation measures. The
European Union calls on the Government of Israel to
reverse its decision and to refrain in future from taking new
measures of this type.

It is unfortunate that this question, despite the efforts
of the States most interested in building a lasting peace in
the Middle East, could not be resolved by direct dialogue
between the parties. It is a pity that the matter had to be
brought before the Security Council. But could it have been
otherwise? The parties have agreed that certain items
should be dealt with during the discussions on the final
settlement. That does not mean in any sense that
international law no longer applies to those issues. Neither
does it mean that the serious developments that affect them
should not be brought up by the international community.
The peace process, which is based, inter alia, on Security
Council resolutions, is part of a long history that it is trying
to transcend. It cannot, however, erase it, for a lasting
peace can be built only through respecting what the other
side deems essential.

Major milestones lie ahead. The Government of Israel
has just announced promising decisions, in particular
concerning the release of prisoners and the transfer of
authority. The negotiators are working on concluding,
before 1 July, an agreement on elections and redeploying
the army. That is why the European Union, which is more
than ever determined to support the peace process, calls
upon the parties not to give up in the face of the obstacles
that remain, but rather to give absolute priority to the
success of their common endeavour, which merits the full
support of the entire international community.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

