Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
and its support to the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism, as set out in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/319) before the Council. I shall
also update Council members on recent developments
since its publication.

Despite sporadic incidents of violence, the situation
in Abyei remained generally calm and stable. That is
evidence ofthe efforts ofboth Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities to preserve peace in the area. In that regard,
I would like to emphasize that this was first migration
season since 2015 for which the situation no longer
necessitated the implementation of the disengagement
line, which I would recall was instituted by UNISFA
to prevent large-scale intercommunal violence during
the annual migration of the Misseriya and their cattle
through the Abyei Area. That situation has been made
possible by the communities' commitment to engage in
dialogue in order to de-escalate tensions, together with
UNISFA's proactive engagement with the communities
and its robust military posture, particularly along
possible f lashpoints. At the same time, regrettably, there
was no tangible progress to further political dialogue
between the Sudan and South Sudan on the issue of
Abyei since the Council's previous consultations on the
matter. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee has not
met since November 2017.

Let me now touch on the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. I welcome the adoption of
resolution 2465 (2019) renewing UNISFA's support to
the Mechanism. The parties made notable progress on
five of the seven benchmarks outlined in the previous
resolution 2438 (2018). The parties maintained standing
clearance for all UNISFA patrols. Two team sites were
established in the 14 Mile Area ofthe Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone within the reporting period following
extensive sensitization efforts by the South Sudanese
local authorities to allay fears of border communities
in the area.

The Joint Political and Security Mechanism
convened in ordinary sessions in October last year
and March this year, meaning that they were not held
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, as in past instances. That points
to an improved relationship between the Sudan and
South Sudan. The border demarcation discussions
were markedly advanced, with the parties deciding to
demarcate agreed sections ofthe boundary line between
the Sudan and South Sudan. Regrettably, no progress
was made on verifying border-crossing corridors or on
establishing customs and migration offices. In addition,
the redeployment of forces from the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone remains a challenge.

In December last year, the team site at Tishwin
noted the replacement of Sudanese military with police
personnel at a camp within its areas of responsibility,
while the Safaha/Kiir Adem and As Sumayah/Wierayen
team sites within the 14 Mile Area continued to observe
a South Sudanese military presence.

Let me now turn to UNISFA'S operational
challenges. With regard to the changing situation in
the Sudan, thus far there has been no visible adverse
impact on UNISFA's operations. It is too early to
say whether that will provide opportunities for the
settlement of the Abyei dispute. The mission maintains
contact with interlocutors at the working level to ensure
continuity of operations. However, it and Headquarters
remain watchful of any issues that might hinder
mandate implementation.
With regard to the Council's request in resolution
2445 (2018) for the reconfiguration of UNISFA,
particularly the troop reduction and police increase,
there have been delays in the process. In the first phase
of reductions, 360 troops were set to be repatriated
by 15 March. That has not yet taken place for certain
reasons, including the helicopter crash on 9 February,
which created a shortage in air assets, and the current
situation in the Sudan. I will take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the peacekeepers from Ethiopia who lost
their lives as a result of that tragic incident. There are
plans to start the repatriation process on 12 May, to be
completed within a week. As for the increase in police
personnel, while the selection of individual police
officers and a formed police unit has been completed,
the 130 visas from the Government of the Sudan
necessary for their deployment remain outstanding.
That particularly affects the team from Jordan needed
to conduct a technical reconnaissance mission to Abyei
before the deployment of the formed police unit from
that country.

As criminality remains the biggest challenge in the
Abyei Area, I request the Council to urge the parties
to take further steps to address law and order matters.
I would like take advantage of this meeting to request
the Sudan to issue visas expeditiously to facilitate the
deployment of UNISFA's police personnel. In the same
regard, I ask South Sudan to move forward with the
joint planning exercise for the establishment of the
Abyei police service.

Also, pursuant to the request in resolution 2445
(2018), the report before the Council proposes an
augmented civilian component in UNISFA to support
the political process. The proposed civilian component
would enable the mission to support the parties, the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
the African Union Commission to advance day-to-
day solutions. That modest shift in the mission's role
is necessary to match the reality on the ground. The
proposed support is particularly pertinent given the
difficult internal circumstances in both countries. It
is important to prevent the dispute over Abyei and the
border regions between the Sudan and South Sudan
from becoming another frozen conflict and to preserve
the gains achieved by UNISFA.

UNISFA continues to play a stabilizing role in the
Abyei Area and along the border regions. However, the
mission canprovide only a conducive environment for the
parties, whose own efforts remain essential to progress.
I am encouraged by the significantly improved relations
between the two countries in the past year, as evidenced
by the Sudan's role in facilitating the revitalized peace
agreement reached by the South Sudanese parties and
the resumption of joint oil operations. The Sudan and
South Sudan should continue that positive trajectory
and extend their cooperation to move forward on the
resolution of their disputes.

In closing, let me reiterate that it is imperative that the
gains achieved by UNISFA, as well as the communities
in Abyei, be preserved and used to advance towards
a political resolution of the border issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan. I seek the continued support
of the Security Council for the Secretary-General's
recommendations, as set out in the report before the
Council, to continue the reconfiguration of the mission
and extend its mandate by another six months.

