Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.

We wish to congratulate Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
thank its delegation very much for organizing today's
debate on this very important subject. We also thank
Ms. Virginia Gamba and the other briefers for their
insightful briefings.
More than two decades have passed since the
first-ever open debate on this topic took place in the
Chamber (see S/PV.3896). ASEAN welcomes positive
developments in the protection of children in armed
conflicts. We are also encouraged by several measures
put forward, such as Youth 2030 and the launch of
a process of proactive engagement with national,
subregional and regional actors. However, as reflected
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509), we
remain deeply concerned about the highest number of
verified cases of the killing or maiming of children,
the untold suffering of thousands of children forcibly
used or recruited as human shields, suicide bombers
or sexual slaves and the damaging effects of attacks
on schools and hospitals. We also note that protracted
conflicts, devastating tactics of war and disregard for
international law are among the main causes. Against
that background, we believe there is a strong global
consensus to move forward that agenda. We also
believe that a stronger consensus is needed to turn
those commitments into meaningful action.

We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the monitoring and reporting mechanism established
by resolution 1612 (2005). We support continued
constructive engagement with member States in the use
ofaccurate, objective, reliable and verifiable information
in reporting to ensure the integrity and credibility of
the work of the Special Representative. While we also
encourage engagement among the United Nations and
parties to conflicts, we reaffirm the principle of the
primary responsibility and authority of States to protect
their civilians in armed conflicts. We believe that a
comprehensive approach is needed to address the root
causes of the hardship that children bear.

At the regional level, ASEAN continues to be
engaged in protecting the rights of children in armed
conflicts. In October 2018, the ASEAN Dialogue on the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
was held to raise awareness on the implementation of
the rights of the child. ASEAN also closely cooperates
with United Nations agencies. In 2018, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children held an annual dialogue with the
ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection
of the Rights of Women and Children. As we mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1882 (2009), ASEAN
remains strongly committed to combating violations
of the rights of children and shall continue to engage
with all our partners to continue that vital work for the
betterment of our children.

Allow me to speak in our national capacity. As
the Chair of ASEAN in 2020, we will work closely
with other ASEAN countries to promote existing
arrangements and explore other possibilities. We are
of the View that the Security Council, with its primary
responsibility, needs to focus more efforts on conflict
prevention and resolution. Cooperation among the
United Nations and regional organizations could be
enhanced to provide more effective protection for our
children. We are deeply grateful to non-governmental
organizations and individuals who work on the ground
to bring about a profound impact on children's lives and
inspire others.

As a country growing out of the ashes of wars, we
underline the importance of a comprehensive strategy
to address the root causes of conflict, with high
priority given to ensuring that education continues
during conflict time, as it not only empowers children
but also tackles the root causes of conflicts, by
cultivating and promoting the culture of peace in the
hearts and minds of children. We also share the view
that we need to pay greater attention to address the
issue of explosive remnants of wars and their negative
effect on livelihoods, environment, public health and
socioeconomic development.

Viet Nam is proud to be the first in Asia and
the second in the world to ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. During our first tenure in
the Council in 2008 and 2009, we had the valuable
opportunity to work closely with other countries for the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1882 (2009). We are
committed to working closely with the States Members
of the United Nations and other relevant stakeholders
to promote and protect the best interests of children
affected by armed conflicts.

