Mr. Essonghe (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
Allow me, first of all, on behalf of the delegation of
Gabon and on my own behalf, to say what a great loss
the sudden passing of His Highness Shaikh Isa Bin
Salman Al-Khalifa, Amir of the State of Bahrain, is for
the States of the Arabian Gulf and for the world at large.
Through his great wisdom, experience and spirit of
compromise, His Highness contributed to peace in the
Arabian Gulf and to the search for a lasting solution to
the problem of the Middle East. We are certain that his
successor, His Highness Shaikh Hamad Bin Isa Al-
Khalifa, who has long followed his predecessor's
example, will pursue the tremendous work accomplished
by His Highness Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa with
the same dedication and devotion. We wish him every
success.

The draft resolution to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL), which we will be voting on shortly, bears
witness to the Security Council's solidarity with the
people of Sierra Leone, who have suffered so much from
the fighting and from the abuses committed by the rebels.
We can only be pleased by that solidarity, which will be
reflected concretely in the earliest possible re-

 

establishment of UNOMSIL in Freetown and by the
increase in the number of military observers and human
rights personnel, as well as by the redeployment of the
necessary support staff.

We are also encouraged by the fact that the text of the
draft resolution before us takes into account the need to
respect the embargo on the sale and supply of weapons to
the rebels, and expresses the readiness of the Council to
pursue this issue of external support for the rebels and, if
necessary, to take additional measures.

It is also reassuring to note the commitment of
President Kabbah to begin a constructive dialogue with the
rebels with a view to achieving national reconciliation and
lasting peace in the country. Likewise, the courageous
measures taken by President Charles Taylor, as reflected in
the statement of 19 February 1999, aimed at encouraging
the return of Liberian combatants from Sierra Leone, with
a promise of amnesty, offer hope for a lasting solution.

We cannot forget the role and the commendable
efforts made by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) aimed at
restoring peace, security and stability in Sierra Leone. We
hope that effort will be given increased support by the
international community.

This being said, my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.
