Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
skilful and effective manner in which you are
conducting the business of the Council. I should like to
thank Ms. Frechette, who introduced the report of the
Secretary-General, Mrs. Robinson and Mr. Oshima for
their statements.

I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
opening the debate to participation by the
representatives of non-members of the Council to
express their views and to make comments on an
important humanitarian issue - the protection of
civilians in armed conflict between or within States.

Despite the fact that the issue of the protection of
civilians has been developing a clear and concrete
humanitarian dimension for only one decade, it has
acquired special significance because of the potential
human tragedy and danger that it involves at the
national, regional and international levels, and because
of its impact on international peace and security.

In this context, we would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General,
for his sincere efforts to promote peace. We would like
in particular to commend the valuable views, proposals
and recommendations contained in the report before
the Council on the protection of civilians with a view
to overcoming the difficulties and ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian supplies and assistance to civilians in
times of civil war and armed conflict.

We fully support the content and thrust of the
core recommendations contained in the report and hope
that the Council will succeed in creating a concrete
formula to implement all the recommendations so that
bloodshed can be averted, property preserved and
peace and security maintained.

The report of the Secretary-General examines the
general situation prevailing in cases of conflict
between States or between a State and armed groups in
which civilians fall victim. The report also refers to
conflict scenarios and humanitarian situations that
make it imperative for Governments to intervene, or for
the international community, as represented by this
Council, to do so when Governments are unable or
unwilling to carry out their duties.

The report does not, however, address another
situation: that of a State in direct confrontation with
unarmed civilians. This is exactly the case of the tragic
situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian
territories. There, an armed conflict is being waged by
one party - the Israeli State, with its full military
machinery - against unarmed Palestinian civilians and
their children, who are armed only with stones as a
means of expressing their rejection of occupation and
of the violence committed by the Israeli State.

What is striking - indeed, baffling - to us is
that the acts of killing, demolition and siege, the
levelling of homes, the destruction of grazing land and
farmland, and all the attendant devastation and
displacement of civilians, have not been adequately
addressed in the Security Council. There has been no
effort to put an end to the massacres that undermine the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The bitter
irony is that all international norms and humanitarian
laws - including the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the
two Additional Protocols and other relevant
international instruments - apply fully to the
Palestinian situation.

But the Security Council continues to be unable
to shoulder its responsibility. We are concerned that,
unless the situation is properly addressed, the crisis
could spiral out of control and become a region-wide
conflict posing a threat to international peace and
security.

Public opinion in my country, Yemen - indeed,
in all Arab countries - is closely following the scenes
of massacre, destruction and displacement that are
unfolding in Palestine. The public wonders why the
Council has failed to fulfil its obligation to protect
Palestinian civilians. Absent that role, and given the
Council's failure to shoulder its responsibility, the
conviction is growing among the public in our region
that the Security Council's practice in this regard is a
blend of double standards, selectivity and a lack of
objectivity.

Let us now ask the question: will the Council take
action to protect Palestinian civilians and to salvage the
peace process, which is now all but dead? We await the
Council's response.

