Mr. Chergui: Mr. President, I, too, wish to thank
you for this opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the joint African Union and United Nations high-
level visit to South Sudan, which we undertook from
7 to 9 October. As my colleague and friend Jean-Pierre
Lacroix indicated, this was the first joint visit that also
included UN-Women as well as the African Union
Panel of the Wise and FemWise, Indeed, this mission
underscored our resolve to strengthen our institutional
partnership aimed at achieving an equitable peace in
South Sudan.

I wish to inform the Council that our joint mission
provided a similar briefing to the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council at its 800th meeting, held
here in Addis Ababa on 10 October. The Peace and
Security Council commended President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and the other South Sudanese parties for the
signing of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, on
12 September. It also recognized that this remains the

only viable option for addressing the current political,
social, economic and security challenges facing South
Sudan and for ensuring lasting peace.

As the Council is aware, the African Union and
the United Nations signed the revitalized Agreement
as guarantors, which in itself comes with major
responsibilities. Therefore, it was only logical to
undertake this visit early enough to express support for
the revitalized peace Agreement while encouraging the
parties to faithfully implement it. The African Union
Commission believes that the Agreement offers the
South Sudanese a unique window of opportunity to
deliver an inclusive, lasting and just peace.

However, as my colleague mentioned, both the
AU and the United Nations are very much aware of
the scepticism surrounding the ability of the parties
to deliver on their commitments. As a result, some
international partners are yet to sign as guarantors.
However, as the African Union and the United Nations,
we felt duty-bound to engage the Government of South
Sudan, at the highest levels possible, and emphasize
the need for the full implementation of the Agreement
and the importance of women's representation in the
peace process.

I should like at this point to commend the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), especially the leadership ofthe Sudan, Uganda
and Ethiopia in delivering this peace Agreement. The
African Union shares the view that the responsibility
to fully implement the Agreement now rests with
the South Sudanese parties. Therefore, the African
Union wishes to convey to the parties that our two
organizations can successfully mobilize international
support for the current process if the South Sudanese
live up to their commitments. I made this point very
clearly this morning during the 66th IGAD Council of
Ministers meeting here in Addis Ababa.

In this connection, our joint mission underscored
the imperative for the Government to create an
environment conducive to the return of opposition
groups during the pre-interim period. We therefore
take note of and applaud the decision by the National
Assembly to ratify the revitalized Agreement on
15 October, which paves the way for its incorporation
into the transitional Constitution. We now look forward
to the successful completion of the work of the National
Pre-Transitional Committee aimed at, among other
things, facilitating an environment conducive to an
inclusive implementation process.

The coming together of the signatories to the
Agreement, including Mr. Riek Machar, during the
peace celebrations on 31 October in Juba, gives further
hope that the implementation may be on the right track.
In this regard, we commend the leaders for making
conciliatory and confidence-building statements
during those celebrations. During our visit, there was
concern over the status of political prisoners as well
as prisoners of war. As my friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix
stated, their release is a further testament to the fact
that the parties are more serious about implementing
the current Agreement.

Meanwhile, I wish to inform the Council that on
14 November, the African Union High-level Ad Hoc
Committee for South Sudan met with the Chairperson
of the AU Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, to
exchange views on how best to support the peace process.
As the Council will recall, the Ad Hoc Committee is
composed of South Africa as Chair, Algeria, Chad,
Nigeria and Rwanda. There was consensus that the Ad
Hoc Committee should sign the revitalized Agreement
as a guarantor, since it had not done so on 12 September.
It was also agreed that a meeting would be convened
between the Ad Hoc Committee and the IGAD Special
Envoy on 19 November to exchange views on the
tasks to be undertaken by the member States and the
AU Commission.

The Ad Hoc Committee will use the interaction to
reach a better understanding and appreciation of the
implementation progress, in preparation for its planned
visit to South Sudan, to be undertaken soon.

The African Union Inter-Departmental Task Force
on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
undertook a mission from 7 November to 9 November
to South Sudan. The aim was to ascertain the current
and future needs of the African Union, with a view to
enhancing its capacities to accompany the people of
South Sudan in their efforts to attain lasting peace.
The team has reported findings similar to those of our
joint mission and has underscored the need to support
this revitalized Agreement. The visit will be used to
express continental support for the peace process and
underscore the fact that there can be no sustainable peace
unless the parties adhere to a permanent ceasefire and
ensure an inclusive process. This is given the fact that
those that are called on to support the peace process,
including the AU and the United Nations, can offer
their best assistance to the people of South Sudan only
in a conflict-free environment. I should therefore like
to inform the Council that the AU has been called upon
to assist both the independent border commission and
the Technical Boundaries Committee. In this light, the
ongoing clashes are of concern to our member States.

In this regard, we also note with concern that
the National Salvation Front has not yet signed the
Agreement and continues to disapprove of it. All efforts
should be undertaken to engage the Front on its concerns
and ensure that itjoins the peace process, especially by
those countries that have influence on this movement.

Before I conclude, I wish to commend the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan for its excellent
work in protecting civilians under very challenging
circumstances. The Mission should be supported in
whatever way possible to ensure that it accomplishes
its assigned tasks. I wish also to commend the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism, and pledge the AU's continued
support to the two institutions. We call on them to
provide IGAD, the AU and the United Nations with
timely reports and proposals on how to proficiently
support the Agreement, and our Councils should stand
ready to respond appropriately.

I fully concur that the agreement provides an
unparalleled opportunity for the people of South Sudan to
realize lasting peace. The success of the implementation
process will require considerable coordination and
cooperation between our organizations and IGAD.
There can be no doubt that some challenges will emerge.
Therefore, we should all be prepared to address them
in a swift and coordinated manner. Such coordinated
approaches would help us to persuasively insist on an
inclusive implementation process that ensures that the
interests of all communities would be catered to, if not
already accommodated in the agreement.

Last but not least, the gender dimension of the
joint visit showed that, unfortunately, violence against
women has not stopped, and we must devote more
effort and attention to that critical issue. Let me say
once again that, sooner or later, justice will be done.

