I would like to make a couple of points on the security situation and the human rights and humanitarian situation. We are concerned about the persistent levels of violence in North and South Kivu and Ituri. The activities of, and attacks by, armed groups, especially the Allied Democratic Forces, must stop. As a consequence, the protection of civilians remains a key challenge. We are glad to see some positive signals, such as a peace pledge in Mahagi territory in Ituri in August. The reported 8 per cent increase in human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, is of particular concern to us. Almost half of all human rights violations are attributable to State security activists. That number indicates a clear need for reform and for greater accountability. The humanitarian situation continues to be alarming, with more than 25 million people depending on humanitarian aid. Once again women and children are being hit disproportionately hard. We urgently call on the international community to support the humanitarian response plan, which is dramatically underfunded at this stage. Germany has so far contributed approximately €70 million for humanitarian assistance measures in 2020, including response measures regarding Ebola and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Let me make some remarks on the political situation and reform efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Even if the country has navigated strikingly well through the Ebola epidemic and the COVID-19 pandemic so far, the massive socioeconomic repercussions have to be dealt with. Therefore, we call on political actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage constructively, and we encourage the Government to continue its work on much-needed reforms in the security sector, the justice sector and the economy. It is important to focus on what needs to be done now. We should not only look towards the electoral year 2023. Strong democratic institutions and respect for the rule of law, for equal and meaningful participation of women in the fight against impunity and against corruption will be crucial. Let me also say a couple of words on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), on the reconfiguration of Mission and on benchmarks. We reiterate Germany's support for MONUSCO. MONUSCO remains indispensable in supporting the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular regarding the protection of civilians and in the east of the country. We encourage the Mission to continue in its reform process and to abide by resolution 2502 (2019), as well as the recommendations contained in the report authored by former United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled "Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers". We note with concern that allegations of five cases of sexual exploitation and abuse by members of MONUSCO were recorded. We stress that these allegations must be properly investigated by troop- and police-contributing countries and the Office of Internal Oversight Services, respectively. On the reconfiguration of MONUSCO, it is important to ensure national ownership in developing a joint strategy. We need a conditions-based reconfiguration and realistic benchmarks. Security-sector reform must be at the core of that process. The progress made should be secured and close links with new peacebuilding efforts should be allowed.
