Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I join
my colleagues in thanking Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
8

for all the efforts he and his Office have made over the
past six months to implement the mandates conferred
by the Security Council on him to investigate the
situation in Darfur. And I would like to thank him in
particular for his report and his statement today, which
was a frank and disturbing account of recent events in
Darfur and in the Sudan relevant to the mandate of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
ICC. We see it as a central pillar of the international
community's efforts to combat impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern. Justice is an
essential part of delivering a sustainable peace in
Darfur, as we recognized when the Security Council
adopted resolution 1593 (2005). It is important that
those who have been accused of the most serious
crimes are brought to justice.

My Government is therefore gravely concerned
that the two individuals for whom the Court has issued
arrest warrants remain at large and that the
Government of the Sudan has not given any
cooperation to the Court. We note that since the
warrants were transmitted to the Government of the
Sudan in June this year, instead of cooperating with the
Court in the execution of the warrants, as it is legally
obliged to do under resolution 1593 (2005), the
Government has instead adopted the course of
protecting the indictees. The Prosecutor's accounts of
the activities of Ahmad Harun and the protection he
enjoys from the Sudanese Government is of special
concern.

The Government of the Sudan clearly has the
ability to arrest and surrender the two indictees to the
Court but has chosen not to do so, in defiance both of
the International Criminal Court and of the Security
Council.

We are also deeply concerned by the Prosecutor's
reports of ongoing crimes in Darfur against civilians,
including displaced persons within their camps, and
against humanitarian workers and United Nations and
African Union personnel. The numerous incidents
catalogued in the Prosecutor's report illustrate the very
grave humanitarian situation which continues to exist
in Darfur. My Government deplores acts of violence
committed by all parties to the conflict and calls on all
sides to work together towards a peaceful resolution.

I therefore urge the Government of the Sudan, on
behalf of the Government of the United Kingdom, to
07-6267
comply with its obligations under resolution 1593
(2005) and to cooperate with the Court, specifically by
ensuring the immediate arrest and surrender of the two
indictees.

We also call on all other parties to the conflict in
Darfur to cooperate fully with and provide any
necessary assistance to the Court and its Prosecutor.
There can be no impunity for the terrible crimes
committed in Darfur.

The Security Council should, in the view of the
United Kingdom, give its full and public backing to the
International Criminal Court. In the light of the
Prosecutor's account of the failure of the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate, that warrants a formal
response by the Council today, as suggested by the
Permanent Representatives of Panama and France. I
agree with their proposals and I hope that such a
response can be agreed.

