Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): We congratulate
you for assuming presidency of the Security Council
for this month and wish you well in your endeavours.
We would also like to extend through you, our
gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador Belinga-
Eboutou for the sterling work that he did in the Council
during the past month.

My Government's comments on the final report
of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2002/1146) are
as follows:

The final report of the Panel Experts maintains
the same approach as that of the Addendum to
document S/2001/1372, issued on 13 November 2001.
In its contribution to the United Nations Security
Council debate on that Addendum on 14 December
2001, the Government of Zimbabwe, through the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mudenge,
characterized the Addendum as a "hurriedly drawn
Zimbabwe-bashing pamphlet". The final report is no
different, in its intent, from the Addendum.
Consequently, the observations and comments made on
that occasion remain pertinent, even though the final
report has shifted the focus of its attention from States
to individuals operating the so-called elite networks.

The final report deliberately, for it cannot be
otherwise, misdefined the nature and character of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. By
characterizing the conflict as regional in paragraph 12,
the Panel detracts attention from the real causes of the
conflict as well as its principal progenitors.
Consequently, it now portrays the conflict as being no
more than motivated by the greedy desire of African
military and security leaders to loot, plunder and
profiteer from the riches of Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Zimbabwe has, on innumerable occasions,
including at the Security Council and in the presence of
the members of the Panel of Experts, gone to great
lengths to explain the basis of its involvement in the
war of aggression perpetrated by Rwanda, Uganda and
Burundi against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
For reasons best known by the Panel, these
explanations including, as well, their recognition and
acceptance by the Security Council as to the distinction
in the character and purpose of the presence of allied
troops and those of Rwanda and Uganda in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have not only been
ignored but also questioned.

Speaking on this issue, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. She Okitundu,
as recently as October 24 this year, responding to this
report, again stated clearly that the allied forces from
Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe, at the invitation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo helped them
defend their sovereignty from being over run by the
invading forces of Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda. He
further stated that since the issuance of the Addendum
and final report, there seems to be a desire to attack
Zimbabwe for reasons that are well known. It is
important to note that the victim of these illegal
exploitative activities, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, is at pains to understand why the Panel is
choosing to drag Zimbabwe into the cabal of the
uninvited forces.

The final report repeats allegations that have been
challenged and discounted in the past without offering
any new evidence. For instance, in paragraph 23, there
is the repetition of alleged Zimbabwe Defence Forces
support for Burundi and Rwandan rebels; in paragraphs
17 and 54, the Panel alleges that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government repaid Zimbabwe
for military services and contributed to the salary
payments for Zimbabwe Defence Forces personnel.
Either the Panel mistakenly believes that repeating
these falsehoods will somehow transform them into
accepted truths or it is pursuing a certain agenda whose
realization demands that the falsehoods should
continue to be peddled in the public domain.

In paragraph 5, the Panel states that it "determined
that a central focus of its work should be gathering
information about politically and economically powerful
groups involved in the exploitation activities

It adds that "the Panel developed the central
concept of the elite network as an operational thesis".

The report does not privilege us with information
on why and on what basis it made such a determination,
and how this thesis related to any or all of the
components of its mandate. It appears that the Panel,
contrary to the Security Council's mandate as
reproduced in the final report in paragraph 1 (a-d),
decided on a mandate of its own. This propensity
towards revising the mandate set by the Security Council
can be traced to the addendum of November 2001.

While the original Panel had painstakingly and
meticulously defined the key concept of illegality in
the mandate, the current Panel fudged the distinction
between legal and illegal exploitation. For them, those
activities amount to the same thing. Hence, the
interchangeable use of the words "exploitation" and
"illegal exploitation" throughout the final report.

The new paradigm or operational thesis shifts the
focus of attention from the State to the individual. This,
of course, fits in comfortably with the characterization
of the conflict as a regional conflict perpetrated by
individuals whose sole motive is greed and looting. But
this paradigm has sinister motives as well. Apart from
letting those States who are in violation of international
law off the hook, it demeans the legitimate relations
between Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the

Congo. Not only does it suggest the privatization of
State interests but it also reduces relations between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe to
the level of the so-called elite networks and the
individuals allegedly involved therein. It thus
criminalizes legitimate State-to-State relations between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe
and, by extension, legitimate activities carried out by
duly appointed State representatives in the normal
conduct and promotion of mutually beneficial relations
between our two countries.

We have no apologies to make for the very close
and co-operative relations that exist between
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
These relations are being conducted in the framework
of cooperation agreements signed between our two
sovereign and independent States. If activities pursued
under legal frameworks signed by sovereign
Governments are considered illegal, then the Panel will
have to come up with a new definition of legality.
There is something fundamentally wrong with an
approach that, on one hand, accepts that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a sovereign and
independent State whose affairs are being conducted
and managed by a legitimate Government, and, on the
other hand, questions the legality of the decisions and
agreements taken and signed by that very same
Government. The Panel betrays its schizophrenia about
the legitimacy of the Government of the DRC; in many
instances it refers to that Government in the accepted
form but on occasion refers to it as the "Government in
Kinshasa" (paragraph 23), an appellation we strongly
objected to in December 2001. The Security Council,
and indeed all of us, deserve an explanation from the
Panel as to who it feels should Sign agreements on
behalf of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, if it
criminalizes the legitimate actions undertaken by the
duly appointed Government ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the conduct of
their ministerial responsibilities.

In paragraph 27, the Panel makes a very
outrageous and serious allegation that Harare has been
turned into "a significant illicit diamond-trading
centre" without providing the slightest evidence to
support it. Members of the Security Council may wish
to note that the regional headquarters of Interpol for
Southern Africa is in Harare. This headquarters has
been very active in combating criminal activities
throughout our region and would certainly have been
aware of the allegation being made by the Panel, as
would the Zimbabwe Government. As will be indicated
later, only one representative of the Panel, a part-time
technical adviser, visited Harare in the course of the
compilation of this report and there is no evidence that
he visited Interpol or any organization that could have
provided him with information to reach such a
conclusion.

The character and nature of the joint ventures
between Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are misrepresented, as they are now reduced to
mere vehicles for the activities of the so-called elite
networks. This is in spite of the explanation given to
the Security Council on 14 December 2001 by Minister
Mudenge on the genesis and other attributes of the
joint ventures. The final report's misrepresentations
amount to questioning the veracity and credibility of
the Minister's statement, purely on the basis of an
operational thesis, for there is no evidence to conclude
otherwise.

Trade and commercial relations between
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are multifaceted and predate the 1998 war there. As
with our relations with other countries, Zimbabwe is
always endeavouring to reinforce and deepen its
relations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the benefit of not only our two countries but also of
the Southern African Development Community region
and of the wider African continent. It is in this context
that, following a meeting of the Joint Inter-Ministerial
Commission involving Zimbabwe and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, held in Nyanga, Zimbabwe,
from 18-22 August 2002, some eight agreements were
signed between our two countries. These agreements
encompass a wide range of areas of cooperation,
including trade, investment, finance and the movement
of persons.

We are dismayed at the continued use of the
Panel's report to do a hatchet job on Zimbabwe. For
instance, paragraph 28 makes a totally irrelevant and
uncalled for reference to Zimbabwe's electoral laws.
What do the electoral laws of Zimbabwe have to do
with the illegal exploitation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo resources? Nothing at all. They
are brought in here purely to sully the name of
Zimbabwe and its Government. The British project to
destabilize Zimbabwe has, in this report, sought to
draw attention to our military and security
establishments and institutions. The allegations of
criminal behaviour levelled against our military and
security institutions, as well as some specific
individuals connected thereto, are intended to bring
these institutions and individuals into disrepute,
ridicule and disrespect. We may wish to note that
Patrick Smith, a British national and a part-time
technical adviser to the Panel, is a signatory to this
report, but Gilbert Barthe, a Swiss national with the
same designation, is not. Gilbert Barthe, according to
the records, has been with the Panel since at least
February 2002. He contributed to and signed the May
2002 interim report. Patrick Smith was not mentioned
in that report. Why did Barthe not sign the final report?
What exactly was Patrick Smith's role in the
compilation of the final report?

It is intriguing that none of the Panel members
decided, for whatever reasons, to visit Zimbabwe in the
course of compiling this report. What they did, however,
was to send Patrick Smith, a British national, to
Zimbabwe at a time of heightened suspicions and a
much publicized conflict between Zimbabwe and
Britain. This can only reflect lack of sensitivity on the
Panel's part or insincerity in seeking our cooperation in
providing the information sought. Is it by coincidence or
by design that Mr. Smith met only with the British High
Commission staff, out of all the many foreign State
representatives in Harare? What expertise or privileged
information, if any, did the British High Commission
have in connection with this matter that other foreign
State representatives in Harare did not have?

The Panel concludes that certain companies and
individuals should be subject to some form of
sanctioning as they are engaged in activities deserving
of such sanctions. The Panel, however, proposes to
treat these companies or individuals unequally on the
basis of whether they are located in an Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) or
non-OECD member country. Thus, the former group,
the home countries, who happen to be European, are
deemed competent to censure the erring companies,
while the latter group is to be the subject of United
Nations Security Council action. Why does the Panel
provide for such unequal treatment for similar
breaches? This stance smacks of a paternalistic,
condescending and discriminatory attitude which has
no place in the United Nations, where its Charter
principle of the equality of States must not only be
professed but must also be promoted and protected.

No information is given on how OECD remedies
or measures compare to those of the United Nations
Security Council. What assurances do we have that the
concerned OECD countries will be able to ensure
compliance with the guidelines this time around when
it is evident that they have failed to do so in the past?

The final report grudgingly reveals the identity of
those that are really behind the exploitation and illegal
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These are the financiers and
end-users of the exploitative activities, and they are
based in Western countries. Attention, however, is not
focused where it should rightly be; rather, it is diverted
to insignificant players. Indeed, one may ask who
ultimately really benefits from the exploitation of these
resources? Who are the arms manufacturers and
merchants?

Paragraph 43 of the report is illustrative of the
exploitative and unfair business practices perpetrated
by some western companies and multinationals in
Africa since the colonial era. Those practices persist to
this day. It illustrates who the real beneficiaries have
been and are in the exploitation of African countries'
resources. If the Panel is serious and sincere in wishing
to promote "Ethical and transparent business
practices", as stated in paragraph 156, so that the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
genuinely benefit from the exploitation of their
country's resources, then it would have paid greater
attention to this nefarious practice, rather than dangling
a red herring before the Security Council.

"-

In paragraph 154, the Panel states that it is
hoping that this report will contribute to a shift in
policies that will bring the exploitation of resources
back to a legally acceptable level". One may ask, when
last was exploitation at that level? Who defines that
level? Who decides that that level is now legally
acceptable?

On 14 December 2001, our Minister of Foreign
Affairs, I. S. G. Mudenge, made a very important
statement to the United Nations Security Council in a
meeting which was also attended by the Panel
members. It is disappointing to note that, though the
clarifications he gave have not been reflected in the
final report, we participated in that meeting with the
expectation that we would be engaged in a meaningful
dialogue with the Security Council and the Panel. It
appears as if we were talking to ourselves, because we
see in the final report the repetition of innuendoes and
allegations that we commented on last time without the
submission of new evidence to justify their continued
inclusion in this report.

