Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to express our gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council and the United
Nations for their solidarity and support in the aftermath
of the terrorist attack on Domodedovo International
Airport.

We are grateful to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Lang, for his substantive
report (S/2011/30), which includes a whole range of
measures to increase the effectiveness of anti-piracy
measures. It is important that its conclusions are based
on material gathered through direct work in the region,
including broad consultations with interested parties,
including the regional authorities of Somalia. We share
Mr. Lang's objective assessment of the dismal situation
of the fight against piracy, and we agree that the time
has come to take decisive measures to reach a new
level in combating that threat. Indeed, not only is
piracy not decreasing, but it is expanding like a
cancerous disease with alarming speed. This criminal
activity is attracting increasing numbers of people and
resources, and pirates are using new technological
means. Their reach is extending ever wider.

2010 was a record year. According to the
International Maritime Organization, in the Horn of
Africa 49 vessels were hijacked and more than 1,000
hostages taken. Some of these were killed. We are
deeply concerned by the news that, in territorial waters
off the coast of Seychelles controlled by national naval
forces, a vessel flying under the flag of Antigua and
Barbuda was recently hijacked. Most of the crew are
citizens of Ukraine and according to some reports,
some are Russian.

The damage to the world economy from piracy
runs to billions of dollars, despite the fact that a few
years ago the international community's expanded its
anti-terrorism efforts and increased resources to control
waterways where pirates operate and to combat
impunity. Clearly, this problem cannot resolved
without tackling the root causes of piracy, which are a
lack in Somalia of stability, the rule of law and normal
economic and social conditions. The problem is also
that piracy is no longer just one of the consequences of
the country's fragmentation. It has actually become a
self-sustaining, profitable and well-organized criminal
industry.
An important factor that fuels piracy is the
complete impunity of pirates and its kingpins. The
current anti-piracy measures are not adequate in terms
of prosecuting the participants. In order to significantly
improve the situation, we need a breakthrough. We
view Mr. Lang's recommendations as a strong basis in
that regard.

There is also a need to focus on the instruments
used for combating piracy. Significant experience has
been garnered in this area, and there are impressive
institutional provisions in place. New measures should
focus on the solid foundation provided by the work that
has already been done.

We agree with the recommendation to expand and
increase the preventive capacity of naval forces.
Control of dangerous areas in the region needs to be
strengthened. The Russian Federation continues to
participate in the anti-piracy force. To that end, at the
end of December 2010, the fifth-ranking detachment of
the Russian Pacific fleet was dispatched to the Gulf of
Aden, where it has been accompanying merchant
vessels of different countries. In 2010, Russian military
vessels were also involved in escorting vessels of the
World Food Programme. However, we must realize that
the problem cannot be solved by the means of force
alone; there needs to be a whole range of efforts
encompassing political settlement, socio-economic
aspects and security and law enforcement
considerations.

An important aspect to which we must devote our
attention is the prosecution of pirates. The fact that
pirates are not held to account is undermining anti-
piracy measures in other areas. The figures speak for
themselves: according to sources, 90 per cent of those
detained for piracy activity are released. We have
drawn the attention of the Security Council on a
regular basis to the lack of existing mechanisms for
prosecuting pirates. It is clear that current opportunities
in Somalia and neighbouring countries in terms of
prosecuting pirates mean that the capacity in this area
cannot be harnessed properly.

In this regard, the proposal by Mr. Lang to set up
two special anti-piracy courts in Somaliland and
Puntland and an extraterritorial special court deserves
our close attention and further consideration. It is
important to focus on an appropriate mechanism in this
area. We are convinced that it will only be effective if
it is supported by international specialists. There are
currently not enough professionals in Somalia with
sufficient expertise.

In practice, we have good experience in assisting
national courts, such as the assistance provided to
Kenya and Seychelles by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

The time has now come for us to tackle piracy
properly. Further developments in this area will really
depend on the extent to which the Council will be able
to take decisive steps to curb this threat. We are
prepared to make specific proposals here in the near
future. If this opportunity is not taken, then control of
the situation in Horn of Africa will be lost.

