Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; and the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area Iceland and Norway align themselves
with this statement.

At the outset, I should like to join other speakers
in expressing thanks to Ambassador Arias for the
excellent work performed by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

The significant results that have been achieved
over the past few years in the worldwide fight against
terrorism should not be underestimated. Top leaders of
terrorist networks have been arrested in Europe, Asia
and other regions. Criminal proceedings and trials are
under way in several countries, and many sentences
have already been handed down. Terrorist cells have
been disrupted and attacks foiled in several countries.
None of those successes would have been possible
without close cooperation among the law enforcement,
intelligence and judicial authorities of various nations.
This type of cooperation is still the international
community's approach to peace and security.
Nonetheless, the threat of terrorism remains a
major source of concern. While the terrorist network
has suffered major blows, it has also shown
extraordinary resilience and a strong ability to adapt to
changing situations. It does so by decentralizing its
planning and operations and by reconstituting its bases
and safe havens elsewhere, especially in failed States
or in countries with particularly weak public
institutions.

The European Union recognizes and supports the
central role of the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism worldwide. Within that framework, the
European Union stresses the need for closer
cooperation between the United Nations, in particular
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and regional and
subregional organizations. The European Union is
actively engaged in political dialogue and multifaceted
cooperation with several of those organizations. Most
recently, the European Union participated in two
significant initiatives: the seminar hosted by the
Chinese Government in Beijing on 22 and 23
September 2003 within the framework of the Asia-
Europe Meeting, and the meeting organized by the
CTC and the Organization of American States in
Washington, DC, on 7 October 2003.

On this occasion, I should like to reiterate some
of the basic principles underlying the strategy of the
European Union.

First of all, the European Union unequivocally
condemns all acts of terrorism as criminal and stresses
that terrorism is never justifiable, irrespective of its
alleged motivations, objectives, forms or
manifestations.

The fight against terrorism must be conducted
with full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, the rule of law and, where applicable,
international humanitarian law. In its internal anti-
terrorist legislation, the European Union and its
member States have set high standards for the
safeguarding of human rights.

The European Union considers Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) to be the cornerstone of the
international community's cooperation strategy and is
firmly committed to its implementation. I should like
to highlight some of its basic aspects. The signature,
ratification and full implementation of the 12
international conventions against terrorism are a top
priority for the European Union. The European Union's
members and acceding countries are now parties to the
vast majority of those conventions. We strongly
encourage all other members of the United Nations to
act in that direction. Regional organizations have a
crucial role to play, since they can reaffirm their
commitment by actively monitoring the progress being
made on signature and ratification of the conventions
by their respective member States.

The fight against the financing of terrorism is
equally crucial. We have increased our efforts and our
effectiveness in that field, focusing our attention on
cutting off financial flows and other forms of support
from terrorist organizations. A list of terrorist
individuals, groups and entities is regularly reviewed
and updated.

A workshop on terrorism financing, organized
jointly by the Italian European Union presidency and
the European Commission, will be held in Brussels on
7 November 2003. That forum will provide an
opportunity to pursue political dialogue and to
exchange information and best practices on problems
related to the implementation of international
obligations stemming from the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Technical assistance aimed at strengthening
counter-terrorism capacity-building is another basic
tenet of the European Union's strategy. In addition to
programmes carried out by individual member States,
the European Commission has launched pilot projects
in a few countries in consultation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

In that context, the European Union also
recognizes the role of the Terrorism Prevention Branch
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
assist States in implementing their obligations arising
from Security Council resolution 1373 (2001),
particularly in becoming parties to and fully
implementing the relevant international conventions
and protocols related to terrorism. We believe that
effective technical coordination in that field is crucial
to the success of counter-terrorism capacity- building.

Special attention should be dedicated to the links
between terrorism and organized crime, especially
trafficking in drugs and human beings. In many
instances, funds generated from these criminal
activities help finance terrorism. Terrorist organizations
also seek to take advantage of migration flows in order
to infiltrate countries and execute their deadly projects.

Faced with the serious challenge of terrorism and
its global threat to peace and security, the international
community must continue to respond with a strategy of
cooperation at all levels. To this end, the European
Union supports the role of the competent United
Nations agencies and bodies in helping to strengthen
the United Nations capacity to counter terrorism and
advise Member States on the implementation of the
pertinent Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations legal instruments against terrorism.

