Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have the honour to brief the members of
the Council in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic.
In my statement, I intend to provide an overview of the
Committee's work since my predecessor last briefed the
Council on 15 February 2017 (see S/PV.7884), and in so
doing highlight the activities of the Committee and the
Panel of Experts.

Over the course of 2017, there were a number of
positive developments in the Central African Republic,
including the start of political consultations within
the framework of the African Union initiative and the
progress achieved in engaging representatives of armed
groups in disarmament and demobilization and security
sector reform. Despite all those advances, however,
the heightened level of violence in the south-east and
north-west last year has reminded us of the worst
developments in the country in 2013 and 2014, with the
number of internally displaced persons and refugees
reaching unprecedented levels, while civilians, Blue
Helmets and humanitarian actors have been regularly
attacked by predatory armed groups.

Since my predecessor's last briefing, the
Committee has convened a total of eight meetings - on
23 February, 31 March, 12 May, 21 July, 6 September,
4 and 29 December 2017 and 26 January 2018.
While press releases summarizing those meetings
are available on the Committee's webpage, I wish to
highlight several activities of the Committee that speak
to the implementation of sanction measures.

The Committee has continued to work closely
with the Central African authorities, regional and
neighbouring States, and, on 6 September and
26 January, convened its first open briefings, which
were available to all Member States. Those open
briefings have proven to be very useful and engaging,
and have provided Committee members and the invited
regional States with an opportunity to hear the views
of the broader membership of the Organization on how
to enhance the implementation of sanctions by regional
States and those neighbouring the Central African
Republic. Most important, though, they have allowed us
to see the complete picture on the ways in which we can
address cross-border arms trafficking and trafficking
in natural resources.

It is clear to me that regional cooperation among
neighbouring States in countering illicit networks,
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and cross-
border trafficking in arms and ammunition is key in
addressing many challenges that countries in Central
Africa face. However, without the sanctions regime and
other assistance being provided by the international
community, those steps may fall short in efficiently
eradicating the root causes of the conflict.

In that regard, I would also like to highlight the
outstanding work of the United Nations Mine Action
Service in ensuring the safe and effective management
of weapons and ammunition in the Central African
Republic, improving weapons and ammunition
storage facilities and building permanent armouries
outside Bangui. The Mine Action Service briefed the
Committee twice in 2017, on 17 May and again on
4 December, regarding its assistance to the Central
African authorities in the implementation of the 2017-
2018 small arms road map aimed at developing a
national strategy and action plan. On 4 December, the
Committee received a briefing for the first time from
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
which provided preliminary findings of its report on
weapons and ammunition management that is expected
to be published by the end of March.

I also wish to underline the work of the members
of the Panel of Experts, who are the eyes and ears of
the Committee on the ground. Thanks to the Panel's
reporting - namely, its midterm and final report, as
well as its progress updates, the most recent of which
was circulated on 9 February - the Committee is well
informed in connection with the implementation of the
sanctions measures in the Central African Republic and
the region. In that respect, it is important to note that,
on 17 May 2017, the Committee added the name of one
individual, Abdoulaye Hissene, to its sanctions list. I
would also like to emphasize that in 2017, the Panel of
Experts submitted three new statements of cases for
possible sanctions designation as well as two updated
statements. To date, the Panel has submitted a total of
32 statements.

On 29 December, in an example ofthe Committee's
cooperation with the Central African Republic's
national authorities, the Committee heard briefings
on the implementation of the arms embargo via video
teleconference in Bangui from the Ministers ofNational
Defence and Interior and Public Security and from
representatives of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the European Union Training Mission in Mali
and the Panel of Experts. While fully recognizing and
understanding the Central African Republic authorities'
legitimate efforts to rearm the national defence and
security forces, the Committee also stresses the secure
and safe management of arms and ammunition.

During the reporting period, the Committee also
worked closely with the Central African Republic,
States of the region and other Member States to provide
guidance on implementing the arms embargo. In
that regard, the Committee and the Panel of Experts
are committed to further dialogue with the national
authorities in order to ensure that the arms embargo
can be seen to be helping the Government to rearm
the defence and security forces while fully complying
with its provisions. The ongoing deterioration in the
security situation, particularly in the south-eastern and
north-western areas of the country, along with the easy
availability of arms and ammunition, makes effective
implementation of the embargo essential.

With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
and the Panel of Experts have continued to actively
engage with regional States, particularly Kenya and
Ethiopia, in following up on reported violations, while
emphasizing that appropriate exemption procedures
aimed at promoting mediation activities may be used
ahead of the proposed travel in accordance with the
sanctions measures, as detailed in resolution 2339
(2017) and the Committee Guidelines. In that regard, I
would particularly like to thank the Kenyan authorities
for having communicated reliable evidence to the Panel
of Experts indicating that a sanctioned individual,
Mr. Francois Bozize, has been travelling under a
different name, which has just been added to the
sanctions list. I would therefore like to urge the Central
African Republic authorities and all States of the region
to fully implement the sanctions measures, including
by ensuring that fraudulent, counterfeit, stolen or lost
passports, as well as invalidated diplomatic passports,
are removed from circulation, as requested in paragraph
12 of resolution 2399 (2018).

Turning to the assets freeze, in its final report the
Panel of Experts highlighted the fact that Chad had
frozen the assets of the listed individual Abdoulaye
Hissene, while noting once again that the Central
African Republic authorities have still not frozen the
accounts and assets of Alfred Yekatom and Eugene
Ngai'kosset. According to the Panel of Experts,
the Central African Republic authorities have also
continued paying Yekatom and Ngai'kosset's salaries,
in violation of the assets freeze. On behalf of the
Committee, I once again urge the authorities to fully
implement the sanctions measures and immediately
freeze the assets of the individuals in question.

In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council that
this year I intend to visit the Central African Republic
and several States of the region in order to be able to
talk directly and frankly with the appropriate officials
on the ground, convey the importance of ensuring that
the sanctions measures are fully implemented and
outline the relevant exemption procedures.

