Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish): I want to thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien for
his briefing to the Security Council, as well as to align
myself with the statement made by the representative of
New Zealand on behalf of the three penholders on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

We fully agree that we should ensure with the utmost
urgency that the civilian population, both in Aleppo
and in the rest of the country, receives the protection
and assistance they need from impartial actors and
in full respect for humanitarian principles and under
the leadership of the United Nations. Of course, there
should be an immediate cessation of all attacks on
medical personnel and on civilian infrastructure - such
as schools, camps for internally displaced persons and
hospitals. In addition, there should be immediate and
unrestricted access to medical and surgical equipment
for those who need it, as set forth in resolution 2286
(2016). I believe that the recommendations that the
Secretary-General is preparing on the protection of
personnel and medical facilities will help to put an end
to such attacks as soon as possible.

The situation on the ground continues to be
extremely serious, as the Secretary-General's latest
monthly report (S/2016/714) on the implementation
of the humanitarian obligations of the parties to the
conflict leaves very few words to express the suffering
of the Syrian people. In his report, the Secretary-
General stresses that it is vital to ensure that there is a
48-hour humanitarian pause in Aleppo as well as safe
and lasting humanitarian access to the city. We welcome
the fact that, at the meeting of the Humanitarian Task
Force in Geneva on 18 August, the two Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) agreed to
support Special Envoy De Mistura's initiative for a 48-
hour humanitarian pause.

It is of the utmost importance that such pause
be put into practice on the ground and that it should
be done on a weekly basis so that there is access for
humanitarian workers and medical personnel to the
civilian population in order to provide assistance to that
population and, if necessary, voluntary evacuation with
appropriate security and neutrality guarantees. It is also
important that the water and electricity supply systems
be repaired, which is urgently required. We therefore
urge the Chairs of the ISSG and all those States that
have any influence on the parties to the conflict to
make every effort not to miss this opportunity to ensure
that the parties respect the ceasefire and thereby allow
humanitarian access to the population, in compliance
with their obligations under international law.

Finally, we hope that the talks between the parties
can soon be renewed in order to put an end the conflict
under the terms set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). But
we should not forget that the obligations of the parties
under international humanitarian law are independent
of any other consideration. The fact remains that we
must continue to work urgently to ensure that resolution
2254 (2015) is fully implemented. For our part, we will
continue to support the work of the ISSG Chairs with
concrete proposals, as we have been doing so far.

