The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

My delegation thanks the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing. We want to
highlight his visit to Damascus, as well as his efforts to
achieve a political solution to the conflict. We believe
that dialogue is the best way to achieve positive results.
In that regard, we again underscore the efforts of the
Astana guarantors and the agreements concluded on the
situation in Idlib, which have had tangible effects in
reducing violence and restoring relative calm for the
Syrian people. We reiterate that the conflict can have no
military solution, and we therefore reject any attempts
to foment fragmentation or sectarianism in the Syrian
Arab Republic, as well as the presence of foreign forces
with no authorization from the Syrian Government.

I want to once again emphasize Mr. De Mistura's
tireless efforts on this very delicate and important issue,
not just for the Council but for the entire international
community. I would therefore like to thank him for his
work and reiterate our full support for his efforts to
find a political solution. We eagerly await the outcome
of the upcoming high-level meetings. After hearing
his briefing today, our delegation sees the glass as
half full rather than half empty. We remain optimistic
that patience and dedication will have positive results.
We agree that if we want to strengthen the political
process, we must also give the Special Envoy the
opportunity to work and focus on reaching that
outcome. We believe that the solution requires ensuring
the continuity and implementation of the Sochi final
outcome, whose main goal is establishing a credible,
balanced and representative constitutional committee
through continued consultation and cooperation with
the Syrian Government. We urge that the conflict be
resolved through dialogue and an inclusive and united
political process, led by and for the Syrian people, that
can lead to a peaceful and sustainable solution within
the framework of the Geneva process and resolution
2254 (2015), under the auspices of the United Nations,
in line with international law and with full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

