Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix for
their informative briefings.

First and foremost, we want to emphasize the crucial
importance for regional stability of maintaining the
existing ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic, particularly in the light of the increase in
tensions between the parties over the past three months,
with frequent military activity, including firing into
the area of separation, and crossings over the ceasefire
line on both the Alpha and Bravo sides, with the risk
that this represents for the civilian population and
United Nations personnel. We join the calls to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid any breach of the ceasefire
and the area of separation and ensure compliance
with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. We
emphasize this in view of the renewed attention being
given to non-compliance with the relevant resolutions
of the Council and the General Assembly where the
occupied Syrian Golan is concerned. We also want
to recognize the essential work of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), particularly
as a liaison between the parties in order to maintain
an atmosphere conducive to peace. It is therefore
essential to emphasize to the parties the importance
for UNDOF of providing guarantees, facilities, access
and freedom of movement so that it can perform its
functions effectively.

My delegation would like to express the Dominican
Republic's firm foreign policy position based on the
fundamental principles of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, non-intervention,
respect for human rights, international law and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts as a means of ensuring
the maintenance of world peace. Those fundamental
principles are consistent with the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territories by force, in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

The issue ofthe Golan Heights, considered occupied
territory under Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 497 (1981) and General Assembly resolution 72/16,
is a key and sensitive element in the set of issues
pertaining to the achievement of a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

We call for multilateralism and adherence to
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations to prevail. The same is especially relevant in the
current context, in which the Syrian people desperately

await a secure and stable environment. The recent
developments that we have addressed in the Council
allow no hope of progress to achieve lasting peace in
the region. We should also not forget that the ultimate
goal of all these processes are the human beings who
live in our countries - in the case of Syria the almost
13 million people who currently have serious and urgent
humanitarian needs.

Finally, we believe that unilateral positions in
flagrant Violation of international law - and especially
of the resolutions of the Council - should be avoided.
We call on those who want peace to prevail in the region
to act accordingly.

