The Deputy Secretary-General: Thank you for
organizing this timely debate, Madam President. I
know how committed and experienced you and several
of your colleagues on the Council are to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Peacebuilding encompasses a variety of political and
development actions by United Nations peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, country teams
and other actors. It lies at the heart of United Nations
aspirations in countries emerging from conflict.

Just two weeks ago, the Secretary-General visited
Sierra Leone to mark the closure of the United Nations
peacebuilding operation, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. The transition to
the country team is under way, in close collaboration
with the Government of Sierra Leone and with the
continued political engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The example of Sierra Leone, and of Timor Leste
before it, provides evidence of how post-conflict
peacebuilding can prevent a relapse into violence and
underpin a country's development after conflict. On the
other hand, the recent upsurges ofviolence in the Central
African Republic and in South Sudan demonstrate the
unpredictable environment for peacebuilding and the
great risks involved. That is why we must always be
prepared to adapt and seek new approaches based on
experience and evidence.

In 2012, the Secretary-General identified inclusivity,
institution-building and the need for sustained
international support and mutual accountability as
three priority areas for peacebuilding. Let me say a few
words about each.

First, with respect to inclusivity, national
ownership, national leadership and national political
commitment are indispensable elements for durable
peace. But peace agreements that involve only a limited
number of protagonists or key actors often fail to meet
peoples' needs and expectations, and therefore turn out
to be fragile. While peace settlements admittedly need
to include so-called people with guns, peacebuilding
primarily requires political processes with broad
participation and public accountability.

In Guinea last year, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit,
facilitated a political dialogue, with support from the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund. It promoted trust among political parties and
strengthened the role of women, including as electoral
monitors. Those were critical elements for the largely
peaceful elections held in September 2013. In Yemen
over the past two years, the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser worked to bring the voices of women and youth
into the country's national dialogue. Both examples
highlight the importance of gender-responsive
peacebuilding and the inclusion of women in peace
processes.

Let me underscore the Secretary-General's
engagement in that area, through the commitment
to allocate 15 per cent of United Nations-managed
peacebuilding funds to projects promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women. I am aware
that the goal has not yet been reached, but it remains a
priority concern in peacebuilding.

My second point concerns institution-building
for fostering peace, development and social cohesion.
Inclusive institution-building in the areas of justice,
education and health care can help States gain broad
popular confidence and ensure that disputes and
political competition are handled without resort to
violence. Effective and impartial security and judicial
institutions are particularly important for building
respect for human rights and the rule of law. We see
the centrality of institution-building in Liberia, where
United Nations support for the establishment of five
regional security and justice hubs has helped to restore
faith in the country's security services. The expansion
ofjudicial services and legal reforms are central parts
of Liberia's statement of mutual commitments with
the Peacebuilding Commission. Ssupport to the Land
Commission and so-called "peace huts" has promoted
the peaceful resolution of disputes. I know that the
representative of Jordan is very familiar with that point.

The examples of successful peacebuilding I have
mentioned depend upon sustained and predictable
financial and political international support, which
brings me to my third point. Where a United Nations
mission is making the transition to a United Nations
country team, such as in Burundi or Sierra Leone, we
need to ensure continued funding for central activities.
We also need to provide the necessary political support
and act decisively at critical moments. As the Council
noted during its recent mission to Mali, cantonment is a
key confidence-building measure in the peace process.
Early and reliable funding by the Peacebuilding Fund is
essential for the ability of the United Nations to support
cantonment.

In Somalia, the New Deal Compact has aligned
donors with the priorities articulated by the Government
and Somali counterparts. That has strengthened
mutual accountability. In Liberia, a publicly accessible
so-called "dashboard" showing the details of donor
funding has promoted transparency.

I would also like to add that the African Union
engagement in the Central African Republic, Somalia
and elsewhere in Africa underlines the importance
of working in close partnership with regional
organizations in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Building a regional environment
conducive to peace should be a critical priority for
countries emerging from conflict. That will help them
to strengthen fragile transitions and reduce illicit arms
or financial flows.

The Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General in Burundi, the Central African Republic
and Guinea-Bissau have worked actively with the
Peacebuilding Commission to ensure the cooperation
of neighbouring countries and regional organizations.
Last year, in May, the Secretary-General and the World
Bank President visited the Great Lakes region of Africa
and, together with the Chairperson of the African
Union, the President of the African Development
Bank and the Commissioner for Development of
the European Union, visited the Sahel in November.
That demonstrated the welcome joint commitment to
supporting transformative work and engagement for
peace and development. Similar partnerships have
been developed in the Great Lakes region, where the
United Nations and the European Union are working
with Governments and civil society to improve
natural-resource management.

Member States created a new peacebuilding
architecture at the Summit in 2005 in response to the
frequent relapse into violence of countries emerging
from armed conflict. Given its diverse composition,
the Peacebuilding Commission is well placed to
help ensure the coherence of efforts and sustained
attention in support of peace. I would also assert that
the Peacebuilding Fund is now widely recognized for
its usefulness and flexibility. But questions remain
as to where and how the Commission can be most
helpful and relevant. The Commission and its country
configurations are working hard to play a useful
advisory role to the Security Council and to bring to
bear the collective weight of Member States in support
of peacebuilding priorities.

We should recall, however, that the Peacebuilding
Commission is a subsidiary organ of this body and, I
stress, can be ofoptimal use only ifthe Council empowers
it and utilizes its potential. When the Peacebuilding
Commission was established - I happened to be
President of the General Assembly at the time - we
believed that the Council could benefit from an advisory
body that could take a longer, post-conflict perspective.
I would like to appeal to the Council to take advantage
of the review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2015
to shape the kind of Peacebuilding Commission that
will be relevant, catalytic and effective, not least from
the perspective of the Security Council and, naturally,
in the interests of those States that are affected. The
realities in the world certainly remind us that there is a
need for such a function and such a role for the United
Nations. I look forward to hearing the new Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission speak on that challenge.

The challenges are many, serious and urgent
in countries like Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan, Mali and Somalia. I am
confident that the Governments and the people of those
countries could gain considerably from an efficient
and broadly anchored United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

