Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I want to
thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
informative briefing on the current state of
humanitarian affairs across the African continent, and

particularly on his recent trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, northern Uganda and southern
Sudan. We are grateful to Mr. Egeland for taking on
that timely mission.

Let me say at the outset that the United States is
encouraged by what appear to be some positive
developments in resolving some of the longstanding
humanitarian problems in Africa. For example, we
would note that the return of refugees and displaced
persons in Angola and Liberia is nearly complete, and
that the process is also underway in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and southern
Sudan.

We also share Mr. Egeland's cautious optimism
about the situations in northern Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recognize that
support for peace and reconciliation efforts, as well as
for the basic recovery of the social and economic
infrastructure in all of those post-conflict situations,
will be critical to the sustainable resolution of those
protracted crises. We add our hope that external
financial support for the recovery of those countries is
shared more broadly by a wider donor community,
since we all benefit from the peace and security that
should result.

The United States is encouraged by the ongoing
negotiations between the Government of Uganda and
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), and we are
monitoring the results with interest. We urge both
parties to continue to work towards a viable ceasefire.
In that regard, it is important that the 2007 United
Nations Strategy and Consolidated Action Plan address
internally displaced person (IDP) returns in Uganda, as
well as assistance to IDP camps. While IDPs may well
continue to move between camps and their lands for
some time, it is important to start laying a foundation
for returns now.

The United States, however, is gravely concerned
over the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Darfur,
including the possible new flows of refugees to Chad
and weak implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We must find a way to help reach a
cessation of hostilities in Darfur, to help provide
security for the civilians there and to support a process
of dialogue rather than use of arms. We look forward to
the outcome of next week's meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, and we reiterate our
call on the Government of the Sudan to welcome

deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Darfur.

We deeply regret the recent deaths of
humanitarian workers in Darfur. We join others in
underscoring the need to support individuals working
in some of the most difficult areas of the world for the
benefit of those in need.

