Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to express our gratitude for
the invitation to this meeting, as well as to Ms. DiCarlo
and Mr. Zannier for their important briefings.

The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity
to salute the new Ukrainian President Volodymyr
Zelenskyi's inauguration. We welcome the
pronouncements to prioritize the resolution of the
conflict in the eastern region of his country. We wish
him many successes in his Administration.

The Security Council and the international
community received the Minsk agreements as an
expression ofthe parties' legitimate interest in achieving
a sustainable and lasting peace. However, more than
four years after the signing of the agreements, we
continue to witness ongoing violations of the ceasefire,
the worrisome need for humanitarian assistance for
civilians in the conflict zone, the alarmingly high
number of people - around 4 million - affected by
hunger and misery and the painful reality that more than
1.5 million internally displaced persons are still unable
to return to their homes. Added to that are the constant
unilateral measures that, in fact, do not contribute to
moving the peace process forward.

We once again call on the parties to relax their
positions and open the way to dialogue and to reaffirm
their commitment to peace, multilateralism and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The Dominican
Republic urges the parties to ensure the collective
interest and respect for human rights, guarantees and
freedoms for all its inhabitants - for both those of
the majority and those of the minority, including the
rights and prerogatives relating to the language of the
latter populations.

In the context of today's meeting, it is essential
to act on an impartial assessment of the situation of
minorities. To that end, we reiterate that it is necessary
to maintain a dialogue with all the relevant parties. It is
also necessary to move forward without delay towards
a sustainable solution. To achieve that, the parties are
called upon to refrain from any unilateral action that
might hinder the process of implementing the agreements
and complicate the efforts being made to build peace in
the Ukrainian people and their surroundings.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its recognition of the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, we
take this opportunity to highlight the continued efforts
and customary support of the Organization and the
international community to overcome the adversities
suffered by the Ukrainian people in the midst of the
conflict that has affected them for years. Accordingly,
we call for the maintenance of conditions that allow for
the continuation of the dialogue between the parties
in the current Normandy format and the Trilateral
Contact Group and insist on the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements in order to put an end to the
conflicts and restore international peace and security
in Ukraine and the region.

