Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing and for
presenting the sixteenth report of the Prosecutor to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Azerbaijan is not party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We know the efforts
of the Court to investigate violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law in Darfur. It
is important to ensure that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court acts strictly within the
mandate of resolution 1593 (2005).

It is clear that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Darfur, We note some positive developments
in the overall security environment in the region. We
also take positive note ofthe signing ofthe memorandum
of understanding between the Government of the Sudan
and the Justice and Equality Movement faction to
cease hostilities and launch peace talks. It is important
that those groups that have not yet signed the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur join the peace process
without preconditions.

At the same time, we reiterate our serious concern
about the activities of non-State armed groups, which
represent the main obstacle to the peace process. The
reports of serious human rights violations committed
by such groups against civilians, especially those
settled in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
should be properly investigated, in order to bring those
responsible to justice and to prevent those violations
being repeated in the future.

We note with profound concern the increasing
attacks on United Nations staff members and aid
workers, including the looting of a World Food
Programme location in the Otash IDP camp in July.

In conclusion, we stress the need for the international
community to further support the implementation of
the Doha Document, as well as the importance of the
renunciation of violence by the rebel groups, as a vital
prerequisite for ensuring durable peace in Darfur.

