Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): First let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate of the
Security Council on the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I believe such deliberations will further
the operational relations between the two bodies.

Given the complexity of its work and an
increasingly demanding mandate, the work of the
second session of the Peacebuilding Commission is
indeed commendable. We thank its Chairperson,
Ambassador Yukio Takasu, for his able stewardship.
We are pleased that the Commission's working method
has been further consolidated. The Chairs of the
country-specific configurations have also played
important roles in their contributions to the
Commission's work. We commend Sierra Leone,
Burundi and Guinea-Bissau for their cooperation and
for taking national ownership of the Peacebuilding
Commission initiative. We wish similar success to the
Central African Republic.
The Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund have also played catalytic roles in
our shared objectives. We hope that the recent
restructuring of the Office will result in greater
efficiency and improved servicing for all the
Commission configurations.
The disbursements of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund
and other funds should be rapid and immediate to
ensure early stabilization of countries in the
peacebuilding process. That is required to support
national and local authorities in delivering a peace
dividend. In that regard, we may remind ourselves that
one of the main purposes of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to marshal resources for reconstruction
and institution-building in countries emerging from
conflict.

Therefore, the Commission should play a central
role in any discussion regarding the creation of the new
rapid funding mechanism. We feel that members of the
Commission should be more frequently updated on the
operations of the Peacebuilding Fund, and information
on disbursements should be shared with them. The
relationship between the Commission and the Fund and
their individual roles have to be made clear to the
stakeholders on the ground in order to dispel the
ambiguity about eligibility for Fund support. We are
heartened by the fact that the Fund has exceeded the
$250 million target. This is testimony to the continued
commitment of the international community to the goal
of peacebuilding.

As we all agree, the multidimensional areas of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding require a certain
expertise. However, as we may recall from the
discussion in the meetings of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the idea of civilian observers
is still not agreed upon. We are not in favour of the
creation of any type of cadre or pool comprising
United Nations staff for rapid civilian deployment. We
believe that filling the vacant posts in field missions
and country offices by personnel recruited from
Member States and host countries, in both military and
civilian categories, can better serve that purpose.

On the question of relation between such United
Nations capacities and national capacities, we would
like to emphasize that national ownership of the
peacebuilding process is a fundamental prerequisite.
We emphasize ever-greater ownership by the respective
Governments of the countries on the agenda. In our
perspective, national ownership is the key to sustaining
progress and preventing the country in question from
relapsing into conflict. It is indeed a shared moral
obligation to be vigilant about the special needs of
countries emerging from conflict and stepping towards
recovery, reintegration and reconstruction.

As one of the largest troop-contributing countries,
Bangladesh is actively engaged in United Nations
peacekeeping activities. As a developing country, we
have experienced home-grown ideas like microcredit
and women's non-formal education, which we believe
can work miracles in economic advancement and
women's empowerment. Bangladeshi peacekeepers
have to some extent transferred that development
philosophy to the countries of their deployment, and as
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Bangladesh fully supports integrating those concepts
into the economic recovery and development
dimensions of the peacebuilding process. To begin
with, we could focus on youth development,
employment generation and women's employment in
consolidating the initial gains of peace.

We pledge our continued support to the
Organization's peacebuilding goals. We would like to
reiterate that the Peacebuilding Commission should
have the central role in post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation efforts. The Commission should act as a
spearhead for a coordinated, coherent and integrated
peacebuilding architecture.

My delegation is of the View that the operational
relations of the Peacebuilding Commission with the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council and other
intergovernmental United Nations bodies and relevant
stakeholders should be further strengthened. We urge
the members of the Security Council to extend their
full support to the Commission, so that it may fully
function as a competent advisory body to address post-
conflict situations. The international community should
assist the Commission in fulfilling its mandate in all
possible ways.

