Mr. Stephen: The report before the Council,
contained in document S/2003/621, is the fourteenth
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNOGBIS).

As members will recall, I briefed the Security
Council on 5 March on developments in Guinea-Bissau
since 13 December 2002, when the last report of the
Secretary-General (8/2002/1367) was issued. Members
of the Council will also recall that, following my last
briefing, in March, the Council, in a statement to the
press, expressed concern at the political instability in
the country and appealed to the Government to ensure
that the forthcoming legislative elections are conducted
in a transparent, fair and credible manner. The present
report covers developments since that briefing,
concentrating on the situation in the country in advance
of legislative elections, due on 6 July 2003. It also
describes the contributions of UNOGBIS, in
collaboration with the United Nations country team on
the ground, to promote conditions conducive to free
and fair legislative elections.

Since my last briefing, in March, the overall
situation in Guinea-Bissau has worsened. The
opposition continues to accuse the Government of
restrictions on civil liberties. Donors have conditioned
financial support for the elections on the creation by
the Government of conditions propitious for credible
elections. The caretaker Government continues in
office, while the National Assembly remains dissolved.
Judicial institutions continue to be weak.

With regard to the electoral process, at President
Kumba Yala's request, the United Nations
Development Programme has continued to provide
technical assistance to the National Electoral
Commission. UNOGBIS will be prepared to coordinate
international observation should conditions on the
ground be conducive to free and fair elections.

To reassess the electoral preparations on the
ground, an electoral needs assessment mission of the
Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of
Political Affairs visited the country between 5 and 11
June. The mission noted that it is not technically
feasible for the elections to be held on 6 July and urged
the authorities to undertake the planned electoral
census, or revision of the electoral registers, with a
minimum of delay. While the President has concurred
with the view that the polling date cannot be
maintained, he has yet to announce publicly that the
elections will be postponed and that a new calendar of
electoral activities is under consideration. However,
some progress has been made towards launching the
voter registration.

While it is encouraging that the country remains
peaceful, regrettably, the overall economic situation
remains critical. The non-payment of months of salary
arrears by the Government, amounting to something
like $11 million, has raised the level of social
frustration, resulting in periodic strikes by public sector
workers. The Government has, however, told the trade
unions that it intends to pay arrears of wages soon.
Since the report was completed, there have been more
cabinet changes. In other developments, Radio
Bombolom continues to function. On 3 June, the former
Minister of Defence, as well as President Yala's
Adviser for Political Affairs, who had been detained
since April, were provisionally released.

To conclude, allow me to highlight three points
made in the observations section of the report. Every
effort should be made by the country's elected leaders
to return the country to political and constitutional
normality, so that the rehabilitation and peace-building
agendas can be put back on track.

Secondly, to gain the confidence of the donor
community, the Guinea-Bissau leaders have to take
concrete measures to ensure the holding of credible
legislative elections and to guarantee respect for civil
rights and the liberties of citizens of Guinea-Bissau.

Thirdly, in this hour of extreme want, the people
of Guinea-Bissau need the support of the international
community. To that end, despite concerns about
setbacks in peace consolidation and economic recovery
in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations mechanisms,
including the Bretton Woods institutions and the
United Nations country team on the ground, remain
constructively engaged in the country in order to help
alleviate the most urgent social needs of the
population. Their ongoing efforts, as well as similar
actions by Guinea-Bissau's other international partners,
are welcome.

The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa of the Security
Council, the recently created Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and Social Council,
and the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau have
continued to work closely to explore ways to assist
Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council's forthcoming
mission to Guinea-Bissau, with the participation of
representatives of the Economic and Social Council, is
a timely initiative. The Secretary-General hopes that
this mission will further encourage a productive and
constructive dialogue between the Guinea-Bissau
Government and the international community.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank the
Chairman of the Security Council's Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
for inviting me and the Resident Coordinator two days
ago to brief members of the Working Group, the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group established by the Economic and
Social Council and the Group of Friends of Guinea-
Bissau in advance of the Security Council's mission to
Guinea-Bissau.

