Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate.

I would like to begin with some remarks concerning
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Brazil reiterates its
support for a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security. Brazil
encourages the parties to seek a constructive political
environment conducive to a return to meaningful
negotiations. The situation in Gaza, which has now
lasted for a year, continues to highlight the importance
of a fair, just and mutually agreeable political solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian question. In that spirit, Brazil
welcomes the United States initiative for a peace plan.
We look forward to its presentation and encourage
all the parties involved to engage with an open mind

in constructive negotiations. Peace can be achieved
only through difficult decisions and concessions from
all sides.

With regard to Syria, Brazil is gravely concerned
about the escalation of violence in Idlib and reiterates
the importance of fully complying with the ceasefire
agreed on last year. Only then can we begin to create
conditions on the ground that can enable progress to
be made towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
Brazil would like to underscore its support for the
work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and its hope
that we will soon see further progress on the Geneva
track, especially through the speedy convening of a
constitutional committee, which will be a crucial step
towards an urgently needed political solution, based
on the parameters established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2254
(2015), and the Sochi declaration. We reiterate that only
a political process mediated by the United Nations and
owned and led by the Syrian people can bring an end
to the conflict and enable the alleviation of Syrians'
humanitarian suffering.

Brazil regrets that the security situation has
continued to delay the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and resolution 2452 (2019) in Yemen.
We remain committed to monitoring the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah, for which we have agreed to deploy
Brazilian military and police officers. In our View,
the Stockholm Agreement represents only a first step
on the way to achieving a comprehensive political
solution to the conflict in Yemen. In that regard, while
welcoming the recent announcement that the parties
have agreed to the concept of operations for the first
phase of the redeployment of forces in Al-Hudaydah, we
are following with great concern the continued reports
of violence, which threaten to undermine the fragile
ceasefire in the city and the escalation of violence
elsewhere in the country. We call on the parties to
continue to work with Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
towards the full implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and urge them to refrain from measures
that might lead to a halt in the momentum created by
its establishment.

Lastly, Brazil is opposed to any military action in
Libya and urges all sides to de-escalate the situation,
commit to a ceasefire and engage with the United
Nations, the African Union and the relevant regional
stakeholders in order to ensure a full and comprehensive
cessation of hostilities throughout the country. We
continue to believe that establishing lasting peace and
national unity ultimately requires an inclusive Libyan-
led and -owned political process. We call on all parties
to work with Special Representative Ghassan Salame'
to achieve a comprehensive political solution to the
security crisis and the dire humanitarian situation
in Libya.

