Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, let me first express my very sincere
thanks to the presidency for having convened this
public meeting. We appreciate this opportunity to be
able to learn directly from President Obasanjo, whose
presence here today is an honour, about the increasing
efforts of the African Union in pursuit of peace and
security in Africa, which we strongly support.

As is known, the Security Council has been
particularly active in relation to the African agenda. It
has secured some important successes in this regard,
such as the developments in West Africa. There have
been successes because it has been possible to work
together, in many cases in accordance with decisions of
the African Union or of sectors of the African Union
that have committed their support to those processes.

We have been less fortunate in the case of Central
Africa, where a general agreement eludes the efforts of
this Council and other entities involved. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and,
particularly until recently, in Burundi, there has been
significant progress, although we cannot in good
conscience say that peace has returned to that area. The
Great Lakes region is an area where the African Union
is playing an important leadership role, which should
lead to a successful effort.

The humanitarian disaster being experienced in
Darfur requires the resolute support of the international
community and of this Council, in particular with
regard to the efforts of the African Union. For this
reason, my country voted in favour of Security Council
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004), in the
conviction that through them resolute support for the
African Union would be established and that they
would continue a path of cooperation with the
Sudanese Government, whose purpose is to save lives
in that country.

In this regard, a number of concerns have arisen
this morning. Some have already been mentioned by
other members of the Council, but I wish, respectfully,
to address a question to President Obasanjo. I would
like to have his opinion on a possible Security Council
visit or mission to Darfur to reinforce the work that is
being done there by the African Union. And perhaps,
since much has been said this morning about
cooperation between the African Union and the
Security Council, it might be interesting, if the
logistical details can be worked out, to hold a joint
meeting of the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council.

