Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): We are
pleased that today the Council has renewed the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which sends a clear
message regarding the future deployment of the
Mission, which is working in very difficult
circumstances to promote the well-being of the
population of Darfur. That is why Belgium voted in
favour of resolution 1828 (2008).
The resolution firmly calls upon the Sudanese
Government to cooperate fully with UNAMID and to
fulfil its commitments. A year after our initial decision
to deploy the mission, it is more than time for the
Sudan to halt all obstruction of that deployment. The
resolution also demands once again that all sides put an
end to violence, and refers in particular to aerial
bombing, which kills innocent civilians.

No less important are the provisions calling for
unhindered humanitarian access and demands an end to
violence against peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel. We also value the paragraphs of the
resolution calling for a revival of the political process
and calling on all parties to fully commit themselves to
the process, in particular those rebels who have
remained reluctant or have refused to commit
themselves.

Another aspect of the text relates to fighting
impunity and the need to bring to justice those
responsible for crimes in Darfur. We would have
preferred to see agreement on even firmer language in
that regard. From the outset of this debate, Belgium has
taken an unambiguous position of principle. The fight
against impunity in Darfur is of the highest priority and
should go hand in hand with the political process, so
that a lasting settlement can be attained.

We strongly support the International Criminal
Court and the pursuit of international justice. We look
forward to the decision to be taken by the Pretrial
Chamber in a matter of months regarding the
Prosecutor's application for an indictment by the
Court. We refute the arguments of those who are
calling upon the Council to react in advance to
developments that we cannot foresee at this stage, by
invoking article 16 of the Rome Statute; some wished
in fact to include that element in this resolution on
UNAMID, where such a debate is entirely out of place.
That is why resolution notes that some delegations may
come back to the Council with regard to the process
under way in the International Criminal Court.

It was the Security Council that, by resolution
1593 (2005), asked the International Criminal Court to
take up the situation in Darfur. Given the systematic
refusal of the Government of the Sudan to cooperate,
we called again on that Government to cooperate with
the Court, through the presidential statement of 16 June
(S/PRST/2008/21). In particular, that Government must
hand over to the Court the two persons for whom the
Court has issued arrest warrants, Ahmed Haroun and
Ali Kushayb, who continue openly to enjoy impunity
in the Sudan.

The Sudan's obligations and responsibilities in
Darfur are clear. They have been set out in all previous
resolutions, as well as in this one. Belgium will
continue to work in the Security Council to ensure
respect by the Sudan for all Council resolutions. We
owe it to the population of Darfur, but we also owe it
to the cause of international justice.

Finally, I wish to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its efforts leading to the adoption
of resolution 1828 (2008).

