Mr. Baja: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the member States of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) - Brunei Darussalem,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam
and my own country, the Philippines.

ASEAN congratulates the Greek presidency on
its excellent stewardship of the Council in September,
and you, Madam President, for continuing the
Council's discussion of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in a public
meeting.

ASEAN continues to fully support the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security, and in developing friendly relations among
nations and international cooperation in solving
international problems. Over the past four decades,
ASEAN has concluded several initiatives which have
significantly contributed to peace, security and stability
in the region. These include the declaration of a Zone
of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in South-East Asia,
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia,
the Declaration of ASEAN Concord, the Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, the
establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum, the
ASEAN+3 - ASEAN plus China, Japan and Korea -
process, the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea and regional actions undertaken in
cooperation with the United Nations with regard to
Cambodia and Timor-Leste.

ASEAN is currently engaged in bringing
ASEAN's political and security cooperation to a higher
plane under the ASEAN Security Community, which is
the third pillar of the organization's objective of
establishing an ASEAN Community by 2020. The
ASEAN Security Community aims to ensure that
countries in the region live at peace with one another
and with the world at large in a just, democratic and
harmonious environment. The ASEAN Security
Community would also strengthen ASEAN's capacity
to deal with traditional and non-traditional security
challenges.

ASEAN's efforts towards that end recently
received a major boost with the accession by Australia,
China, India, Japan, Mongolia, New Zealand, Papua
New Guinea, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea and
Russia to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation.
ASEAN expects more countries to accede in the next
few months. Those developments constitute significant
support for the Treaty as a code of conduct governing
inter-State relations in the region.

Fighting terrorism and other transnational crime
is another priority area for cooperation among ASEAN
member countries. ASEAN has issued joint
declarations with Australia, Canada, China, the
European Union, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
New Zealand, Pakistan, Russia and the United States
on cooperation in counter-terrorism and on combating
transnational crime.

The ASEAN Regional Forum, as the primary
forum on peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region,
is moving beyond confidence-building measures
towards preventive diplomacy. ASEAN, as a driving
force of the Forum, has expanded contacts with various
international and regional organizations, including the
United Nations, the Organization of American States
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, to exchange experiences and best practices in
promoting peace and security. In fact, several United
Nations agencies and entities, such as the International
Maritime Organization, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Political Affairs have participated in Forum activities.

ASEAN cooperation with the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security was
highlighted during the first ASEAN-United Nations
Summit, held in Bangkok in 2000, when ASEAN
leaders and the United Nations Secretary-General
called for closer cooperation between ASEAN and the
United Nations in activities such as exchanging
information and organizing conferences on issues
relating to peacebuilding.

That cooperation was further strengthened with
the adoption of General Assembly resolutions 57/35 in
2002 and 59/5 in 2004. Both resolutions encouraged
the two organizations to further increase contacts and
strengthen areas of cooperation. With the assistance
and support of the Department of Political Affairs and
the United Nations Development Programme, a series
of seminars on peacebuilding in South-East Asia has
been conducted in ASEAN member countries. ASEAN
hopes there will be more activities to that end.

ASEAN-United Nations cooperation reached
another milestone last year with the convening of the
second ASEAN-United Nations Summit at United
Nations Headquarters. The Summit agreed on the need
to further broaden ASEAN-United Nations
cooperation, with the involvement of the various
United Nations specialized agencies, to encompass all
areas related to community-building, including key
issues on development, in particular poverty
eradication and the Millennium Development Goals,
prevention and control of infectious diseases, disaster
management, trade and investment, and peace and
security.

ASEAN believes that regional organizations
should not only maintain but also explore and expand
contacts and relations with various countries and
regional and international organizations in pursuit of
peace. Aside from its 11 dialogue partners, ASEAN
maintains interregional consultations with Latin
America through the Forum for East Asia-Latin
America Cooperation and the Rio Group, with Europe
through the Asia-Europe Meeting process, with the
Gulf Cooperation Council, with the Economic
Cooperation Organization and with the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation.

Cooperation among regional organizations
themselves should therefore be encouraged. A good
opportunity occurs annually during the annual sessions
of the General Assembly, when bilateral meetings
between regional organizations can be organized on the
fringes of the session. ASEAN has developed its own
tradition of meeting at the ministerial level with other
regional organizations during General Assembly
sessions.

Different regional organizations have different
levels of capacity, mandates and resources. In order to
assess their potential to contribute to the United
Nations efforts in the maintenance of international
peace and security, the comparative advantages of the
regional organizations should be determined. In that
regard, a region-to-region study may need to be carried
out in order to identify how each regional organization
could individually cooperate with the United Nations
to achieve our goals.

We believe the debate in today's public meeting
on this issue is timely and relevant, and we hope that
the various ideas generated here will further enhance
United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations.

