Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting to follow up the
ministerial-level meeting held on 20 January on
combating international terrorism.

In a democracy, people express their views freely,
and differences of views are resolved peacefully
through the ballot. Terrorists, on the other hand, seek to
realize their objectives violently, through bullets.
Terrorists try to justify themselves by insisting that
they are denied democratic means and have no other
recourse but terror to realize their goals. But acts of
terrorism cannot be justified under any circumstances.
All too often, it is the innocent who are the victims of
terrorist acts. Such acts must be strongly rejected and
condemned.

But simple condemnation is not sufficient to
protect democratic systems and ensure security. Efforts
must be urgently made in order to implement ongoing
counter-terrorism measures even more effectively. At
the same time, I would like to add that it is also
important to make honest efforts to analyse the root
causes of terrorism and to try to redress them.

In the past, terrorist activities generally targeted
certain regions, but, with the spread of globalization
and with advances in science and technology, terrorists
now have a more global reach, with greater destructive
and lethal capacities, as we witnessed in the 11
September attacks and in the bombing incident in Bali.
The situation would become even more dangerous if
terrorists were to have access to weapons of mass
destruction. Traditional means of deterrence cannot
adequately address the threat of international terrorism.
International terrorism is thus a new and grave threat to
international peace and security in the twenty-first
century and demands resolute and concerted action by
the international community. The existing global
cooperative mechanism and international rules must be
strengthened.

In the global fight against terrorism, Japan
considers the following three objectives to be of
particular importance: first, denying terrorist groups
safe haven; secondly, denying terrorist groups the
means to conduct terrorism; and thirdly, eliminating
vulnerability to terrorism. In order to achieve these
objectives, cooperative relations and networks among
countries must be built in a wide range of areas,
including not only military organizations but also law-
enforcement agencies and intelligence organizations.
Capacity-building efforts in developing countries to
strengthen their counter-terrorism measures are also
vital.

We appreciate very much the work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to that end.
Japan, for its part, attaches particular importance to
such efforts in the Asian region and has been holding
seminars and training courses for developing countries,
mainly in Asia, in the following six areas: immigration,
aviation security, customs cooperation, export control,
law-enforcement cooperation and anti-terrorist
financing. It received 220 officials in fiscal year 2001,
and approximately 250 in fiscal year 2002, for training
in these six areas. In addition, my country is planning
to receive 30 trainees each year for the next five years,
for a total of 150 trainees, with a view to enhancing the
crisis- and consequence-management capacity of their
respective countries in the event of a chemical,
biological, radioactive or nuclear terrorist attack. Japan
is also planning to hold a seminar to encourage
accession to counter-terrorism-related international
conventions, to which it will invite officials from Asian
countries.

Every member of the international community
must actively take part in the global combat against
terrorism. We have to mobilize the resources available,
including the expertise of all relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations. From this
viewpoint, Japan strongly endorses the sixth work
programme of the CTC and its intention to expand and
deepen its contacts with these organizations. It goes
without saying that global efforts must be well
coordinated to avoid any duplication of work. We
believe that the dialogue between the CTC and these
organizations, which has already begun, will greatly
contribute to such coordination.

The special meeting with representatives of
international, regional and subregional organizations,
to be held next month, will be an important occasion
for both the CTC and other relevant international
organizations to assess their respective contributions to
combat terrorism and explore ways of improving
coordination.

In its 17 months of work, the CTC has made
remarkable progress in implementing resolution 1373
(2001). For that, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the CTC, and other members of the
Bureau. But the fight against terrorism, especially
international terrorism, is by no means complete. Much
more needs to be done. I trust that, under the new
leadership of Ambassador Inocencio Arias, the
Committee will continue its highly effective efforts to
combat terrorism.

