Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay
voted in favour of resolution 2295 (2016) to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
convinced of the importance of ensuring the continuity
of the crucial work the peacekeeping operation is doing
on Mali. It is clear that we have to work to improve the
security conditions of the Mission, since the security of

the peacekeeping personnel affects the effectiveness of
the Mission in fulfilling its mandate, in force generation
and in its task of protecting civilians.

MINUSMA is the peacekeeping operations
that has had the sad record of the largest number of
peacekeepers to have lost their lives as a result of direct
attacks. Given that scenario, there can be no doubt
that it must be a priority to improve the security of the
personnel deployed in MINUSMA, not only in order
to prevent further losses, but also for the Mission to be
able to better fulfil its mandate.

The United Nations peacekeeping personnel is
being deployed in increasingly complex situations. The
use of terrorist tactics, also known as asymmetrical
tactics, represent serious threats to the safety of
civilians - and of peacekeepers, giving rise to the
need for additional tools to allow them to effectively
protect civilians. Now, within the need to adapt to the
terrorist threat, for Uruguay, peacekeeping operations,
owing to their composition and character, are not suited
to engage in military counter-terrorism operations. In
the cases where asymmetrical threats are present in
the operational environment peacekeeping operations
must of course adopt security measures, in particular to
protect United Nations personnel and civilians.

Through today's resolution, the Security Council
has this year allowed MINUSMA to adopt a more
proactive and firmer posture in carrying out its
mandate. Sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 19, on
countering asymmetrical attacks in active defence
of MINUSMA's mandate, calls for engaging direct
operations pursuant to serious and credible threats. In
the opinion of my delegation, the proactive nature of a
peacekeeping operation should not lead to preventive
actions or attacks when it comes to fighting terrorism
because that would be changing the nature and meaning
of what a peacekeeping operation actually is.

I would very briefly like to quote the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
"the Panel believes that United Nations troops should
not undertake military counter-terrorism operations"
(5/2015/446, summary). The report continues,

"[w]here a parallel force is engaged in offensive
combat operations it is important for United
Nations peacekeeping operations to maintain a
clear division of labour and distinction of roles"
(ibid).
Likewise, the Seeretary-General's report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations states,
"[a]s the Panel rightly recognizes, United Nations
peace operations are not the appropriate tool for
military counter-terrorism operations" (S/2 015/682, para. 15).

Even though Uruguay voted in favour of resolution
2295 (2016), it would like to state that we do not feel
it is appropriate to mandate MINUSMA, or any other
peacekeeping operation, to carry out military counter-
terrorist activities or to fight asymmetrical threats.

Finally, Uruguay wishes to point out that the
type of mandate adopted in today's resolution is of an
extraordinary nature, given the very particular situation
that MINUSMA is facing on the ground. The solution
it provides does not mean that it can be transferred to
other peacekeeping operations.

