Mr. Kanner (France) (spoke in French): At a time
when France has probably just managed to escape
another deadly attack, this time targeting churches
and Christianity, I would like to extend my heartfelt
gratitude to the Jordanian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this debate. I am convinced that
the subject of youth should receive greater focus in our
exchanges. I have no doubt that the Crown Prince of
Jordan shares that belief, as he has just expressed.

France is an old country, but its population is
young. We have the highest birthrate in Europe. Our
demographic is our strength. It is also our responsibility.
It is our responsibility to provide our young people with
prospects, to give meaning to their life and, perhaps
even more importantly, to give meaning to life in
general. The ideology that threatens the world today is
a morbid one that seeks to repress our desires, condemn
ourjoy, and extinguish our vital energy.

The international community was struck by the
horror of the massacre in Garissa, in which 148 Kenyans
were killed for their beliefs. And let us not forget the
murder of Christians in the Middle East. Let us not
forget the plight of the 276 Nigerian highschool girls
kidnapped one year ago from Chibok by Boko Haram.
Extremists hate the otherness of women. Let us not
forget either the atrocities committed against children
and youth by Daesh in Iraq and Syria, or the martyrdom
of Syrian youth by the regime of Bashar Al-Assad.

Young people are on the side of life and, as such,
should be the best shield against obscurantism. It is
necessary to both work with young people and also to
protect them from the machinations of the extremists.
The latter are extremely active on social networks
and disseminate conspiracy theories that undermine
institutional authority. They feed on the helplessness of
the young. Girls and boys as young as 13 or 14 years
old have been recruited from a number of countries,
including my own. In France, we speak of several
hundred young people, perhaps more. That is very few,
but far too many. Even just one would be one too many.
Therefore, my mission is to show each young person
in France that the Republic remains valid; it is still our
future and our ideal. I must convince my young fellow
citizens that is in the Republic, and therefore in liberty,
equality and fraternity that they will find the best
conditions for their fulfilment and happiness.

The Jordanian initiative is right to remind us that
the struggle against extremism cannot be military
alone. It is a wider political and moral struggle in which
society as a whole has a role to play. That is why France,
after the terrible attacks in January, which both injured
and killed, has decided to launch a national campaign
for republican values. It is in that spirit that the Prime
Minister, Manuel Valls, just announced a major national
plan to combat racism and anti-Semitism with a special
emphasis on the youth.

Starting in school we wish, through specific
teachings, to focus on the concepts of citizenship and
secularism, the French model that strikes a balance
between fundamental freedoms, which allowed for
the peaceful exercise of freedom of all religions and
the conditions that enable us to live together since its
consecration 110 years ago this year. Secularism is not
an opinion; it is the freedom to have one. It is essential
that every child understands the foundations of our
collective foundation, that which makes us a nation, and
beyond that, which signals our belonging to the same
human community. Young people must understand that
this is not just a matter of fact, but one of determination
and responsibility.

School is a central institution in France, but
other actors are mobilized with the same objective.
Associations that do the same job of providing
citizenship education in neighbourhoods where despair
is the greatest have seen a considerable increase in their
numbers. The State and associations are bringing this
republican discourse to the Internet. We are launching
a counteroffensive campaign against the arguments of
our opponents in order to prevent the most absurd and
dangerous theories from spreading.

On a large scale, we are developing mechanisms for
citizen engagement, such as Civic service. For 6 to 12
months, young French people who are interested will
be compensated for accomplishing a mission of general
interest within an association or administration.
As such, 150,000 young people in France will be
involved by the end of 2016. We now wish to develop
this mechanism at the international level. The best
ambassadors of humanist values among young people,
are the young people themselves. In that regard, I
welcome the remarkable work of UNICEF and its
national committees, in particular UNICEF France,
which, through its Youth Ambassador Programmes,
turns young people into veritable global citizens that
carry a message of solidarity and humanity.

Finally, let us not abandon those who have gone
astray or have made a mistake. Everyone is capable of
realizing their mistakes and to make sincere amends.
We would like to show radicalized youth who return
from combat zones their terrible mistake and offer them
the possibility of reinsertion into their home countries
in accordance with the values of those countries.
France is aware that its response cannot be confined
within its own borders; we are acting in concert with
our European partners. My country took the initiative
by, for example, convening a meeting of the Ministers
of Education of the 28 member States of the European
Union in Paris on 10 March. Measures need to be
adopted to improve coordination aimed at combating
terrorist propaganda and recruitment over the Internet
through collective pressure on providers, to harmonize
legislation with respect to the removal of online illegal
material and to adapt the international legislative
framework that governs the increasingly globalized
flow of information.

Along with our fight to combat violent extremism,
we want to bring to the United Nations the struggle to
restore hope to our youth, as the Organization is the
premiere venue of multilateralism. The anti-terrorist
strategy defined by the United Nations remains more
relevant than ever, and the World Programme of Action
for Youth will doubtless take on new momentum. Next
month will mark 20 years since that programme was
established - a good age at which to become involved.
It is crucial for that anniversary to be more than a mere
formality. It should rather be seen as an opportunity for
Member States to show youth around the world that we
believe in them.

