Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): First of all, let me join
others in welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security
Council. We thank the High Representative for her very
informative and comprehensive briefing.

Allow me to highlight some key issues.

The first is the role played by regional arrangements
as first responders in the maintenance of international
peace and security. As a founding member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
Indonesia is a consistent and robust supporter of
regional organizations. Indonesia believes that regional
organizations can fundamentally shift the dynamics
of the region towards peace and security. They can
build bridges of understanding, they can transform
relations from enmity to amity, and they can bring
stability and prosperity where conflict and discord
previously reigned.

We believe that neighbours know best. We recognize
the important role played by regional and subregional
arrangements within the framework of full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of all States in their respective regions. However, we
have to bear in mind that regional and subregional
organization must adapt to new challenges in order to
remain relevant to the pursuit of international peace
and security.
My second points concerns the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The challenges of the twenty-first
century are too numerous and complex. Our world today
is witness to great and unprecedented challenges. After
listening attentively to the briefing by Ms. Mogherini,
I believe that it is clear that Europe is certainly not
immune to those challenges. We understand that there
are no easy solutions to some of those challenges,
and the European Union (EU) and other regional
organizations cannot find solutions to the difficult and
complex issues alone.

That is where the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations come into play. We
can easily find a very good example of this partnership
in the African Union. The African Union, through
its regional conflict prevention and management
mechanism, has established itself today as an essential
and credible partner of the United Nations. Indonesia
attaches utmost importance to such cooperation, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that spirit, we initiated a meeting
on this important topic during our presidency of the
Council in 2007 (see S/PV.5776). We also believe
in what the High Representative referred to, namely,
triangular cooperation in which regional arrangements
work with the United Nations and other partners.

Indonesia strongly believes, that to address the
collective challenges, greater emphasis must be placed
upon multilateralism. In working through multilateral
mechanisms, cooperation, dialogue and mediation
must take precedence over unilateralism and division.
It is only through investment in a stronger multilateral
approach and adherence to the principles of the United
Nations Charter and international law that global
challenges can be addressed effectively. We also share
the view on the importance of working together on
global issues, such as the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and the Sustainable Development Goals, and
hope for continued support of the EU on financing
for development.

The EU has made important contributions to
maintaining regional stability in other regions.
Indonesia and ASEAN, too, have benefited from the EU
role. ASEAN and the EU have survived by helping each
other through many challenges. Relations between the
two regions are expanding and developing progressively
on the economic, political and cultural fronts.

Indonesia also recognizes the work of the EU
on various issues with which the Security Council
is seized, such as the Iranian nuclear issue and the
settlement process of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Indonesia welcomes this role. We look forward to any
effort to reinvigorate the Middle East peace process
as well as many other issues addressed by the High
Representative in her briefing.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the EU is one of the major strategic partnerships with
a regional organization. It includes active engagement
on a number of conflicts and crises that go beyond the
EU neighbourhood. Indonesia commends the excellent
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU
in numerous peacekeeping contexts. Today, the EU is
a major actor in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Its
role is becoming ever more vital to a number of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, whether through
financing, military contribution or political support.
Currently, as the largest troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping in the Chamber, Indonesia looks
forward to the continued support of the EU, together
with other partners, on United Nations peacekeeping.

I am aware that the list of areas in which the EU
has a substantial role to play has not been exhausted
in my statement. We in ASEAN also share many
of the values of the EU in the pacific settlement of
disputes and in addressing conflict through dialogue,
mediation and political settlement, as well as the need
for neighbours to take care of neighbours. As we speak
now, a team from the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management is
on the ground in Myanmar.

In conclusion, we trust that the EU will continue
to contribute to international peace and security by
helping to resolve crises through diplomatic means,
emphasizing peaceful settlement and on the basis of
international law.

