Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the matter of inter-mission cooperation. I
personally thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative of
addressing the subject.

First, allow me to emphasize that there is no
official, agreed definition of inter-mission cooperation.
Historically, the concept has taken various forms in
various scenarios due to many reasons. In fact, its
practical modalities have been defined on a case-by-
case basis.

In today's briefing, I plan to focus primarily on
those cases of inter-mission cooperation that have
involved the temporary transfer or sharing of personnel
or equipment that has been made available by Member
States among two or more missions that are often
located in close proximity to one another. It seems to
me that this is one example ofinter-mission cooperation
that has generated particular interest in the Council,
especially in recent months. My colleague, Under-
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, will address those
aspects that relate to mission support.

That form of cooperation is one of the tools
at the disposal of the Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries to support the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. It is not
at all a new tool - far from it. Some colleagues will
recall that the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina provided 39 uniformed personnel and
police to support the launch of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in 1999.
Thirteen years later, several missions also provided
military observers to the launch of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
in the spring of 2012. In both cases, the provision of
uniformed personnel happened with the consent of the
capitals concerned.

It is therefore not exactly a new tool, but it is
obvious that this kind of cooperation has become
increasingly attractive over the past few years. I believe
that four factors in particular have contributed to this
development.

First, there is the recurring lack of certain critical
items of equipment, the so-called "critical enablers"
and "force multipliers" - for example, military
transport helicopters. This lack has sometimes resulted
in missions being unable to implement their mandates,
in particular in times of heightened activity, such as
during elections or security crises. The tensions that
have arisen as a result have led missions to resort to
temporarily transferring such equipment from one
mission to another, or to two or more missions sharing
or jointly owning such equipment or personnel.

The second factor is the repeated appeal by the
General Assembly and the Security Council for the
enhancement of synergies among missions deployed in
geographical proximity to each other.

The third factor is the economic crisis, which has
led us to be even more rigorous in the way that we use
our resources. The economic climate has thus pushed
us to examine more closely inter-mission cooperation
as a tool for a more rational use of resources, which
are, we must admit, increasingly rare, be they financial
resources or specialized equipment.

The fourth, and final, factor is the fact that
inter-mission cooperation is, by definition, a flexible
tool.

(spoke in English)

Most members would be are aware of recent
examples of such inter-mission cooperation. They
include, but are not limited to, the following cases.

In January 2006, an infantry company was
temporarily transferred from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) following violent
disturbances in Abidjan.
In late 2010 and early 2011, three infantry
companies and military aviation assets were redeployed
in the opposite direction, from UNMIL to UNOCI, in
connection with the elections in Cote d'Ivoire and, later,
in connection with the ensuing post-electoral crisis.

In October 2011, one infantry company and one
formed police unit were transferred temporarily from
UNOCI to UNMIL in connection with the elections in
Liberia. Additional personnel and assets were put on
standby.

A year ago, in December 2011, two infantry
companies and one formed police unit were transferred
from UNMIL to UNOCI in connection with the
legislative elections in cote d'Ivoire.

In January 2012, two military utility helicopters
were transferred from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to partially fill the helicopter
gap during a period of heightened demand on the
Mission owing to the crisis that was then unfolding in
Jonglei.

Last Friday, colleagues from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support briefed a Security Council working
group in some detail on those and other examples of
inter-mission cooperation. Allow me, therefore, to
not dwell on details, but rather try to outline some of
the lessons learned. I hope they will contribute to a
discussion on the way forward.

First, whenever personnel and assets contributed
by Member States are involved, inter-mission
cooperation requires the consent of the troop- and
police-contributing countries, of the host Government
and, generally, of the Security Council. Needless to say,
delays in obtaining consent can weaken or sometimes
cancel out altogether the desired impact of temporary
reinforcements. For example, in 2006, owing to delays
in receiving formal consent from a troop-contributing
country, by the time the temporary reinforcements
from UNMIL to UNOCI had arrived in C6te d'Ivoire,
the situation in Abidjan had already begun to stabilize.

Secondly, inter-mission cooperation has been
used as a temporary measure - a quick, temporary
fix - to either fill critical gaps or provide for a surge
at times when missions were already under extreme
stress, including during the start-up phase. Uniformed
personnel and assets were transferred between UNOCI
and UNMIL in connection with the holding of elections
by the host country - a period when there is typically
a surge in the security and logistical demands on
missions. Similarly, military utility helicopters were
transferred from MONUSCO to UNMISS when the
latter was facing a crisis in Jonglei state. That transfer
was not to provide a surge, but to partially fill a critical
gap that UNMISS already had in the field of such assets.
Incidentally, I am pleased to report that a first group
of three military utility helicopters, contributed by the
Government of Rwanda, are expected to be deployed to
UNMISS by the end of this year.

Thirdly, inter-mission cooperation can occur
in connection with either scheduled, predictable
events, such as elections, referendums and censuses,
or unscheduled, unforeseen events, such as security
crises and natural disasters. For scheduled events,
inter-mission cooperation, where appropriate, can be
planned for well in advance. Preparations can be made
ahead oftime, and the necessary consent secured in good
time. For unforeseen events, however, it is more difficult
to plan ahead and obtain the up-front, contingency
commitment from troop- and police-contributors, the
host Government and, when required, the Council. It
is partly a coincidence that, when the post-electoral
crisis erupted in Cote d'Ivoire in late 2010 - and
obviously that was an unscheduled event - elements
of inter-mission cooperation were already in place in
connection with a event that was scheduled, namely, the
presidential elections in that country.

Fourthly, inter-mission cooperation should be a
tool not of choice, but of necessity, especially when it
is used to fill critical gaps. It should be implemented
on a temporary basis only. Inter-mission cooperation
cannot and should not be used as a substitute for
providing missions with the required military and
police capabilities on a dedicated basis. When filling
capability gaps, inter-mission cooperation tends simply
to move the gap from one mission to the other. In that
context, the transfer of helicopters from MONUSCO
to UNMISS, which was possible in January, would be
hard to conceive at present, when MONUSCO needs all
its capabilities owing to the crisis in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Time and space are key considerations when
responding to a crisis. It is about the ability to deploy the
right resources to the right place, at the right time and
with the right capabilities. To face situations of activity
surge, missions keep reserves. The redeployment of
units from one mission to another usually occurs over
and above existing reserves to relieve missions at times
of severe distress. Inter-mission cooperation, in other
words, fills gaps, if only temporarily and on a relatively
limited scale.

As I mentioned earlier, this type of cooperation is
at times a tool not of choice, but ofnecessity. In an ideal
world, the tool of choice for strategic, over-the-horizon
reserves would be the standing up of highly capable,
self-contained and dedicated units, which would
maintain high readiness to deploy to any peacekeeping
crisis theatre at short notice. We can but dream,
however. Such arrangements are unavailable at present.

In any case, consent of troop- and
police-contributing countries, host Governments and
the Security Council are and will remain key enabling
principles for inter-mission cooperation. We must
also preserve the flexible and versatile character of
inter-mission cooperation to ensure its continuing
relevance. Peacekeeping operations and the Secretariat
must plan ahead and, whenever possible, anticipate
their needs in terms of inter-mission cooperation, and
they must prepare accordingly.

(spoke in French)
All of the foregoing are lessons learned.
(spoke in English)

Inter-mission cooperation is increasingly in
demand. Instances of such cooperation are becoming
increasingly frequent. It behooves us to learn from past
difficulties and build on successes to ensure that we
tap into the full potential of inter-mission cooperation
in support of our missions. In that regard, we should
explore the possibility of discussing the setting up of a
light, flexible framework for inter-mission cooperation
that would allow the Secretariat, the Security Council
and the troop- and police-contributing countries to plan
for inter-mission cooperation on a contingency basis.

