Mr. Akasaka (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting as a follow-
up to the Security Council's recent mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. First of all, let me
welcome the presence of Mr. She Okitundu, Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
would also like to thank Mr. Otunnu for his excellent
report this morning.

My Government commends the Security Council
for its work and for its timely report. We read with
great interest the Secretary-General's eighth report on
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which
is based on the mission's report. We appreciate its
focus on reconstruction and development issues in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and note its
recommendation that MONUC's mandate be extended
for one year.

Japan has been closely following the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, recognizing
that world stability and prosperity cannot prevail in the
twenty-first century unless the problems of Africa are
resolved. For this reason, my Government places great
emphasis on the need to support the African countries'
own efforts for their development, as well as conflict-
prevention measures and refugee-assistance
programmes. Today I would like to emphasize the
following points with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

First, my Government has long emphasized that
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs
to be considered in the wider context of consolidating
peace throughout the region, and must therefore be
pursued with a comprehensive and integrated approach.
Peace-building and post-conflict reconstruction and
development, democratization and a halt to the illicit
exploitation of natural resources must likewise be
pursued from a regional perspective. Thus, my
Government has argued that, as part of its efforts to
achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Security
Council should also address the economic and security
problems in neighbouring Burundi, Rwanda and
Uganda. For this reason the recent deterioration of the
situation in Burundi is all the more worrisome to my
Government. Japan shares the View of the Secretary-
General that there can be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without a
comprehensive settlement of the situation in Burundi.
Secondly, my Government welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendation that, while
MONUC continues to complete phase II of its
operations, the Security Council authorize the
transition to phase III of MONUC deployment, which
entails the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement of armed groups. We believe this
overlapping of the activities for the completion of
phase II with the preparatory activities of phase III will
reduce the risk of losing momentum in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Thirdly, an expansion of the civilian components
of MONUC is necessary if the Security Council is to
have a longer-term commitment to the peace process in
the region.

Fourthly, Japan is greatly encouraged by Sir
Ketumile Masire's announcement that a preparatory
meeting for the inter-Congolese dialogue is to begin on
16 July. We sincerely hope that this will advance the
democratization process, and we call upon the
international community to support the facilitation
efforts of Sir Ketumile Masire,

Finally, my Government welcomed the
announcement of the reopening of the Congo River as
well as the proposed establishment of a Congo River
Basin Commission. The revitalization of trade by
reopening the country's main inland waterway system
would be a significant milestone on the path towards
economic reconstruction and development.

Japan has provided emergency and humanitarian
assistance as well as financial contributions to support
the activities of the Joint Military Commission and the
inter-Congolese dialogue. As the situation becomes
more stable, we look forward to considering extending
assistance to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for its nation-building efforts.

