Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this public meeting at such
short notice. I should like to acknowledge the presence
of the Secretary-General and to thank him for the very
good statement he made. My delegation associates
itself with that statement and supports it fully.

The situation in the Middle East has clearly gone
out of control. We have had the opportunity here on
several occasions to say that the vicious circle of
unabated violence can only lead to a full-fledged war
in the Middle East. The acts of terror which have
befallen innocent Israeli civilians, followed by the
Israeli military actions on Chairman Arafat's
headquarters in Ramallah, are fast taking us to full-
scale war. It is extremely important therefore for the
Security Council to act collectively to bring the two
parties to their senses.

Let me express in the strongest terms my
delegation's condemnation of all acts of terror,
especially against innocent civilians.

These events are happening at a juncture when
the initiative of Crown Prince Abdullah has been
adopted by the Arab summit at Beirut; that initiative
provides some very important light at the end of a very
long tunnel. They are happening at a time when the
Security Council has just adopted resolution 1397
(2002), setting out the vision of a Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel.

The Secretary-General, in his statement to the
press today and in his statement a short time ago in this
Chamber, rightly said that those who perpetrated the
recent terrorist acts, killing innocent civilians, are
extremists and the enemies of peace. We wonder,
however, whether the actions taken by Prime Minister
Sharon, who claims, together with many others, that he
is acting in the self-defence of his country and of its
citizens, will or can lead to an end to terrorist
activities. The disproportionate use of force and the
siege of several cities and of the headquarters of
Chairman Arafat, instead of curbing acts of
terrorism - which, as many are aware, are considered
acts of martyrdom by the Palestinians - will in fact
cause them to take on wider proportions.

One cannot expect a leader to exercise control
over his people when he is himself under siege and
when he is made to undergo the worst forms of
humiliation.

In a statement that the Foreign Minister of
Mauritius made to the press today, he stated that
Mauritius was horrified by the escalation of violence
and by the Israeli action against Chairman Arafat,
which we consider to be acts of provocation. He called
on the two sides and on the two leaders to exercise
maximum restraint and to act towards the
implementation of the Tenet plan and the
recommendations ofthe Mitchell report.

The senseless decision to attack Chairman
Arafat's Ramallah headquarters and Prime Minister
Sharon's decision to isolate Chairman Arafat are totally
inadmissible, appalling and unwise. Prime Minister
Sharon recently mentioned that he regretted his earlier
commitment not to hurt Chairman Arafat; such
humiliation of Chairman Arafat will have extremely
negative repercussions on the peace process and is
likely to further infuriate the Palestinians.

The United States Secretary of State, Mr. Powell,
today said that Chairman Arafat is the leader of the
Palestinian people and that his leadership is now even
more central to trying to find a way out of this tragic
situation. We fully share and support that assessment. It
is therefore extremely important that Chairman Arafat
be strengthened rather than weakened. Let me also say
that, in the view of my delegation, Chairman Arafat
remains the only interlocutor with whom Israel can
negotiate peace. We call upon Prime Minister Sharon
and Chairman Arafat to renounce violence and to take
the bold step that would bring them to the negotiating
table. There cannot be peace until the two protagonists
resume negotiations towards a political settlement of
the Middle East issue based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

We fully support the work currently being
undertaken by General Zinni and the other special
envoys, and we sincerely hope that their efforts will not
be deterred by the recent incidents.

We believe that it is time for the Security Council
to consider ways and means to translate the vision
enshrined in resolution 1397 (2002) into reality. We
suggest that a special group of influential world leaders
be set up. That group, together with the Secretary-
General, could work towards the creation of an
independent Palestinian State, as spelled out in
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002) and based on
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

