Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join you, Mr. President, and other
Security Council colleagues in welcoming Mr. Nikola
Spiric', the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Mr. Valentin Inzko, the
High Representative, to the Council Chamber today.

I would like to begin by thanking the High
Representative for his comprehensive report on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last
six months (S/2009/588*). The United Kingdom fully
supports the actions taken by the High Representative
to uphold the Dayton Agreement and his efforts to
facilitate reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
should also note that the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council unanimously reiterated its full
support for the High Representative in its communique
on 19 November. We also welcome the Security
Council's decision of 16 November to extend the
mandate of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) for a further period
of 12 months. Although we are pleased that the
security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
currently stable, we agree with the High Representative
that EUFOR's continued presence remains essential to
underpin that security.

The United Kingdom shares the concerns set out
in the High Representative's report about the situation
over the last six months. It is a bleak and honest report.
Despite some positive developments, there has been
insufficient progress on key reforms. We have seen
another negative European Commission progress
report, and the political climate has deteriorated
further, with a worrying increase in nationalist rhetoric,
particularly, but not exclusively, from the authorities in
the Republika Srpska. This threatens to seriously
impede any further progress.

At the same time, other countries in the region
are getting ready to make big steps forward towards
integration with the European Union and NATO.
Unless Bosnian political leaders take urgent steps to
unblock the current stalemate on reform, Bosnia and
Herzegovina runs a serious risk of being left behind the

rest of the region. We would not like to see this
happen. The views of Bosnian political leaders vary in
many areas, but they have all made it clear that they
support the country's EU aspirations. The European
Commission has been equally clear that an EU
membership application cannot be considered while the
Office of the High Representative (OHR) remains in
place. It is therefore essential that the "5 plus 2"
objectives and conditions for closing the Office be met
in full to allow for transition from OHR to the
reinforced EU Special Representative. With the aim of
EU integration in mind, we hope that Bosnian political
leaders will be able to reach agreement on some
modest reforms to bring the country's Constitution into
line with the European Convention on Human Rights
and to improve the efficiency and functionality of the
State-level institutions.

Since the European Commission's progress report
was issued in October, important steps have been taken
by Bosnia and Herzegovina on the reforms necessary
for visa liberalization. It is also good to hear about the
successful International Monetary Fund mission to
Sarajevo and the number of legislative measures
enacted or in train. We welcome this progress, which
demonstrates what can be achieved when the political
will exists, and we call on Bosnia's political leaders to
apply that determination to other pressing areas.

As my Foreign Minister made clear during his
visit to Sarajevo earlier this month, the United
Kingdom strongly supports the current efforts by the
EU presidency and the United States Government to
facilitate a local agreement between leaders on the
outstanding issues. We urge the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seize this window of opportunity to
make real progress. A similar opportunity is unlikely to
occur for some time.

The United Kingdom strongly supports Bosnia
and Herzegovina's European perspective. We are
determined to work with Bosnia and Herzegovina
wherever possible, so that it can take its rightful place
in Europe along with other countries of the region. But
ultimately it is only the political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina itself who can take the necessary action to
advance their progress towards integration within the
European Union and NATO, and provide the Bosnian
people with the new European future that they deserve.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election to
the United Nations Security Council for the next two
years. We hope that this will be a unifying challenge
for Mr. Spirie's country, and we very much look
forward to working with him.

