The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
June, I should like to take this opportunity to pay a
warm tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Ambassador
Mr. Wang Yingfan, Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations. He represents one of the most
outstanding civilizations of the world, and he has
displayed talents that have impressed all the members
of the Council. I am sure that I speak on everyone's
behalf in expressing our appreciation to him for the
quality, effectiveness, authority and readiness he
displayed throughout the month of May, a particularly
difficult month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States, between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Rwanda, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mutaboba
(Rwanda), took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rule of
procedure to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States,
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December l994.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Ms. Del Ponte and invite her to take a
seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the Prosecutor of the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.

I call on Ms. Del Ponte, to whom I once again
extend a warm welcome. The Council has extended
Ms. Del Ponte an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, in order to brief the
Council.


