Mr. McKnee (Canada): The hour is late; I shall try
to be short. Canada welcomes this opportunity to speak in
the debate and would like to thank the United Kingdom
for its initiative, which has resulted in this discussion
on the very broad implications of climate change, one
of the greatest threats facing the world today.

The science of climate change is clear. We must
focus our attention on solutions to protect our planet's

fragile ecosystems. The impacts of climate change are
already being felt - on water availability, biodiversity,
food supply, coastal systems and low-lying areas and
on public health. All regions could be affected,
including in Canada, where traditional ways of life in
the north are already being threatened. Poor
communities can be especially vulnerable, in particular
those concentrated in high-risk areas.

Efforts also are needed to better integrate climate
change into the international community's long-term
security and humanitarian strategies.

Technology advancement will play a critical role
in addressing climate change and in improving energy
and global security. The development of new
technologies and the wide deployment of both new and
existing technologies will be necessary. Collaborative
efforts between the public and private sectors need to
be rapidly accelerated in an effort to advance
technology uptake.

The time for action is now. In the weeks ahead,
Canada's Government will set out enforceable
regulatory targets for greenhouse gas emissions. These
targets will place Canada on the pathway to achieving
deep reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. Canada
also stands ready to work to build a truly global
approach to achieve deep reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions with the full participation of all major
emitter countries.

(spoke in French)

There must also be greater cooperation to
integrate climate change adaptation efforts more
effectively into national development policies of the
most vulnerable developing nations. These efforts must
also be supported by more effective bilateral, regional
and multilateral assistance. Working together, we must
implement effective strategies to overcome the
challenges that climate change presents to sustainable
development, human health and the health of the
ecosystem, as well as to security.

Finally, addressing climate change is also a
matter of good global stewardship and as such deserves
our sustained attention and action.

