Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his report and the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs for their presence among
us today.

In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016), in which it calls on all parties to end
territorial claims, respect sovereignty and liberate the
occupied territories. Unfortunately, the situation has not
changed since then. The reality is that the occupation
has illegally expanded without any consequences,
thereby preventing any step towards achieving peace.
According to reports, Israeli authorities have approved
more than 12,000 housing units in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

The Dominican Republic continues to agree with
the existing international consensus that the only
way forward for Palestinians and Israelis lies in the
negotiation of the solution of two States living side
by side in peace and security. The Security Council
must remain committed to working with all parties
concerned to achieve that goal.

The Dominican Republic remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian and security situation in Gaza,
which continues to seriously deteriorate. The health-
care system is on the verge of collapse after years of
blockade and is now overburdened with the thousands
of those injured as a consequence the recurrent Great
March of Return demonstrations. The increase in
violence and tension only raises concerns about a new
escalation of hostilities. We therefore commend the vital
work being carried out on the ground by the relevant
organizations and agencies of the United Nations
system, as well as the support of friendly countries, to
alleviate suffering and bring about change.
In that regard, we also note with concern the violent
incidents in the West Bank that have resulted in the
death of or serious injury to Israelis and Palestinians
alike. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, 350,000 people living in
67 communities in the West Bank are vulnerable to
settler violence. The Palestinian Authority cannot
access that area to provide vital services, such as
health care, education and social and policing services.
Construction restrictions also hinder the economic and
social development of that area. Access to and control
over natural resources remain major problems facing
the community.

We call on Hamas and other armed groups to end
all acts of violence and provocation that endanger the
lives of civilians, which we condemn in the strongest
terms. We encourage the Palestinian Authority, Israel
and regional and international actors to propose
sustainable solutions to the threat posed to Israel's
security by Hamas.

In conclusion, expressing how we feel - as we
often do in this Chamber - does not relieve us of the
key responsibility conferred upon the Security Council
for the maintenance of world peace and security, the
achievement of which demands firm and effective
actions, complemented by our positions, in accordance
with the authority and respect that this beacon of world
order deserves.

