Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation is pleased to note
the success with which the work of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) will conclude on 30 June. The
Mission has carried out with honour the tasks entrusted to
it by the Security Council in resolution 940 (1994). New
democratic institutions have been established in the
country, and broadly speaking the Haitian National Police
has been trained and is deployed.

We are grateful to the former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and to his
successor, Mr. Enrique ter Horst, as well as to the
commanders of the military and civilian components of
UNMIH, for their effective work. We pay tribute to all
the personnel of the Mission, which included our
compatriots, for their tireless efforts in support of the
consolidation of democracy in Haiti.

It is no secret that Russia had misgivings about the
need for a new operation, particularly with respect to the
retention of a military component, at a time when, on the
whole, the situation in Haiti is stable and secure, and
when there is no threat of organized violence to
destabilize that situation.

But taking into consideration the appeal of the
President of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Rene Preval, the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, and the
position of the Organization of American States and the
group of Friends of Haiti, we have joined other members
of the Security Council in consenting to the establishment
of the new United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH) for a period of five months, to provide
underpinning for the Haitian National Police in its
formative stages.

This was possible because the sponsors of the draft
resolution took into account proposals made by Russia
and China, which were along the same lines. Specifically,
the final text of the draft resolution includes a substantial
reduction of the military component and the financing of
a significant portion of it through voluntary contributions
and by troop contributors. We note the contribution of

 

Canada and the United States to the resolution of the
financial aspect of this problem.

On our initiative, the draft also emphasizes the
economic rehabilitation and reconstruction of Haiti. We are
convinced that only a speedy solution to Haiti's economic
difficulties, as well as providing it with sustainable
development, will make it possible to establish a truly firm
foundation for the support of stability and the further
consolidation of democracy in that country.

With regard to outside support for the reforms of the
development programmes, the activation and coordination
of the efforts of the specialized agencies of the United
Nations, as well as the international financial institutions
and donor States, will play a decisive role. Of particular
importance will be their capacity to show good will and to
take further steps, speedily, to reach agreements with the
Government of Haiti that will remove barriers to the
provision of the promised aid.

It is important that the draft resolution seeks to
continue, and to further step up, the efforts of the
Organization of American States to provide assistance in
resolving Haiti's problems. Work on the draft resolution
showed that a constructive approach, an equal reflection of
the positions and interests of us all, made it possible for
Council members to find generally acceptable solutions to
questions of the development of new forms and methods of
peace-keeping in United Nations activities.

