At the outset, I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful remarks, and we commend the Indonesian presidency for convening this timely discussion. These are extremely challenging times. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to claim lives and livelihoods as it tests our collective resolve as nations, regions and an international community. Supply chain disruptions and sharp declines in economic activities have exacerbated inequalities within and among countries, while prolonged lockdowns have produced disastrous implications for humanitarian operations, education sectors and other social protections that are critical to sustaining peace. For conflict-affected countries, the pandemic has accentuated security risks, as delicate peace agreements have become increasingly fragile, while many warring parties, including armed groups, continue to disregard our shared calls for a global ceasefire, as articulated in resolution 2532 (2020). Under such tenuous circumstances, persons in vulnerable situations have been disproportionately affected by food shortages, high levels of displacement, increases in sexual and gender-based violence and other humanitarian and protection concerns that threaten to reverse the hard- won peacebuilding gains in countries affected by or emerging from conflict. Amid those immense challenges, the United Nations peacebuilding architecture has played a crucial role in strengthening the institutional arrangements between Member States and the international financial institutions in order to safeguard national development plans, reinforce social contracts and bolster national ownership over peace processes. These institutional arrangements, geared towards strengthening partnerships and providing predictable and reliable financing, are critical to preventing conflict in many fragile contexts. In that regard, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 and the work critical to building and sustaining peace financed through the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund. However, both remain significantly underfunded, and we urge donor countries and the international private sector to renew their efforts to provide financial support to those essential institutional mechanisms, which provide a critical lifeline for many in precarious situations. In order to ensure that conflict-affected countries are able to mend their social fabric, advance political processes, strengthen institutions, restore State authority and provide justice and prosperity to all in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we encourage the international donor community to honour their overseas development assistance commitments and explore additional pathways for providing debt relief. We also echo the joint appeals of the Secretary- General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the recent calls by a group of Special Rapporteurs on human rights, for the discontinuation of all unilateral coercive measures that impede countries' abilities to address the pandemic. Sanctions create unnecessary suffering in vulnerable societies. They serve to undermine national ownership and global cooperation, which are the most basic tenets of sustaining peace. While we continue to grapple with the peacebuilding implications of COVID-19, we must renew our efforts to protect the most vulnerable. Concurrently, we must also maintain a watchful eye on other menacing threats that add further complexity to our twenty-first-century security landscape, such as climate change. As we look towards the intergovernmental phase of the 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture, we must work to further strengthen the synergies across the United Nations system, including by exploring new modalities through the Economic and Social Council for mobilizing comprehensive development responses to peacebuilding challenges at the national and regional levels. Only by strengthening and mainstreaming a cohesive and integrated approach across the peace, security and development nexus can we provide the inclusive, people-centred and climate-informed solutions needed to sustain peace. I conclude by echoing what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia said earlier today, "crisis may also create an opening for peace". (see annex 4). Let us not waste this opportunity.
