Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for presiding over this important
meeting. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
insightful contributions.

Our world is confronted with unprecedented
challenges. Many of the world's regions are witnessing
prolonged periods of instability and conflict, growing
turmoil, extremist violence and terrorism, and, of
course, mass human dislocation and suffering. These
challenges are compounded by persistent poverty,
unemployment, inequality, water and food scarcity
and human rights violations - factors that diminish
the gains made so far and further exacerbate violence.
Nowhere are these threats more pronounced than in
Africa. Against this backdrop, we welcome today's
meeting and hope that it will generate greater awareness
of the challenges confronting the continent.

The fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration of
the African Union (AU) importantly pledged to end
conflicts in Africa. The AU Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
presents a significant milestone towards achieving the
aspirations of Africans for their continent.

Considerable progress has been made towards
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts in Africa.
Many of the devastating conflicts in Africa now stand
resolved. Reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
agreements in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, and the holding of elections in Madagascar,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali are
success stories that testify to the enhanced capacity
of the African Union and its regional mechanisms for
dealing with crises. With United Nations support, these
efforts have contributed to strengthening peace and
stability and creating favourable conditions for Africa's
development in the last decade.

Despite these achievements, significant challenges
persist. Parts of Africa remain mired in conflict, while
new threats are emerging. Allow me to make five
specific points.

First, addressing the root causes ofconflicts in their
widest dimensions is imperative for ending conflict as
well as to prevent relapses into cycles of violence. The
key drivers of violence, extremism and terrorism must
be tackled.

Secondly, the illicit trade of small arms and
light weapons exacerbates violence and insecurity
and undermines development. A holistic approach,
including international assistance and cooperation, is
needed to address this challenge.

Thirdly, the eradication of poverty and inequality
are essential to ending conflicts. Towards this end, the
AU's partnership with the United Nations offers a strong
foundation. Robust efforts are needed to strengthen the
implementation of the AU's Agenda 2063, and to build
on the synergies with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Mobilization of international support
for Africa's development priorities and its inclusive
transformative agenda are vital.

Fourthly, stabilization of conflict situations and
resolution of disputes are critical for a peaceful, secure
and prosperous Africa. A comprehensive approach to
peacekeeping, relying on strong African Union-United
Nations cooperation, is required. In this regard, the
growing dialogue between the Security Council and the
African Union for a better and more effective response
to peace and security issues is a welcome development.

As one ofthe largest troop-contributing countries to
United peace operations, Pakistan's peacekeepers have
served and continue to serve in Africa, contributing to
many of Africa's success stories. We take pride in our
contribution to bringing peace and security to Africa
and remain committed to improving peacekeeping
initiatives as environments and needs evolve.
Investment in sustainable resources, formulation of
achievable mandates and better utilization of triangular
cooperation mechanisms are crucial for strengthening
our efforts.

Finally, the African Union and its regional
mechanisms have devised several useful instruments
to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. Sustained
progress requires enhanced cooperation with relevant
stakeholders, improvements in governance, the
strengthening of existing mechanisms, the monitoring
and evaluation of agreements, and ensuring adequate
resources for their implementation. Most significantly,
the role of women as key participants and decision
makers in all aspects of conflict resolution and
prevention must be fully promoted.

Pakistan remains committed to achieving a
conflict-free Africa and will continue its cooperation
to realizing the goal of lasting peace, security and
development in Africa.

