Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening the present open debate
on the proposed topic, which might truly deserve the
convocation of a week-long international conference.
It is a formidable task to reflect on a 70-year journey
since the end of the Second World War and the birth of
the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations
insists that there are no first and economy class tickets
on this journey, as all nations, big or small, rich or poor,
are equal members of the international community.

In our reflections, we also recall that in 1945, only
51 founding Member States joined the United Nations.
The membership doubled in the five subsequent years.
By 1978, it broke the threshold of 150 Member States.
Today there are 193 free nations gathered in this
iconic building - including such countries as Palau,
Liechtenstein or Armenia, or such groupings as the
Group of 20 or the five permanent members - in full
exercise of their determination to work together on a
common global agenda.

The incremental growth of the membership of the
United Nations to its present membership of 193 States
is a source of a deeper thought about the privilege to
be a self-determined free nation and about the exercise
of jurisdiction over other peoples within the confines
of the territorial integrity of States. This dilemma
has been the cause of numerous conflicts, whether in
the times of decolonization or in the aftermath of the
breakup of the Soviet Union. This dilemma has been
resolved differently in each case.

The present number of Member States manifests
the fundamental right conferred to any people to freely
express their will. It is a principle of international
law and a purpose of the United Nations. It does not
necessarily need to challenge the territorial integrity of
a State, as many multi-ethnic nations living in harmony,
with democracy and justice, or as the recent example
of Scotland, distinctly demonstrate. Switzerland, for
instance, might even remind us of an example of the
free will to pool sovereignties. However, the legitimacy
of a claim to govern people out of historical injustice
and in a persistent environment of discrimination and
intolerance is always bound to fail. If we are serious
about our collective responsibility towards each other
and about our determination to combat atrocity crimes,
then we should not allow the suppression of freedom in
the name of territorial integrity.

The Nagorno Karabakh conflict is one such
example that awaits resolution. I speak at a time of
heightened tensions in the region. Upon the instructions
of my Government, I have been regularly informing
the Council and the General Assembly about the
situation and about our concerns. Today, I once again
reiterate the full conviction of Armenia that there can
be no alternative to the strictly peaceful and negotiated
settlement of the conflict. I speak at a time when the
co-chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
representing the Russian Federation, France and the
United States, have just concluded a visit to Baku,
Yerevan and Stepanakert in their continued efforts
to foster peace. I once again reiterate Armenia's full
commitment to the peaceful settlement of this conflict
on the basis of the purposes, principles and norms of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act and the basic principles and elements identified by
the co-chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group.

We are waiting on Azerbaijan to heed the call ofthe
co-chairs and observe its commitments to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The unequivocal support
of the international community to the agreed format
of the peace talks and the efforts of the co-chairs
remain instrumental for a consolidated peace effort.
We call upon all Members, whether they gather in
the United Nations or in other groupings, movements
or organizations, to remain faithful to this support.
Establishing confidence-building measures, including
the withdrawal of snipers and the establishment of an
investigative mechanism for the ceasefire violations,
remains an immediate priority to address. We once
again call upon Azerbaijan to act on establishing such
measures.

For my people, the past 70 years since 1945 have also
been entwined with the tragedy of 30 years earlier. The
harrowing experience of suffering and extermination of
Armenians in 1915 prompted a prominent Polish lawyer
of Jewish origin, Raphael Lemkin, to coin the term
genocide. Subsequently, in adopting the Convention

on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, the international community recognized
the need for a legal instrument to counter this heinous
crime. However, today we can hardly claim victory over
the perpetrators. The people of Rwanda, for one, would
remind us of the price of the international community's
inaction and silence. Let us now reflect on the denial of
justice and the denial to millions around the globe of
the very sanctity of the right to life. Prevention remains
as compelling an imperative as ever.

As for Armenians, we will commemorate in
dignity the centenary of the Armenian genocide. We
will not be alone as many nations around the world
stand in solidarity with us. We are not bitter. We have
been willing to rebuild relations with our neighbour
Turkey without preconditions. We have initiated the
normalization process, which culminated in the signing
of the Zurich Protocols. Our goodwill, unfortunately,
has not been reciprocated.
While paying tribute to our victims, we will also
celebrate life, revival and confidence, as millions of
Armenians around the world have been doing through
hard work. As for the denialists of the Armenian
genocide, they only continue to do favour to perpetrators
of subsequent genocides. I would therefore once again
reflect on the words of Hitler who asked, prior to the
invasion of Poland in 1939, "Who, after all, speaks of
the annihilation of Armenians?" To the chagrin of the
denialists, millions fortunately do, including in Turkey.

