Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting at the request of the League of
Arab States. I also take this opportunity to welcome in
our midst today the Chair of the League's Ministerial
Council, the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Qatar, His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin
J assim bin J abr Al-Thani; and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, Mr. Nabil Elaraby. I would
like to thank them for their comprehensive briefings on
the League's efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Syria for his statement.

The participation in the Council's deliberations
this afternoon by the Secretary of State of the United
States of America, the Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of the Republic of France, the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, the Minister of State and
Foreign Relations of the Republic of Portugal, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco and the
Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany testifies to the importance of the discussions
and also deserves our great appreciation.

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides for the Council's cooperation with the regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that context, we welcome today's
meeting and think that it provides us with a good
opportunity to understand the role that the League of
Arab States is playing in the resolution of the problem
in Syria.

The Syrian Arab Republic has historically played
an important role in the Middle East by virtue of its
geographic and strategic location, its diversity and the
genius of its people. Developments in Syria have
implications for peace and stability in the wider region.
We have therefore called for a peaceful and inclusive
political process to address the grievances of all
sections of Syrian society since the beginning of the
protests in March 2011. The problem in Syria is not
merely security-related; it is primarily political and
economic and emanates from the Syrian people's desire
to play a greater role in shaping their destiny. The
resolution of this problem cannot be found in violence
or armed struggle and its violent suppression. Nor can
a solution be reached through prescriptions from
outside. The Syrian people demand and deserve
empowerment, so that a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political solution can be found in an atmosphere free of
violence and bloodshed.

Unfortunately, during the past 10 months we have
witnessed an increasing level of violence that has taken
a heavy toll on civilians and the security forces and has
destroyed civilian infrastructure. We unequivocally and
strongly condemn all Violence, irrespective of its
perpetrators, no matter what justifications are proffered.
We also condemn all violations of human rights and of
the rights of expression and peaceful assembly. India
holds those rights among the fundamental values that
should be respected while ensuring the stability and
security of society. India, along with its IBSA (India, Brazil and South Africa) partners, conveyed this
message clearly to the Syrian leadership when an IBSA
delegation visited Damascus in August 2011. That
message was also contained in the presidential
statement issued by the Security Council in August
2011 (S/PRST/2011/16), under India's presidency.

We see the efforts of the League of Arab States in
Syria in the light of our own support for a political
resolution of the crisis. We had noted that the
deployment of the League's observer mission across
several areas of the country had had a calming effect,
and we are disappointed that the mission was
suspended on 28 January owing to deteriorating
security conditions and continuing violence. The report
of the observer mission (see S/2012/7l, enclosure 4)
that the League has made available to the Security
Council clearly states that there is an armed element to
the opposition, which is also responsible for a number
of Violent acts. The continued presence and
deployment of the observers could have helped reduce
the violence and present a more accurate picture of
developments, especially since the monitors had also
confirmed that a great deal of information in the media
is exaggerated and misleading. The report of the
observer mission also made an important point: that the
mission needs to be accompanied by a political process
28
to address the grievances of the Syrian people,
something that we strongly support.

We are firmly of the view that all sides need to
cooperate with the League of Arab States. A political
process must begin without any further delay. The
process should be led by the Syrians and should respect
Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. The
League of Arab States, as an important regional
organization, should play its required and historical
role in promoting political dialogue among the Syrian
parties. That dialogue can build upon the package of
political reforms already announced by the Syrian
leadership and also bring about the necessary changes
to that package, so that it can find acceptance among
all segments of Syrian society. The outcome of this
dialogue cannot be prejudged. The outcome should also
be acceptable to the widest segment of Syrian society if
it is to resolve the present crisis and be enduring.

The international community, including the
Security Council, should play a constructive role in the
process of political dialogue among the Syrians. In this
context, we welcome the submission of a draft
resolution to the Security Council. We will engage with
fellow Council members so that the Council can speak
with a unanimous voice in support of the initiative of
the League of Arab States to expeditiously resolve the
Syrian crisis.

