Mr. McLay (New Zealand): The illicit movement
of people and goods across borders is as old as borders
themselves. But the past two decades have seen
unprecedented growth in the scale, scope and impacts
of such movements and of the criminal networks that
12-31963
support them. They are complex, well-resourced
networks that span continents and are sustained by
illicit trafficking and movement of people, funds and
goods.

We are now also seeing an alarming convergence
of those networks. Constantly seeking points of
weakness, they target jurisdictions with weak State
capacity. Once established, they further undermine
governance, public safety and development prospects
and provide fertile ground for crime, instability and
terrorism.

The very viability of States is often at risk, with
the perpetrators posing serious threats to security and
to stable democratic Government. No corner of the
globe is beyond their reach, including my own region,
the Pacific, which has been targeted by people
smugglers, human and narcotics traffickers, and others.

We have learned much about what works in
combating and disrupting these illicit networks, not
least the importance of robust legislative frameworks,
effective border and law enforcement institutions, and
good governance for protecting our jurisdictions. But
we have also learned that no country can meet these
challenges alone. The multinational character and
reach of these networks make international cooperation
essential. And we have learned to look at those
challenges through a broader lens, taking into account
the drivers of demand for such activities and the links
between different criminal activities.

In the Pacific, national responses have been
coordinated through the Pacific Islands Forum
Regional Security Committee, and through regional
groupings of border control and law enforcement
officials. New Zealand also supports its Pacific Island
neighbours through bilateral capacity-building
programmes. In partnership with the Forum Secretariat,
we bring Pacific law enforcement officials together in
an annual working group on counter-terrorism, which
this year will address the link between terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We participate actively
in the Trans-Pacific Network on Dismantling
Transnational Illicit Networks, and in other regional
initiatives of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
forum and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum. We contribute bilateral assistance to
partners in South-East Asia. New Zealand and
Australia have also partnered to fund the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime transnational
3
organized crime threat assessment for East Asia and the
Pacific.

In June, building on our chairmanship of last
year's meeting of governmental experts on small arms
and light weapons, New Zealand will fund a workshop
for our Caribbean Community partners on combating
the illicit trade in firearms across borders, focusing
particularly on maritime security issues, which have so
far received insufficient attention within the United
Nations.

More integrated and coherent capacity-building
would be in everyone's interests, particularly those of
small developing States that have the greatest need. In
that regard, we should like to stress four points.

First, we should strengthen cooperation and
coordination between United Nations agencies and
with other international bodies that provide capacity-
building. That cooperation must focus on providing
consistent advice and more coherent capacity-building
support, in line with national priorities. Practical steps
could include enhanced information-sharing and more
coordinated risk and needs assessments and priority-
setting, as well as strengthened cooperation with
relevant bodies, such as INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization.

Secondly, the United Nations should consider
options for achieving more integrated delivery of
assistance on the ground. International donors should
support and respect national partners seeking to
articulate their own priority needs. Regional
organizations also have an important role to play in
coordinating international assistance and aligning it
with regional priorities. The United Nations should be
making better use of such regional partnerships.

Thirdly, the Security Council should ensure more
coordinated assistance within its own areas of
responsibility. It could, for example, ask the Secretary-
General to include in his reports to the Council advice
relating to illicit trafficking and movements, and
integrate these aspects into mission mandates where
they threaten peace and security. This is particularly
important in peacebuilding situations, where
transnational criminal activity can be an obstacle to
sustainable peace. The Council could also instruct its
own committees and bodies to coordinate their work
with other international actors.
Finally, we must view illicit trafficking and
movements through a broader lens than just that of
enhanced border controls. That point was well made
this morning by the Ambassador of Costa Rica. While
strengthening national border and law enforcement
institutions is very important, they alone cannot stem
the flow of illicit movements unless we
contemporaneously address issues such as illicit
financial flows and the factors that drive demand.
Strengthened coordination of international policy and
capacity-building is also required. We welcome recent
steps in this direction, such as the establishment of a
United Nations task force on transnational organized
crime.

The criminal networks behind most illicit
international activity have had devastating impacts on
many communities. Their ever-expanding reach,
sophistication and resources make confronting them a
formidable challenge, but they must be confronted. We
must ensure that countries and communities that find
themselves on the front line of this struggle have the
tools and the capacities that they need to do just that.
More coordinated and integrated assistance has an
important role to play in all of this, and New Zealand
hopes that today's debate foreshadows a substantive
and new step in that direction.

