Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me thank
Nigeria for convening the Council's open debate on
security sector reform and for the very comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/238, annex). This is the second
open debate, out of three in total, during this presidency
and Estonia, as a supporter of the enhanced openness
and transparency of the Council, would like to
congratulate the Nigerian presidency for this effort. It
is important that all of the States that are not members
of the Council are given an opportunity to contribute
to the discussions on issues related to the world's peace
and security.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and the Council for the draft resolution
on security sector reform that is to be adopted later on.

Estonia also aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union (EU).

As it is the first time that Estonia takes the floor
on this important issue, we would like to commend
Slovakia's leadership in adding it to the Council's
agenda. The importance of security sector reform
(SSR) in the global peace and security agenda cannot
be underestimated. "Security is the bedrock upon
which States are built" is stated in the concept note,
and we cannot agree more. Weak security institutions
cannot prevent the outbreak of conflict, and in a post-
conflict situation they often cannot avoid a country's
relapse into chaos. Therefore, support to such reform
is one of the most important tasks of the international
community - not only in order to maintain peace
and security in a country, but also to restore the rule
of law and protect human rights. Let me make some
observations in that respect.

First, one of the key factors for success is an
inclusive reconstruction and stabilization process. SSR
is not a purely technical exercise in reforming defence
forces or law enforcement agencies; rather, it is part
of a wider political process in which the lead role of
national authorities is crucial.

The best guarantee for durable stability and
successful reform and change is the involvement
of all factions of society - religious, ethnic and
social - including the political groups of the country
and women and youth. If that can be achieved, a
society's ownership of its future i which is another
important factor of success - will be much stronger.
As inclusiveness and ownership are fundamental
in peacebuilding, they must be considered in peace
negotiations.

Secondly, very often countries in transition or
exiting a conflict need advice and encouragement. The
international community has an important role to play
in that regard in terms of capacity-building. I would
therefore like to commend the United Nations for the
steady enhancement of its peacebuilding toolbox and
its special attention to SSR as a part of that. The fact
that the number of references to SSR in the Council's
resolutions has increased considerably and that the
majority of mandates for both peacekeeping and special
political missions include SSR is very welcome. We also
note positively that the membership of the inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force has doubled in
recent years. SSR has become an integral part of the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
agenda, achieving greater prominence each year.

Thirdly, see that SSR has been genuinely linked to
the rule of law. We are also happy to see that linkage
mentioned in the draft resolution to be adopted today.
But we do not believe that the rule of law should be
considered as an end or goal in itself. SSR should be
implemented in an environment where the principles
of the rule of law are already applicable, in order to
avoid a great risk of compromising any peacebuilding
or reconstruction process.

Finally, there is a lot of SSR-related knowledge
available. Many Member States have taken the path
of State-building and reformed their security sector as
part of that process. A number of Member States have
already shared such experience and knowledge with
others. That applies also to regional organizations.
Experience gained in those processes is worth collecting
and sharing with those in need. We believe that the
United Nations should coordinate such efforts, and we
commend the comprehensive approach already taken
by the Secretary-General in that regard. That further
enhances the expertise of the United Nations and
contributes to improving the Organization's capacity to
deliver.

Estonia's own record in reforming its security
sector could be taken as an example of success. After
the end of the Soviet occupation, our nation faced the
huge task of building up a society based on principles
and values different from those of the totalitarian
system - a society based on democracy. That meant
vigorous institution-building, adherence to good
governance, strengthening the rule of law and placing
the human being at the centre of development.

SSR became a genuine part of that process. Estonia
was lucky to have had many friends and advisers, but
real results started to emerge when we understood that
the reforms were for our own good, not for the good of
someone else. We can assure the Council that the notion
of ownership was of the utmost importance, and that is
the message that we want to reinforce today.

For the past 10 years, we have been sharing that
experience with others in supporting capacity-building.
Estonia has shared its expertise at the regional level
in the Balkans, in the Caucasus, in the Republic of
Moldova and in Ukraine. Our police and corrections
experts and trainers have been a part of the respective
European Union missions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Step by step, we are trying to enhance the scope of our
involvement and become a part of wider peacebuilding
initiatives and missions. In order to share in United
Nations efforts, this year, for the first time, the Estonian
Government has decided to make a contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund.

