Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
My delegation would like to thank Ambassador
Mayoral, Ambassador Loj and Ambassador Burian for
their respective introductions of the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We appreciate their
untiring efforts to move forward the work of those
Committees.

China would like to offer the following
observations and opinions with respect to the
Committees. The 1267 Committee has enhanced its
cooperation and dialogue with Member States, through
such methods as briefings and visits by its
Chairpersons. The Committee has also further updated
its website, with more information and improved
search methods, and has shared information and
effectively cooperated with Interpol and other relevant
international and regional organizations.

Concerning the issue of listing procedures, the
Committee has made progress in its deliberations. We
hope that during its next phase, focus will be on
attaining an early consensus on listing procedures and
the sanctions list and achieving procedural fairness and
transparency, as well as improving the quality of the
sanctions list.

The Monitoring Group has submitted its fifth
report to the Committee, which contains many
recommendations for improving the sanctions regime.
We hope the Committee will continue to improve its
effectiveness and authority and, in cooperation with
Member States, will thus facilitate international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with
its increasingly full agenda, is carrying out all of its
work as scheduled. Since the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) was
established almost one year ago, it has played an
important role as an improved working mechanism.
China welcomes the Committee's report to the Council
on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).
China believes that eradicating the causes of terrorism
is a new and challenging aspect of our fight against
terrorism and that, accordingly, work towards
implementation of the resolution should continue.

China encourages more Member States to submit
their national reports to the CTC. We also welcome the
package of best practices put forth by the Committee,
which will facilitate implementation of the resolution
by Member States. The CTED has recently visited a
number of Member States, and we hope those visits
will further improve the effectiveness of the relevant
work of the Committee and enhance its follow-up
activities.

The next stage for the Committee is to increase
the efforts towards its programme of work, in order to
achieve greater progress by the end of the year. Since
the extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee,
members have extensively exchanged their views on its
one-year programme of work and have reached a
consensus on most of that programme. We hope the
parties concerned will narrow their differences by
showing greater flexibility, so that the Committee may,
in accordance with resolution 1673 (2006) and the
recommendations contained in the report, come up
with a comprehensive and balanced programme of
work, in order to facilitate the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

In July 2006, with the support of the United
Nations, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Norway,
Australia and others, China successfully held, in
Beijing, the Asia-Pacific workshop on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which has
contributed much to the implementation of the
resolution in our region. China will continue to take an
active part in the work of the 1540 Committee.

Looking back over the past few months, terrorist
activities have continued to be rife worldwide. Our
fight against terrorism remains long and arduous.
China has always held that, as a common scourge of
the international community, all terrorist activities
constitute grave crimes, regardless of their motivation,
timing and location or the identity of the perpetrators.
China is opposed to all kinds of terrorist activities. We
must fight against both the root causes and the
symptoms at the same time. We cannot address the
issue based on double standards.

China welcomes the General Assembly's
adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288), and calls upon all parties to translate it into
practical steps.

We support enhanced cooperation and
communication among the three Committees, which
will help to improve the national reporting mechanisms
and contribute to capacity-building in the developing
countries in that field.

