Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mexico on its assumption of the Security Council
presidency. I would also like to directly thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico for her personal
dedication to the issue of children and armed conflict
and for arranging this open debate. Additionally, I
would like to thank and commend the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Task
Force on Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF
for working to submit an inclusive and well-grounded
report (S/2010/ 181) on the actual situation facing and
involving children in areas of concern. The fact that the
information contained in the report is disaggregated by
country and type of violation gives us a clear picture of
the magnitude of this horrific and all too common
phenomenon.

Kazakhstan, as a State party to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, fully
supports the strengthening of multilateral commitments
through the campaign launched by the Secretary-
General to promote its universal ratification by 2012. It
is crucial that all nations fully and legally embrace the
Optional Protocol if we are to protect and uphold the
right of all children to be children and to grow up in
safer, healthier and friendlier environments.
Regrettably, a number of countries covered in the
present report have not ratified the Optional Protocol,
including some where a legal framework for child
protection is most needed. Kazakhstan feels that this
makes full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1882 (2009), regarding the incorporation of
tracking and the eradication of sexual violence into
existing national action plans, of immediate and vital
importance.

The report indicates undeniable progress in
monitoring and preventing many violations and abuses
against children in armed conflict, as well as some
progress in holding those committing these hideous
crimes against children accountable for their actions.
However, the conclusion that impunity for violators
continues to prevail is indeed, as stated in the report,
disturbing.

Based on the data presented, we can conclude
that direct bilateral dialogue with armed groups and the
implementation of concrete time-bound action plans by
all parties to a conflict constitute an efficient and
effective framework for significantly reducing the
number of grave violations against children. Our
delegation appreciates the political will of countries
affected by conflict that have nominated local citizens
to be responsible for facilitating the separation and
demobilization of children, and those instances where
child protection units have been established in armed
groups. Such precedents have added value in the light
of the lack of trained and qualified personnel
responsible for child survival, demobilization and
reintegration. It is evident that these precedents should
become best practices for the United Nations and all
parties to conflicts to follow.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned that some
countries have shown resistance to providing access for
United Nations country teams to monitor and report on
conditions in areas of conflict. This includes contact
with non-State actors for the purpose of preparing
action plans to stop the recruitment of children and
other grave violations, including killing, maiming and
rape. We call on all countries to grant unrestricted
access to the United Nations to gather objective and
reliable information, and to prepare critical action
plans to protect children.

The report mentions the innovative domestic law
in the United States, the Child Soldier Prevention Act,
which restricts the provision of financing and any
defence-related assistance to countries identified as
recruiting or using child soldiers in violation of
international humanitarian law. This national approach
should be applauded and, where appropriate,
replicated. The loss of military support and aid could
serve as strong motivating factors for some to stop
these disgraceful practices against children.

As a member of the UNICEF Executive Board,
Kazakhstan fully supports the Fund's new mandate as
co-lead in the struggle to end violence against children
in situations of armed conflict. In these efforts, it is
critical to focus on educating all sides in a conflict, as
well members of peacekeeping units, on the rights of
civilians, particularly children and women. National
and international legislation should be strengthened in
order to fill legal gaps and loopholes exploited by
those violating these rights.

The increase of forced school closures and of
schools being damaged or destroyed in attacks,
fighting or explosions is of deep concern to our
delegation. While targeting schools clearly puts
children at direct risk of death and injury, it also results
in their being deprived of education and, potentially,
the loss of an entire generation. Such an outcome
would be fertile ground for fanaticism and terrorism,
and therefore represent a threat to international peace
and security.

Kazakhstan suggests further prioritizing the
protection of educational facilities from attack by any
party and the provision of uninterrupted education for
all children in post-conflict zones, where appropriate.
My delegation also proposes the drafting of large-scale
learning policies for countries affected by long-term
armed conflicts. The goal of these proposals is to help
today's children grow into a generation free from
hatred and loathing based on race, culture or religion.
By promoting dignity, tolerance and a merit-based
approach, education is a cornerstone of efforts to
eradicate deep-rooted stereotypes.

