Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing. Since this is his first time taking the
floor before the Security Council, I would like to
convey to him my wishes for his success and to assure
him of the support of my delegation. I would also like
to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Corporation and African integration of the Republic of
Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, for his presence here today.

I thank the United States presidency for promoting
transparency in the work of the Security Council by
holding most of our meetings this month as open public
briefings. Of course, Uruguay has underscored in
previous closed consultations on the situation in Mali
that little or nothing of what was discussed was actually
conveyed to the Malian authorities. We have very
willingly attended these quarterly meetings and believe
that this is a good opportunity for the positions of the
various Council members to be directly conveyed to the
Government of Mali and other countries interested in
the evolution of the conflict. We regret that the situation
in the Republic of Mali continues to deteriorate, largely
due to the actions of terrorist and extremist groups that
are enemies of the peace and reconciliation process.

We note with satisfaction the statement of the
Under-Secretary-General with respect to the interim
measures that have enabled the establishment and
formation of authorities and mixed patrols during
the month of April. Uruguay wishes to reiterate and
underscore that the main responsibility for order and
the protection of the population in the Republic of
Mali lies with the Malian authorities. The international
community, in particular the United Nations, has
been assisting the Government in its efforts to fulfil
the responsibilities vested in it as a sovereign nation.
In fact, the international community has been
supporting Mali in its efforts to achieve peace in the
country in various ways. It has been making financial
contributions for the implementation of projects in the
north of the country; establishing and strengthening
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA);
and implementing peacebuilding projects thanks to the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Secretary-General and the
Security Council mission also made visits a year ago.

I would like to highlight the conclusions ofthe recent
high-level meeting held at Headquarters in September
to provide new impetus to the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
co-chaired by Algeria, Mali and the United Nations.
That notwithstanding, the achievement of peace in
Mali will require the firm and determined commitment
of the State, which must seek real and lasting political
solutions across its political spectrum to then be able to
tackle the terrorist threat.

I agree with what was said by the Under-Secretary-
General that we must identify a set of priorities geared
first towards implementing the peace agreement
between the three signatory parties. Then, once
the Government of Mali has achieved political and
institutional stability, it will be able to tackle the
security problem through effective strategies, with the
support of the international community. We cannot
lose sight of the fact that the entire Malian population
must feel as if they are part of a single State. To that
end, the State must make its presence felt across the
entire territory, providing basic services to the entire
population. We reiterate once again that any territory
abandoned by the State becomes fertile ground for the
operation of terrorist groups, which take advantage of
the vulnerability of the people there.

Uruguay wishes to express its extreme concern
over the violations of human rights committed by the
defence and security forces of Mali, as described by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/271). The
institutions entrusted with ensuring law and order
should act in strict conformity with constitutional
norms, protecting and providing guarantees to the
civilian population.

Much has been said about the need to optimize
resources for peacekeeping operations, and Uruguay
certainly believes that that it is necessary. On this
point, it is necessary to highlight the role of the host
State in optimizing the results and effectiveness of the
operations in the field.

In connection with the possibility of imposing
sanctions, as raised in resolution 2295 (2016) and in the
latest report of the Secretary-General, Uruguay would
be interested in analysing what would be the real impact
and scope of such measures, and, most important of all,
the position of the Malian Government in that regard.
We see the potential imposition of sanctions only as
a means to achieve the ultimate goal of the effective
implementation of the peace agreement.

In conclusion, Uruguay wishes to reiterate once
again that the current mandate of MINUSMA exceeds
that generally affodred to a peacekeeping operation, in
that it includes possible activities to combat terrorism.
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2295 (2016),
as it considers that the security situation in Mali is
extraordinary, but such actions should not be replicated
in future peacekeeping mandates. In brief, we shall
continue to work to establish stability in Mali and to
ensure that MINUSMA is no longer considered the
most dangerous peacekeeping operation in the world.

