Mr. Omaar (Somalia): First and foremost,
Mr. President, I thank you for this opportunity to
participate in this discussion on Somalia. I also wish to
take this occasion to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General and my good friend Ambassador Ould Abdallah
for all the efforts and energy he has brought to bear on
the situation, and for his leadership over the past two
years and more. In the same spirit, I also wish to pay
tribute to and to thank the agencies of the United
Nations and the international community for their
continuing stance, shoulder to shoulder, with the
Somali people.

However, as has been said - and we all agree -
the issues and the problems of Somalia have to be
solved by Somalis. The responsibility lies not only
with the Government but with the people of Somalia,
wherever they are. The international community has
come to our assistance, which we appreciate. I believe
we have now assumed the tasks and responsibility for
the needs of our country.

What is also clear, we believe, is that the Somali
people and the international community have come to a
decision that the continuous reinvention of the wheel in
the repeated conferences that have taken place in the
past has now come to an end. Now is the moment to
rebuild an institutional base and an operational State
that will bring stability to Somalia. I think that is a
very important decision. In partnership, we are now of
like minds that this has to work and be put in place so
that the State can be rebuilt properly and Somalia can
take its place in the international community.

As has been said, our commitment at the political
level to peace and reconciliation is neither temporary
nor in any way limited. We remain open, willing and
ready to incorporate into the Djibouti peace process
any and every party that agrees to the re-establishment
of the rule of law and is willing to sit across the
negotiating table to deliberate on and find a way
forward. I believe, as my good friend Ambassador
Ould Abdallah has said, that proof of that is the recent
agreement with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a as a new
partner in the reconstruction of Somalia.

Similar efforts are taking place within the country
as well as within the diaspora Somali community
across the world. That dialogue is continuous and will
be maintained and sustained. We are committed to
peace and reconciliation as an ongoing process that
does not have a time limit.

At the international level, we are very grateful for
the support and the position of the African Union and
the recent summit held in Libya, which fully took on
board the political, diplomatic, military and financial
needs of Somalia. We are also grateful for the
endorsement by the African Union summit of the
proposals that the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the Somali Government
have put to it. That was followed by an IGAD
ministerial meeting, which again concluded that, aside
from the actions of the Security Council and the United
Nations, we in IGAD need to act on a subregional
basis. IGAD has also now adopted resolutions and
decisions that establish local sanctions on a
subregional basis to confront the issue of individuals
and entities in IGAD countries that are spoilers of the
peace process.

But what has become clear is that, on the military
side, the objective of the past two months has been to
overthrow the Government, which was the basis of the
initial attack in April. That project of Al-Shabaab and
Hizbul Islam has now run out of steam. It has now
been concluded, on our side and on their side, that that
project to seize power and overthrow the Government
cannot and will not come to fruition. It will not
succeed as a military operation. That has resulted in a
change of tactics, which we first saw in the hostage-
taking that has taken place not only in Mogadishu but
also in the Northern Frontier District of Kenya, as well
as in the impact of the abuse of the institutions and
facilities of the United Nations itself. Over and beyond
that, we expect that an expanded project of suicide
bombings will be undertaken and will come to pass as
another tactic of terrorism seeking to destabilize not
only the Somali Government but also the international
community, which is coming to the aid of Somalia.

In conclusion, our request to the Council is that it
view Somalia within the subregional context. The
subregion as a whole has been through a 50-year cycle
of war - from the Sudan to Eritrea, Ethiopia and
Somalia. Our people have suffered 50 years of civil
and inter-State wars - in effect, since the 1950s or
early 1960s. We believe that Somalia is a key factor for
the stability of the subregion. The peace that we seek,
and which we believe the Council seeks, is not limited
only to Somalia. The peace that we want is subregional
peace, and stability in Somalia is a cornerstone of that

peace. What happens in Somalia will have an impact
on neighbouring countries.

Therefore, the project and partnership that has
been established between the international community
and the Somali Government and people must succeed,
because the impact goes far beyond the borders of
Somalia. I believe that the proof of that is the piracy
that we have experienced in the past few years. We
therefore ask for the Council's assistance and support.
The crucial issue now is that of external vested
interests that Wish to sustain and continue the war in
Somalia. I think Somalis are of the mind that we can
achieve peace and reconciliation if we can overcome
the issue of external interference and external vested
interests that wish to sustain the war. I promise the
Council that the Government can find a peace and
reconciliation process that can be completed among
Somalis, if we are given the opportunity and the
external door can be closed.

