Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. Special
Coordinator Mladenov's briefing was informative and
it is appreciated. Mr. El-Ad's briefing, by contrast,
was the sort of distorted and one-sided account that
is provided all too often at the United Nations when
it comes to Israel and the Palestinian issue. It is why
I have so often attempted to bring some diversity to
our discussions of the challenges facing the Middle
East. Rather than repeating the same tired points at this
monthly meeting, I will take the opportunity to focus
on a matter of great significance that is taking place
today in the Middle East - a matter that has received
far less attention than it deserves. I urge my colleagues
to listen, as their countries might unknowingly be
affected by it.

First, by way of a little background, in less than
two weeks, on 30 October, Iran will celebrate Student
Basij Day. What does Basij Day celebrate? It is the day
on which, during the Iran-Iraq war, a 13-year-old boy
strapped a live grenade to his body and leapt under
an oncoming Iraqi tank. His name was Mohammad
Hossein Fahmideh. Child soldiers like Hossein were
a horrifying feature of the Iran-Iraq war. Children
were sent into battle with a plastic key to paradise
hung around their necks. They were untrained and
considered expendable. In wars between trained adult
military forces, the numbers of the wounded typically
outnumber the dead. But the child soldiers of Iran were
used as cannon fodder and as a human minesweeper.
The dead far outnumbered the wounded. According to
the Iranians themselves, 36,000 school-age children
were killed and just under 3,000 were wounded in the
Iran-Iraq war.

So why does that history matter today? Some in
the international community still labour under the
misimpression that the Iranian regime might be a
responsible international actor or might abide by the laws
ofa civilized society. Some think that Tehran might care
more about a better life for the people of Iran than about
the forcible spread of the regime's power and influence.
Many things about the Iranian regime contradict that
premise. One of the most glaring contradictions is the
continued use of children to fight and die in Iranian
aggression abroad. The Government in Tehran long ago
turned Mohammad Hossein Fahmideh's death into a
propaganda tool to recruit and train children for war.
It continues to use that memory of its past barbarism to
promote more barbarism. The use of child soldiers is a
moral outrage that every civilized nation rejects, while
Iran celebrates it.

The Basij Resistance Force is a paramilitary
force operating under Iran's Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC). In addition to cracking down on
dissidents and enforcing internal security in Iran, the
Basij indoctrinate schoolchildren and provide combat
training to children as young as 12 years old. Those
children are then coerced into fighting abroad for the
IRGC. Since at least early 2015, the Iranian regime
has used the Basij to recruit and train Iranian children
to fight in Syria in support of the brutal Al-Assad
regime. The Basij also targets Afghan immigrants
in Iran - some as young as 14 years old - to fight
in Syria.

The United States has followed the money that
funds the recruitment, training and coerced deployment
of child soldiers in Iran. Earlier this week, we identified
the sources of the Basij funding and took action to cut
them off from the global economy and financial system.
Two days ago, the United States Treasury Department's
Office of Foreign Assets Control imposed sanctions
on a network of 20 Iranian corporations and financial
institutions that provide funding for the Basij Resistance
Force. That network is deeply entrenched in the Iranian
economy. It is comprised of multibillion-dollar business
interests that operate in Iran's automotive, mining,
metals and banking industries. The network uses shell
companies to hide the ownership of those interests.
Many of the companies do substantial international
business across the Middle East and Europe.

The United States action targets banks, investment
firms and subsidiary mining and manufacturing
companies. It includes the largest tractor manufacturing
company in the Middle East and North Africa. It also
includes Iran's largest steel producer, which funnels
millions of dollars each year to the Basij and its
financial network. Our Treasury Department has done
impressive forensic accounting to uncover the hidden
and overlapping networks of businesses and financial
institutions that fund the work of the Basij forces.

For anyone who cares to look, that is a perfect
example of what is fuelling the outrage of the Iranian
people today. Iran's economy is increasingly devoted
to funding Iranian repression at home and aggression
abroad. In this case, Iranian big business and finance
are funding the war crime of using child soldiers.
That is crony terrorism. The Iranian people are rightly
disgusted with it and they are taking to the streets to
protest. To add insult to injury, the Basij use the very
money that they have stolen from the people to forcibly
shut down the protests and arrest the protesters.

The designations announced by the United States
Treasury Department extend beyond property or
interests in the United States or in the possession
of United States persons. Anyone who engages in
transactions with those designated entities could
themselves be designated and any foreign financial
institution that knowingly engages in transactions
with those entities could themselves be subject to
United States sanctions. The sanctions that the United
States is levelling against Iran are broad and deep,
and for good reason. Any company or individual that
does business with that Iranian network is complicit
in sending children to die on the battlefields of Syria
and elsewhere.

The United States will do all that it can to reverse
the flow of international funds into the coffers of the
Iranian regime. I thank everyone for listening today
and for their attention to this human rights crisis that
is occurring in the heart of the Middle East. I urge my
colleagues to join with the United States in helping to
the protect Iranian children from the Government that
is supposed to protect them.

