Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Allow me to refer to some of
the accusations that we have heard here today.

The representative of Lebanon sat here and
accused Israel of attempting to undermine the tripartite
mechanism and questioned its commitment to resolution
1701 (2006). Interestingly enough, there is no evidence
in United Nations reports to support these baseless
claims. In fact, it was the Lebanese side that was
recently accused of violating the resolution by General
Portolano, Head of Mission and Force Commander of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, after the
launch of rockets at Israel from southern Lebanon. The
rockets were fired by Hizbullah, an armed terrorist
organization that still acts freely in southern Lebanon
and holds seats in the Lebanese Parliament, which has
not even been able to elect a President for the past year
and a half. Still, the representative of Lebanon had
the audacity to criticize Israel's democracy. Just as a
reminder, the terror organization Hibzullah, which
sits in the Lebanese Parliament, is the same Hizbullah
that assists Al-Assad's forces in besieging the town of
Madaya in Syria and in starving its people to death.

The element that is sponsoring Hizbullah's heinous
activities is Iran. The sad truth is that wherever there
is terror in the Middle East, we can be sure that Iran
is behind it. Iran's interventions in Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen continue to wreak havoc in the region.

As for Saudi Arabia, as a State that continues to
attack and bomb the civilian population in Yemen
indiscriminately, it may want to refrain from giving
lectures about violations of international humanitarian
law.

As for Syria, I would advise its representative to
direct the time and energy he spends in writing hateful,
false and conspiratorial statements towards approving
United Nations requests for humanitarian assistance
convoys.

It took a lot of nerve for the representatives of
Malaysia and Venezuela - two of the world's worst
human rights violators - to criticize the human rights
record of the only democracy in the Middle East. We
can only hope that one day the people of their countries
will enjoy the same freedom of expression as their
representatives do here at the United Nations.

With reference to my Palestinian colleagues, after
listening this morning to the Palestinian observer I am
still left without answers to the fundamental questions.
Why will the Palestinians not come to the negotiating
table? Why do they continue to refuse to condemn terror
against Israel? I have read and reread their statement.
It contains not a word of condemnation of terror and
nothing about accepting Prime Minister Netanyahu's
offer to negotiate.

While the Palestinians demonstrate such passion
and energy defaming Israel here at the United Nations,
they neglect their responsibility for the people of the
Gaza Strip. For their sake, and for the sake of various
States that sadly failed to learn the facts before
taking the floor here today - including Bangladesh
and Nicaragua - allow me to share real information
about Israel's major efforts to rehabilitate Gaza and to
improve the lives of its population. These are just a few
examples of Israel's commitment.

The Israeli Cabinet has approved a range of short-,
medium- and long-term measures to address Gaza's
water and energy needs, including the addition of a
temporary power line and increased accessibility to
gas. Every day, thousands of people enter Israel from
the Gaza Strip in order to work, do business and receive
medical treatment in Israel. This continues despite the
fact that we know that Hamas exploits this policy in
order to promote terror. Hamas has even used a cancer
patient being treated in an Israeli hospital as a carrier to
pass information to terrorists.

As we have stated time and again, Israel is
committed to the two-State solution and believes in
a better future for Israelis and the Palestinian people
alike.

