Mr. Li Kexin (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening this
meeting at the request of the League of Arab States. I
also welcome the participation of the representatives of
Saudi Arabia, the Arab League, Palestine and Israel.

The convening of the Annapolis conference last
November provided a valuable opportunity, most rare
in recent years, to achieve peace in the Middle East.
With the Annapolis deadline fast approaching, the
international community is waiting with ardent hopes
to see practical results emerge from the Israeli-
Palestinian talks. In recent months, the leaders of Israel
and Palestine have met on a regular basis and a
bilateral negotiating group has kept the negotiating
process alive.

We welcome those developments. However, as
was indicated by Mr. Robert Serry in his latest briefing
to the Security Council, there is now a huge gap in the
negotiation process. It is imperative for the political
talks to produce a specific result.

While we wait for progress in the negotiations,
we cannot neglect the grave situation on the ground.
Since the talks are not being conducted in a vacuum,
the situation on ground provides both the context and
the subject matter to be addressed in such talks. It is
not hard to appreciate that an ongoing improvement in
the situation on the ground would help foster
favourable conditions for such talks.

However, it is matter of concern that the
humanitarian situation in Gaza has continued to
deteriorate this year and that Palestinians in the West
Bank are facing many hardships in their lives. It is also
a matter of concern that Israel has continued its
construction and expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Not only is that a
violation of its obligations under international law, but
it has also weakened the political foundation for the
peace talks. It has also made it more difficult to
implement the programme to establish two States side
by side. We call upon Israel to respond positively to the
appeal of the international community on the issue of
settlements. As a first step, it should forthwith freeze
any new construction or expansion of settlements.

The road map for the Middle East peace process
sets forth obligations for the various parties. The
parties concerned should demonstrate their good will
by earnestly fulfilling their obligations. It is critical to
ensure that no one wait for the others to take the very
first step.

The international community and the countries
concerned should step up their efforts to advocate
conciliation and peace talks. The meeting of the
Quartet to be held later today will provide an important
opportunity to that end. We hope that the Quartet will
help to accelerate this negotiation process.

China supports the establishment of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East through political dialogue on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab peace initiative. As an
important organ entrusted with the mandate to maintain
world peace and stability, the Security Council should
and can play an important role in that regard. We
support the efforts of the Security Council to that end.

