Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Briefings by the Chairs
of the three Security Council subsidiary bodies that
deal with counter-terrorism have become more and
more important now that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in setting a general
framework for Member States to cooperate, has
underscored the need for a general, consistent approach
by various United Nations bodies and entities engaged
in fighting terrorism in the interest of an efficient and
effective multilateral fight against international
terrorism. In this context, the activities of the Counter-
Terrorism, 1267 and 1540 Committees should be
increasingly interactive, transparent and open to
dialogue with all Member States.

We wish to congratulate the three Chairs on the
great efforts that they have devoted personally to the
success of the Committees' activities. Al-Qaida and the
Taliban are still, unfortunately, one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. In our view,
the sanctions regime represents an essential tool for the
prevention of terrorist acts, while upholding the rule of
law and respect for human rights.

In resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006) the
Security Council clearly indicated that the sanctions
regime can be based on clearer and fairer procedures
for listing, de-listing and humanitarian exemptions.
Now, the Committee has the responsibility to
implement the new procedures promptly and properly,
so as to increase Member States' commitment to the
sanctions regime and build general confidence in its
fair implementation.

Over the past year, Italy has contributed actively
along the lines set by the resolutions. Thanks to
information provided by the Italian Government
through the Monitoring Team, the Committee approved
the update of information for 35 names on the
Al-Qaida section of the list. Italy has participated
directly in the process of three of the de-listing
requests submitted to the Committee through the focal
point. Moreover, by its legislative decree of 22 June,
Italy has also amended its laws on the freezing of
financial and economic assets to make the laws more
effective and consistent with the needs of the
international sanctions regime.
07-59786

The sanctions regime will not significantly
reduce the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban
unless all Member States share the same belief in the
effectiveness of sanctions. The Committee and its
individual members, together with the Monitoring
Team, have the primary responsibility to do whatever
they can to raise States' confidence in the sanctions
regime and in the Committee's decisions. This year,
some decisions to list, de-list or update the list were
based on information provided by non-members of the
Committee. Rather than an exception, that should
become the rule - an ordinary rule.

If interaction with the membership at large and
transparency are important for the 1267 Committee,
they are even more important, in our view, for the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We hail the designation
of the new Executive Director, Ambassador Mike
Smith, who will bear the huge responsibility deriving
from the many tasks of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) mandate.
But independent of its mandate, CTED, whose role has
also been recognized by the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288), must become a trustworthy,
significant partner in the international arena, to which
States have direct access to discuss implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In our view,
there is not sufficient awareness that the natural
customers of CTED are not only the 15 Security
Council members, but - especially - all of those
Member States which are non-members of the Council
and which need to discuss problems arising from the
implementation of the resolutions in an open,
transparent and interactive way. We believe that greater
interaction between CTED and all Member States
should be pursued more actively. We need a new
approach that is not based exclusively on written
reports, letters or formal replies, and we hope that the
new Preliminary Implementation Assessment
procedure will give the entire membership the
opportunity to start an informal dialogue.

Finally, the CTC and CTED have everything to
gain in actively cooperating on fulfilling the Global
Strategy in the areas more closely related to resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).

We welcome the adoption of the 1540
Committee's sixth programme of work, and the
sending of letters to the membership to either remind
Members of reporting requirements or to seek

additional information, on the basis of matrixes
prepared by Committee experts, to better assess the
level of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We
support the emphasis by the Committee on outreach
activities to raise the membership's awareness of the
scope and obligations of the resolution, as well as on
international assistance, including through the adoption
of a set of ad hoc decisions aimed at fostering
compliance with the resolution.

The thematic discussions held by the Committee
on those two issues, together with the meeting
organized last July with selected assistance providers,
proved extremely useful in identifying outstanding
implementation difficulties and strategies to overcome
them. We encourage the Committee to enhance its
cooperation with relevant international organizations,
in particular the International Atomic Energy Agency,
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the World Customs Organization and the
Financial Action Task Force, in order to effectively
counter proliferation challenges, in particular in the
areas of export and border controls and of illicit
financing.

Some years from their inception, we cannot
evaluate the Committees without asking ourselves
whether their results can be improved. In the next few
months, the Security Council will have to review the
mandates of the expert groups that help the activities of
the Committees - CTED, the 1540 Committee expert
group and the Monitoring Team. We will then have the
opportunity to consider adjustments which may prove
useful or necessary based upon a thorough evaluation
of the results achieved so far.

