Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation thanks Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing this
afternoon on developments in Rakhine state since the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22 on
6 November. Mr. Feltman has reflected in his briefing
the efforts of the Government of Myanmar in response
to the challenges the country is facing with regard to
Rakhine state. We appreciate the constructive approach
to our engagement adopted by the Secretary-General.
We will continue to cooperate with the United Nations
in our efforts to alleviate the current humanitarian
problems and to achieve our objective of a sustainable
solution to the protracted issue of Rakhine state.
My delegation also welcomes the presence in the
Council today of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten. The Government of Myanmar
has accommodated the proposed visit to Myanmar by
Ms. Patten from 14 to 17 December, in demonstration of
our genuine desire to work with the United Nations and
our faith in the United Nations system. I am confident
that the first official visit of the Special Representative
to Myanmar will produce positive results that will pave
the way for further cooperation between Myanmar and
the United Nations, and in particular with her Office.

With regard to the alleged sexual violence, the
Government of Myanmar has made its position clear
that it will not condone any human rights abuse. Ifthere
is concrete evidence, we are ready to take action against
the transgressor, in accordance with the law, no matter
who or what he is.

The Government of Myanmar has spared no
effort to address the humanitarian, security and
socioeconomic issues that have emerged following the
terror attacks of 25 August by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army against security posts in the Maungdaw
district. At the same time, the Government is striving to
achieve sustainable peace, harmony and socioeconomic
development for all communities in the state. Let me
briefly highlight some salient facts on the status of
what the Government of Myanmar has done so far.

With regard to the cessation of violence, there have
been no major clashes with the terrorists reported since
5 September. Moreover, most troops have withdrawn
from the Buthidaung-Maungdaw region. Public security
and the maintenance of law and order have been taken
over by the Myanmar police force. In order to establish
the rule of law and sustain peace and security, the
police force in Rakhine will be strengthened. The
Government of Japan has accepted the request of
Myanmar to provide community-policing training to
Myanmar police personnel in Rakhine state.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, the Red
Cross Movement is operating in Rakhine state to
address the urgent need for humanitarian assistance
in affected areas, following the violence that broke
out on 25 August. As of 26 November, the Red Cross
Movement had reached out to over 29,000 households
in Rakhine state. Apart from emergency items, the
Movement is also providing health-care services to
the affected communities. Mobile clinics and health
facilities have been deployed. Thousands of people
have also been provided with cash assistance. The
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster
Management is also working with the Government
of Myanmar and the Red Cross Movement to deliver
humanitarian assistance. The Thai and Philippines Red
Cross will soon be joining the Red Cross Movement in
aid delivery.

The Union Government, in collaboration with the
Rakhine state authorities, is trying to find ways and
means for the United Nations agencies and international
organizations to resume their activities in the region.
In the meantime, the World Food Programme (WFP)
is delivering food assistance to Rathedaung township,
including the five remaining Muslim villages. In
late October, the WFP was granted permission to
restart its food distribution in the Maungdaw and
Buthidaung townships. Moreover, the World Health
Organization is also providing medical support that is
being channelled through the Ministry of Health and
Sports. A youth humanitarian coordination group has
been formed with youth volunteers from across the
country in order to efficiently distribute humanitarian
aid to all of the affected communities.

Regarding repatriation, on 23 November Myanmar
and Bangladesh signed an agreement on an arrangement
for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons from Rakhine state. According to
the arrangement, a joint working group will be formed
within three weeks of the signing. We have now
agreed to meet in Dhaka on 19 December in order to
finalize the terms of reference and establish the joint
working group. After the formation of the joint working
group, the repatriation process will start within two
months from the date of signing the agreement on the
repatriation arrangement.

Two reception centres, at Taung Pyo Lat Wel and
Nga Khu Ya, near the border, and a drop-in centre have
already been set up. The reception centres will provide
basic services, such as health, water and sanitation,
gender-inclusive security and safety, education and
transportation to people's respective places of origin.
Application forms for returnees have been sent
to Bangladesh. The returnees will be temporarily
accomodated in those reception centres, but they will
be resettled in their places of origin or places that are
close by. At the request of the Hindu community in
Myanmar, the Government has asked the Bangladeshi
Government to ensure the early repatriation of more
than 500 Hindu refugees. However, Bangladesh has
indicated its intention to include them in the first batch
of returnees, together with other Muslims.
Regarding the implementation of the recommendation
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
the Government of Myanmar has embraced the
recommendations of the Commission as a road
map to addressing the root causes of the problems
within Rakhine state and achieving sustainable
peace and development for all. The Government is
committed to implementing the recommendations
made by the Advisory Commission, as well as
other recommendations made by the Maungdaw
Region Investigation Commission. To that end, the
ministerial-level committee for implementation of the
recommendations on Rakhine state was formed on
12 September. The ministries concerned have already
started the implementation process in various areas.
The progress of the implementation process is to be
released to the public every four months.

Today, I am pleased to inform members of the
Council that an advisory board to the committee for
implementation of the recommendation on Rakhine
state was formed on 8 December. The advisory board
comprises five well-respected international members
and five members from Myanmar. The advisory board
will give necessary, independent advisory opinions in
order to permit the Committee to effectively implement
the recommendations, in consonance with the situation
on the ground.

The Union Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement, and Development in Rakhine
was launched in October as a national initiative to
address the issue of Rakhine state following the August
terrorist attacks. The three main tasks of the Uninon
Enterprise, for both the short and the long terms, are
repatriation and the effective provision of humanitarian
aid, the coordination of resettlement and rehabilitation
efforts, and socioeconomic development and durable
peace. The work of the Union Enterprise complements
the work of the committee on the implementation of
the recommendations on Rakhine state. It is working
closely with the private sector and civil society. It
also collaborates with Government organizations at
the union and regional levels. The Union Enterprise
is undertaking infrastructure development and
construction in preparation for the repatriation

process. It is also assisting in the distribution of
humanitarian assistance.

For the long-term development of the region,
the Union Enterprise is encouraging and inviting
investment in order to create jobs and generate income,
thereby upgrading the livelihoods of the people. As
a result, the Maungdaw special economic zone was
recently established in order to boost cross-border
trade with Bangladesh. We welcome international
partners, donor agencies and United Nations entities to
participate in that process.

The Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22 on Myanmar on 6 November. Just
barely over a week later, the Third Committee adopted
an almost identical draft resolution, entitled "Situation
of human rights in Myanmar" (A/C.3/72/L.48).
On 5 December, almost exactly a month after the
presidential statement was adopted, the special session
of the Human Rights Council in Geneva adopted by
a vote resolution S-27/1, entitled "Situation of human
rights of Rohingya Muslims and other minorities
in Myanmar".

We have stated in unequivocal terms our objection
to the discriminatory and selective application of
overlapping actions against my country in the name of
human rights under various United Nations mechanisms.
The pattern of exerting undue political pressure and
coercive measures will not achieve any positive results.
Moreover, the expressions "ethnic cleansing" and
"crimes against humanity" should not be used lightly
without concrete evidence and a conclusive legal
judgment. We have serious doubts about the attitude of
some members of the Council that repeatedly refuse to
even call my country by its proper name. Such arrogant
behaviour, coupled with a hostile mentality, will not
contribute to constructive cooperation.

Notwithstanding all of that, as a responsible State
Member of the United Nations, Myanmar has never
failed to maintain its relationship with the United
Nations. We always choose the path of engagement
and cooperation, based on mutual understanding and
mutual respect. My delegation is working closely and
in good faith with the members of the Council and the
Secretariat to establish a constructive partnership in our
common quest for peace, reconciliation and sustainable
development in Rakhine state. We will continue to do
so in the spirit of cooperation.

On behalf of the Government of Myanmar, I would
like to express our sincere appreciations to the members
of the Council that have demonstrated an understanding
of the complex challenges that we are facing today. We
believe that mutual understanding and constructive
cooperation will only bring about positive results.

