Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. We are convinced that under your
guidance that our work will be successful. We would
like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing today.

Egypt supports the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the statement to be
made by the representative of Djibouti on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

I would like to emphasize the following six points.
First, Egypt backs the negotiations currently under
way between the State of Palestine and Israel to achieve
a peace agreement that is lasting in nature. We wish
to pay tribute to the efforts of the United States of
America, which have allowed for the negotiations to be
relaunched. We hope they will be crowned with success,
success that will lead to a two-State solution. However,
we are concerned over basic differences between the
two parties that will be difficult to overcome. We urge
the occupying Power, Israel, which possesses all the
means to control and the necessary force on the ground,
to take all the necessary steps to achieve a two-State
solution before it is too late to do so.

Secondly, today we heard the Israeli representative
deny the fact that the Palestinian issue lies at the very
heart of the conflict in the Middle East and use the
current situation in the Middle East to renege on Israel's
responsibilities. We are convinced that a solution in the
Middle East will enable us to build democratic stable
regimes, which we have heard some speakers here deny.
They believe that such developments will contribute
only to instability and bloodshed in the region.

We stress the fact that a failure to find a solution
to the Palestinian issue would threaten the occupying
State above all. We have examined the statistics on
the resumption of settlement construction in the West
Bank, which show a threefold increase since the
signature ofthe Oslo agreements from 1993 to 2012. We
are also alarmed by the increase in illegal settlement
activity carried out by Israel in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, which has grown 70 per cent this year
compared with the same period last year.

That leads us to question the message of the Israeli
Government at a time when it claims to be engaging
in negotiations. We condemn its illegal activities and
invite the international community resolutely to end
them, including through the imposition of sanctions on
Israeli settlements in line with the measures undertaken
by a number of international stakeholders, including
the European Union, whose guidelines will enter into
force at the beginning of next year. We warn against
any attempts to circumvent those sanctions.

Thirdly, Egypt condemns ongoing Israeli actions
against the Palestinian people, including the blockade
of Gaza and the terrorism carried out by Israeli settlers
against unarmed Palestinians. As the occupying Power,
Israel bears full responsibility for the situation. It must
therefore lift its unfair blockade of the Gaza Strip. We

also condemn systematic Israeli violations against the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the provocations of extremist
Israeli settlers there under the cover of the heightened
Israeli security presence. We ask for an end to be put to
Jewish sloganeering in the mosque.

Fourthly, Egypt expresses its concerns regarding
the decrease in funds made available to United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) and the deterioration of its
financial situation. The demonstration by hundreds of
Palestinian refugees in Gaza against a reduction in the
basic services and systems provided by UNRWA will
have an impact on the credibility of the United Nations
and its role in the nation.

Fifthly, Egypt rejects the use of the terrible situation
in Syria as an excuse for disregarding the ongoing Israeli
occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan. We demand
that Israel withdraw from the Golan and implement
United Nations resolutions, especially resolution 497
(1981). We stress the need for the Council to be briefed
on that issue in order to achieve a necessary settlement
of that issue.

Sixthly, we welcome the agreement for the
destruction and elimination of Syrian chemical weapons
pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013). We believe that this
new measure will enable us to destroy weapons of mass
destruction in the region and that it complements others
that have been adopted but not fully implemented,
such as resolution 687 (1991), whose implementation
was limited to the destruction of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq, despite the fact that the resolution
was supposedly designed to eliminate weapons of mass
destruction throughout the region.

Egypt takes this opportunity to remind members
of the proposal made by my Minister of Foreign
Affairs within the framework of the general debate at
the General Assembly this year (see A/68/PV.18) on
the need to turn the Middle East into a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction, and to convene in 2014
the conference that was planned for 2012. We invite
the permanent members of the Council to assume their
responsibilities and to invite all States of the region to
provide the necessary guarantees before the end of the
year.

The Palestinian issue is and remains the main reason
for instability in the Middle East; an instability that
threatens peace and stability, especially international
peace and stability. Egypt will continue to demand
that the Security Council assume its responsibilities
and address the Palestinian issue in the appropriate
manner. We also insist on the need to put an end to
illegal Israeli settlement activities in order to achieve
a definitive solution, and to implement past resolutions
on creating in the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction, which are the real threat to peace
and stability throughout the world.
