Mr. Jacob (Israel): I apologize for responding at
this late hour, but I am compelled to respond to some
of the points raised by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

Israeli actions in Jenin and elsewhere were
undertaken reluctantly and in self-defence against an
unrelenting campaign of Violence and terrorism incited,
supported and financed by the Palestinian Authority.
They were taken only after the Palestinian Authority
was given ample opportunity to fulfil its commitment
and after we had exercised utmost restraint in the face
of a wave of suicide-bombing massacres. We have not
endeavoured to harm the Palestinian people. Rather, we
have only tried to uproot the infrastructure of terror.

We deeply regret the death of any civilians,
whether Israeli or Palestinian, but we maintain that
primary responsibility for their deaths lies with the
terrorists, who have taken up residence in civilian areas
and refugee camps, in violation of international law
and Security Council resolutions and in callous
disregard for those whom they endangered.

We share the concern of the international
community about the humanitarian situation, but, in
our view, dead Israelis are also a humanitarian
problem. If anyone is guilty of war crimes and
terrorism, it is those elements of the Palestinian
leadership that have provided the funding and the
political and ideological support for terrorism. What
motivates an 18-year-old girl to blow herself up in a
supermarket? How long can the Council ignore the
continual incitement by the Palestinian media, the
education of hatred in Palestinian schools and
textbooks, the repugnant embrace of death and suicide,
the glorification of suicide bombers and the
legitimization of terrorism by political and spiritual
leaders?

For how long can we blame only the occupation?
Occupation was not the problem between 1948 and
1967, and the Palestinians did not then establish a
State. It was not a problem at Camp David, and still
peace was rejected. The Palestinian side may have
issued a condemnation of terrorism to placate Western
Governments. But their actions speak louder than their
words. Still, the Palestinian side chooses to place the
full blame for the current crisis, not to mention the
entire conflict, squarely on the shoulders of Israel, as if
54 years of rejecting Israel's very right to exist and
fomenting hatred of Jews has nothing to do with the
continuation of the violence and unrest in the region. In
the Palestinian view, it is Israel alone that is
responsible and Israel alone that had failed to take the
necessary steps for peace.

But the Council has told us otherwise. The
Palestinians, too, have responsibilities - even if they
exhibit no intention whatsoever of abiding by them.
Yesterday, Ambassador Al-Kidwa informed the
Council that the Palestinians would do nothing - there
would be no negotiations and no action to combat
terror - until Israel fully withdraws. His statement is a
clear defiance of resolution 1402 (2002), which also
calls for a meaningful ceasefire and an end to terrorism
and incitement and cooperation with General Zinni as
reciprocal steps, which the Palestinian leadership
refuses to take. Such assertions are typical and enable
the Palestinian leadership to continue to perpetuate the
fiction that a succession of Israeli leaders are solely to
blame for the situation.

Today, it is Sharon for his refusal to make
concessions to terrorism. Before him, it was Barak,
who offered the Palestinians statehood in virtually all
the West Bank, shared sovereignty in Jerusalem and a
solution to the refugee problem, and was rewarded with
terror. Before him came Netanyahu and before him
Peres, both of whom were rewarded with Palestinian
terror. And before them was Yitzhak Rabin. He, too,
was a problem and an obstacle to peace in the region.
Indeed, every Israeli leader has been an obstacle to

peace.

Apparently, the only regional leader who has not
been an obstacle to peace is the great liberal democrat

Yasser Arafat.

