Ms. Krasa (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to deliver short additional remarks
in its national capacity. We thank the presidency
for focusing the Council's attention on countering
terrorist narratives and welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/20l6/6, adopted today by the Security Council,
as well as its valuable and practical focus.

Countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism is a crucial aspect of our overall counter-
terrorism efforts. More than ever before, the
sad proliferation of terrorist attacks - with this
past week having no shortage of such deplorable
acts - has become a constant reminder that terrorist
organizations are successful in widely inciting and
recruiting new fighters. Faced with this reality, we
have come to recognize the need to counter-terrorism
in a comprehensive manner. It is clear that the holistic
approach required is both thematic and institutional.
This precept maintains that no issue can be tackled in
isolation or by individual actors working disparately.

We are certain that today's discussion will garner
further momentum for the General Assembly's
upcoming lO-year anniversary review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in the
context ofwhich we also remain engaged in considering
the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
presented by the Secretary-General (A/70/674), which
we have welcomed. The Plan is of crucial relevance,
including when it comes to strategic communication and
building alternative narratives. We see today's initiative
and what is mandated through today's presidential
statement as complementary to such efforts.

In line with the necessary holistic approach,
our methodology for a globally devized solution to
countering terrorist narratives needs to follow the
principle of subsidiarity, empower action, and utilise
knowledge at the local level as much as possible.
In this vein, we fully agree with the emphasis in the
statement on the importance of enhancing coordination
and cooperation with the private sector, civil society,
religious leaders and institutions, and educational
and cultural institutions, as well as of the recognition
of the role that victims of terrorism, among other
legitimate voices, can play in countering radicalization
to violence. Through criminal justice, information
exchange, education and youth participation,
intercultural dialogue, employment and initiatives for
social inclusion, we can build up the resilience of our
societies to terrorist narratives.

Today's debate showcases our unwavering
determination to stand united, based on our shared
values and goals, in countering the narratives of
terrorism, in what is undoubtedly a long way ahead.
Such unity remains the only recipe for success.

