Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): At the outset, Slovakia
aligns itself with the statement presented earlier on
behalf of the European Union. I would also like to
thank the French presidency for taking the initiative in
organizing this important debate.

Before I narrow my statement to focus on the
Victims of attacks and abuses on religious and ethnic
grounds in the region of the Middle East, I would like
to point out the following reasons for the brutality
of the radical groups Daesh and Boko Haram. The
victims of those attacks were disgracefully killed by
individuals 4 it is very difficult to call them human
beings - motivated by pure hatred. The victims were
abused and tortured, and they suffered in a way that
none of us here is probably able to imagine.

Terrorism and extremism are often linked with
religion, but that is wrong; it is a mistake. There may
be other links to a combination of many elements,
like globalization, migration and social problems,
lack of education, desperation or the lack of decent
perspectives for one's life. Slovakia rejects all racial
or religious intolerance, radicalism and extremism, as
well as the linking of terrorism to religion. Hostilities
targeting civilians - members of different religious
communities and minorities - are a serious offense
against basic human rights. Nor should we speak about
the clash of civilizations. It is a clash of humanity
versus brutality, which is often based on personal or
group destructive hatred against society, other groups
or individuals.

The Middle East region, religion and ethnicity are
the subjects of today's debate, and not incidentally. The
region has given birth to some of the most important
world religions. That unique diversity faces an
existential threat from the so-called Islamic State and
from Al-Qaida and affiliated terrorist groups, which
disrupt the lives of all the communities in the region.
Millions ofpeople have been either displaced or forced
to leave their ancestral lands. Those who stay in conflict
zones or areas controlled by terrorist groups live under
the permanent threat of human-rights violations,
repression and abuses. Terrorist groups target anyone
and everyone. There is no escape from their hatred.
Muslims, Christians, Jews, Yazidis, the elderly, men,
women, children 4 terror knows no difference there
and no boundaries. Unfortunately, so far, the terrorists
know only one thing; there is almost complete impunity
for the crimes they have already committed.

Religious and ethnic fanaticism is a danger
that may exist in any religion or belief. Slovakia is
of the opinion that it is the duty of the international
community, Governments, religious institutions and all
relevant stakeholders to speak out promptly, clearly and
loudly against any acts of violence committed in the
name of religion. We must take all necessary actions
in order to combat extremism and incitement to hatred
more effectively.

Terrorism represents one of the gravest threats not
only to the Middle East but also to us in Europe and the
whole world. In the fight against terrorism, the world
stands on the same side and only joint efforts will lead
to the desired results. The international community
has a duty to assist in building the capacity of States
to fulfil their commitments to the responsibility to
protect their populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The
international community should hold States and
non-State armed groups to account and make them
aware of the existing tools and instruments under
international law, including punitive ones, that must

be used to protect human rights. The community must
apply humanitarian, criminal and refugee law.

Slovakia is ready to support any action in that
regard. Once again, I call upon the international
community to take action immediately, because, as
we speak, victims of abuse continue to suffer. Hatred,
fuelled by desperation and false interpretations of
religious beliefs, can be easily implemented against a
tortured soul, especially of a child. Any hesitation to
take an active step increases numbers ofthose who may
be misled by some who intentionally rupture ideals of
good faith and seed hatred among people.

To conclude, it is the rich unprecedented Middle
East history which has brought Muslims, Christians
and Jews to live in the same cities. Diversity is the
fortune of the region and we must not let it become the
reason of its decline.

