Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania voted in favour
of resolution 1574 (2004), which was just adopted
unanimously at this extraordinary meeting of the
Security Council in Nairobi. The resolution conforms
to the policies and views that the Council has adhered
to with regard to the question of the Sudan, including
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004), both of
which Romania co-sponsored. It also includes a
balanced approach and a convincing message. Most
important, resolution 1574 (2004) adequately reflects
the very aim of our presence in the capital of the great
country of Kenya, namely, to encourage all parties
concerned to expeditiously conclude a comprehensive
peace agreement in the context of the Naivasha talks
and to proceed promptly to its implementation.

Some time ago, we witnessed the signing of the
memorandum of understanding binding the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese People's
Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM) to work together
in that direction. That agreement is included in the
resolution, with the memorandum of understanding
being annexed to the Council's text. We have also
endorsed the decision that the six protocols already
agreed form the core of a future comprehensive peace
agreement.

This is no small undertaking. I suppose we could
say that with the adoption of this important resolution,
we are committed in a very special way - as the
Security Council and, indeed, as the international
community - to the finalization of the north-south
peace process in the Sudan. We are similarly
committed to the overall stabilization of the Sudan and
to utilizing the window of opportunity that is opening
up for this important and resourceful African country
after decades of internal strife.

We are joined in that reciprocal commitment by
all those who invested politically and diplomatically in
bringing the process to the current encouraging stage:
the United Nations and the Secretary-General, the
Special Representative for the Sudan, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union, neighbouring countries, the
European Union and many nations in Europe, the
Americas and Asia. Romania has played its part in that
collective effort. We have long-standing ties with the
Sudan and its people and therefore have a special stake
in securing the bright future that the country and its
people rightfully deserve. Foreign Minister Mircea
Geoana paid a momentous visit to the Sudan on 31 July
2004, during Romania's presidency of the Security
Council.

My delegation commends the vision and resolve
of the United States presidency of the Security Council
that has brought us here to Nairobi to illustrate that the
conclusion of the Naivasha talks is a key to overall
peace in a united Sudan. We were honoured to embark
upon this truly extraordinary event involving a series
of Council meetings in Nairobi. We all came here with
hope and determination, resolved to help bring about a
better future for the people of the Sudan. It was high
time for a process that was almost completed some
time ago to actually reach its intended end. It was also
high time to encourage the parties to close the door on
the decades-long conflict between them. That is, after
all, why the Council came here. We all felt this was an
opportunity that could not be passed by.

That vision and resolve have appeared to pay off.
We heard First Vice-President Taha and Mr. Garang
speak about the obstacles that must still be overcome
before a comprehensive peace agreement is signed
before the end of the year. But we also recall distinctly
that the two leaders considered those obstacles easy to
overcome. In their comments we also heard them
entertaining at some length the prospects for
implementing the comprehensive peace agreement
beginning in early next year. I have the distinct feeling
that we will now all embark seriously, meaningfully
and in good faith on a path that should bring about the
long-awaited dividends.
First, we look forward to the positive impact that
the prospect of the imminent conclusion of the
comprehensive peace agreement can be expected to
have with regard to achieving progress on Darfur. In
the first instance, the final stages of talks on the
comprehensive peace agreement should bring about
closer interaction with the Abuja process. We remain
highly concerned about the latest, worrying
developments in Darfur, and we have clearly stated this
in the resolution just adopted. The kind of human
suffering that is going on there should not be allowed
in the international context of the twenty-first century.
We support the work done so far by the International
Commission of Inquiry and look forward to receiving
its findings at the appropriate time.

Secondly, securing an agreement through the
Naivasha process will generate positive momentum for
peace, much-needed in a region torn by several
conflicts, many - if not all - of which are
interconnected. The conclusion of the comprehensive
peace agreement will also send a powerful message
that a new, enhanced matrix of cooperation in conflict
resolution, involving our world Organization,
regionally owned peacemaking and peacekeeping
forces and supportive action by regional organizations
from other continents, works well for Africa as well,
providing added value to the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. Romania is very
keen to take stock of such positive practices, as the
reform track on which the United Nations has
embarked includes a reflection on how to better use the
potential of regional organizations within global efforts
to safeguard peace and security.

Thirdly, once the comprehensive peace agreement
is in place, a United Nations peace operation could
promptly step in to assist in its implementation. I take
this opportunity to commend the valuable work already
undertaken in that regard by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the United Nations
Secretariat. We support the concept they have produced
and will continue to look into the best ways to tailor it
to the challenges of the moment.

Fourthly, securing the comprehensive peace
agreement and redressing the situation in the Darfur
region is also key for securing an assistance package
offered by bilateral and multilateral donors. This
features in resolution 1574 (2004). We welcome, in
particular, the readiness of the Norwegian Government
to organize an international donors conference for the
Sudan upon conclusion of the peace agreement. We
call on the entire donor community to assist the
Government and the people of the Sudan in their
efforts for the reconstruction of the country. We look
forward, in this context, to hearing from the
representative of the Netherlands, who will be
speaking on behalf of the European Union, which has
been instrumental in providing openings to the crisis in
the Sudan throughout the crisis.

The Council went to great lengths in taking a
series of rather unprecedented steps to foster a solution
to the protracted north-south conflict in the Sudan. I
am persuaded that we did the right thing and that it was
worth it. The parties must now address the major
challenges still lying ahead. The road will not be easy,
but there is now a map for the process, and the parties
are not alone. I also trust we will not be disappointed
in our expectations. While I would hesitate already to
call our experience in Nairobi historic, I truly hope this
qualification will impose itself, as we make progress in
chartering overall peace in the Sudan, starting from
Nairobi.

