Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Like all
of the members here, I too am very aware of the honour
done us today by the presence of President Mandela and
of the Secretary-General, and I welcome the very moving
and eloquent tribute that you paid, on behalf of the
Council, to President Mandela.

Our words are neither pro forma nor dictated simply
by the present situation. The conflict in Burundi was
unending; there was no hope in sight. But everything can
change, and in this case everything began to change with
the arrival of President Mandela, thanks to his prestige,
moral authority and dynamism, and above all to his noble
spirit and his tireless dedication to democracy and
national reconciliation - because national reconciliation
is indeed the key to resolving the situation in Burundi.

That is why we fully support the efforts being made
by Mr. Mandela along the lines of those made by
President Nyerere. We appreciate in particular President
Mandela's intention to have the armed groups involved in
the inter-Burundian peace talks, something that is indeed
essential. It is to be hoped that the inclusion in the
negotiations of all the Burundi parties will enable the
cessation of hostilities as quickly as possible. We also
welcome President Mandela's stated desire to go to

 

Burundi in order to ensure that all the people of Burundi
are kept well informed about the peace process.

Through the European Union, France is making its
contribution to the financing of the Arusha peace process,
and we are prepared to extend our assistance to the
negotiations.

We deplore the resumption in Burundi of violence and
the violations of human rights that go along with it. We
condemn the attacks by armed groups on civilians and on
the personnel of humanitarian organizations. We are
disturbed by the forced regroupment of civilians. We note
that in the Great Lakes region several countries have had,
and are having, recourse to the practice of forced
regroupment to cope with security problems. We deplore
that practice in all the countries of the region where it is
applied, and we call for it to be halted immediately.

We take note of the announcement by the Government
of Burundi that it will proceed to "gradually dismantle the
protection sites". We urge the Government to implement
that commitment and to ensure access to humanitarian
assistance in the meantime.

The resumption and continuation of the Arusha peace
process should be supported by the international community
in a very concrete way. The economic distress in the region
aggravates tension. The vicious cycle must be broken, and
therefore all assistance efforts must be mobilized to
facilitate economic reconstruction and democracy.

Finally, as everyone else who has spoken so far has
said, the Council must bear in mind the links that exist with
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has seriously affected the situation in Burundi.
Implementation of the Lusaka Agreement to resolve the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
essential to bring about the full recovery of Burundi. The
Arusha and Lusaka processes must mutually support each
other. It is difficult to conceive of a lasting peace if that
peace is not all-inclusive, does not take into account the
interactions that may exist among the various countries of
the region and does not lead, as the Ambassador of
Argentina has said, to the holding of an international peace
conference on the Great Lakes region.

