Mrs. Craft (United States of America): We thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller for their briefings and for the admirable
work their teams continue to do.

The United States welcomes the signing of the
Riyadh agreement between the Government of the
Republic of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council. Forming a new and inclusive Cabinet will help
create a Government that is more representative of the
Yemeni people. We encourage the parties to swiftly
implement the terms of the agreement. The return of
the Government of Yemen to its temporary capital in
Aden and the reintegration of forces in the south under
Government control are important steps on the path to
a broader political settlement. Saudi Arabia's laudable
work and the Yemeni parties have produced vital
progress. With the support of the Southern Transitional
Council, the Government of Yemen can now refocus
its attention on dialogue with the Houthis to end this
horrible conflict, which recent reports indicate has
claimed the lives ofmore than 100,000 women, children
and men since 2015.

We welcome Special Envoy Griffiths' announcement
today of progress that will enable fuel ships to enter
Al-Hudaydah. We are also heartened by the recent
progress made by the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement and Lieutenant General
Guha in establishing observation posts for monitoring
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We call on all parties to safeguard the Mission's
personnel as they carry out their duties. However, the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement should not impede broader
efforts towards a comprehensive political agreement.
As the parties engage in dialogue with the aim of
ending the conflict, the financial contributions of
Member States remain essential for addressing what
has become the world's worst humanitarian crisis. We
are pleased to hear that contributions this autumn to
the United Nations humanitarian response plan enabled
several critical humanitarian programmes to become
fully operational once again after facing closure owing
to funding shortfalls.

We are proud of our continued role as one of
the largest humanitarian contributors in Yemen,
especially because the programmes that the United
States funds through the United Nations and multiple
non-governmental organizations have a profound impact
on the lives of ordinary Yemenis. Two examples illustrate
this point. Recently, one of our implementing partners
treated more than 16,000 people for communicable
and non-communicable diseases. And in the second
instance, that humanitarian partner improved access
to safe drinking water for 24,000 people. It is those
kinds of faithful efforts that provide desperately needed
resources for thousands of vulnerable Yemenis. We are
increasingly concerned, however, about limitations on
humanitarian access in northern Yemen. In order to do
their vital work, humanitarian organizations must be
allowed to operate freely and independently in a manner
that reflects the principles of humanity, independence,
neutrality and impartiality. Recent developments in
Yemen are encouraging, and we hope that they will
lead to further de-escalation throughout the country.
That will of course aid Special Envoy Griffiths and his
team's efforts to invigorate the political process, but
even more importantly, it will begin to clear a path for
dignity to the return of the people of Yemen, a path that
we hope will widen in the coming weeks and months.

