Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I am sorry for requesting the floor once again.

Nothing justifies terrorism, which my country
categorically condemns, whatever the forms, reasons or
pretexts. That is our international legal position,
sanctioned by the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted by the United Nations in 2006. My country
took an active part in the adoption of the Strategy,
which we continue to support.

The ridiculous attempt by the representative of
Israel to conflate terrorism, which is a denounced
international practice, with the right of peoples under
foreign occupation to resist occupation does not
deceive anyone. Its only objective is to distract
everyone from Israel's State terrorism, which is well
known and well documented.

The United Nations, through an historic
resolution of the 1970s, declared that occupation was
the gravest form of aggression. We take that as a
starting point. The United Nations has documented
Israeli State terrorism since 1948. This terrorism
began, as everyone knows, in the form of terrorist acts
carried out by various gangs, such as the Irgun, Stern
and Haganah, whose goals were to kill messengers of
peace, including in particular Count Bernadotte, the
United Nations envoy. This was followed by the mass
killing of Palestinians to make them flee their land.
The massacres of Deir Yassin, Qibya, Kafr Qasem,
Jenin, Beit Hanoun and various others are well known
to everyone.

Next, this State terrorism took aim at
neighbouring countries: Qana 1, Qana 2, the Golan,
Tunis, the Sudan, Egypt and Jordan; finally, as we
know, it reached Dubai. Among all these acts, Israel
hijacked a civilian aircraft - a Syrian plane - for the
first time in 1954. Then, in 1971, it brought down a
civilian Libyan plane.

Conventional terrorism has recently been
transformed into nuclear terrorism.

Israel, as everyone knows, spies on its closest
allies, including the United States of America. A great
number of former Israeli officers work in the trade in
children's organs, as has been internationally
documented.

I recall that Israel has set up 600 military
checkpoints in the West Bank in a space that is no
bigger than 5,000 square kilometres - one can picture
Manhattan, for example, with 600 security
checkpoints. Moreover, the settlements number in the
hundreds, devouring swathes of territory, killing
inhabitants and driving out the Palestinians. There is
also the internationally condemned and criminal
blockade of Gaza and daily threats of war and
aggression.
The illegal arms trade conducted by Israel fuels
terrorism, as we know. According to international
reports, including a report on arms published in
Sweden, Israel is ranked fourth among States active in
the international arms trade. If that does not constitute
terrorism, and if strangling peace is not international
terrorism, then what is terrorism? The Security Council
must question and stop Israeli State terrorism and make
no exception for Israel or allow it to be above the law.

