Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) (interpretation from Russian):
At one of the previous meetings of the Security Council,
the delegation of Ukraine reserved the right to speak on
the substance of the question of United Nations sanctions
against Yugoslavia. Today we would like to exercise that
right, and we thank you, Mr. President, for making it
possible for us once again to address the members of the
Security Council and other delegations present here in this
Chamber.

Ukraine notes with satisfaction that the peace
process in the territory of the former Yugoslavia and, in
particular, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is gaining
momentum and is becoming more stable. Step by step,
against a background of extremely active diplomatic
efforts, the countries most closely concerned have found
a formula to reconcile the warring parties within
increasingly clear parameters. A truly diplomatic
breakthrough was reached with the meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
Geneva on 8 September last.

On 14 September major agreements were reached,
pursuant to which, in response to the withdrawal of heavy
weapons by the Bosnian Serbs to a distance of 20

 

kilometres from Sarajevo, the armies of the Bosnian
Government would cease hostilities within the exclusion
zone. The achievement of these agreements, in our view,
should establish a favourable background for continuing the
peace talks. An important element in these agreements is
the suspension of NATO air action, which will cease
following the implementation of their provisions by both
parties to the conflict.
The delegation of Ukraine hopes that this time the
efforts of the international community to settle the
Yugoslav conflict will lead to an end to war and to the
establishment of a lasting peace in the Balkans.

The issue under discussion today is very closely linked
to the prospects for a peaceful settlement in the region,
especially because it affects the interests of one of its main
participants. It is no secret to anyone that the position of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) with regard to
the conflict in the region and, in particular, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, is crucial. The reaction of the leadership of
the FRY to the dramatic events that have unfolded in the
Balkans have to a great extent determined and will continue
to determine the course of their development. On that basis,
Ukraine believes that the problem of lifting sanctions
against the FRY is an important and inalienable part of the
process of political settlement in the Balkans.

There is a self-evident truth to be found in the report
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
"Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" when he says that

"the purpose of sanctions is to modify the behaviour
of a party that is threatening international peace and
security and not to punish or otherwise exact
retribution." (S/1995/1, para. 66).

In the View of the delegation of Ukraine, the purpose of the
sanctions against the FRY has already been achieved.
Furthermore, the FRY, through its specific actions, has
shown its desire to help restore peace in the region. Thus,
the Government of the FRY has voluntarily closed the
border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
those parts of the territory of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina which are under the control of Bosnian Serb
forces, and has in good faith fulfilled the obligations it has
assumed. This is borne out by the conclusions of all 13
reports sent to date to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations by the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.
We should not forget the rather significant fact that
it was, in fact, the Government of the FRY that played a
positive role in freeing the peace-keepers during the so-
called hostage crisis at the beginning of this summer.

The seriousness of the intentions of the leadership of
the FRY to break the vicious circle of violence in the
region has been demonstrated by the restraint and balance
in the position of the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia during the latest dramatic events in the
Balkans connected with the military operations of the
Croatian armies.
In this context, the continuation of the regime of
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
further international isolation of that country can only
lead to the opposite result. One major outcome would be
compromising those measures of economic pressure as an
effective weapon for the international community to have
an impact on a State which is Violating international law.

Ukraine welcomes the provisions of the draft
resolution contained in document S/1995/789. We see in
this a recognition by the international community of the
seriousness of the intentions of the Government of the
FRY and its desire to cooperate for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict. Furthermore, the delegation of the Ukraine
believes that a continuation of the suspension of some of
the sanctions against the FRY by 180 days is not an
adequate step. In our View, at this stage, we could already
be talking about the complete lifting of the sanctions
referred to in resolutions 943 (1994), 970 (1995), 988
(1995) and 1003 (1995).

A first step in this direction could be to renewing
transit deliveries to the territory of the FRY of a list of
individual products, without receiving permission from the
committee on sanctions against Yugoslavia, together with
a lifting of the ban on trade with the FRY in products
which are not regarded as strategic. The list of products
deemed to be strategic could be shortened.

In this connection, the delegation of Ukraine
welcomes the provisions of paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution, which in our view make it possible for the
Security Council in the near future to consider the
problem raised by our delegation. We believe that such a
step on the part of the Security Council would call forth
a further positive reaction from the leadership of the
FRY, which has a great deal of influence on the course of
the peace process in the region - first and foremost, on
the policy of the Bosnian Serbs. At the same time,

 

Ukraine believes that the process for lifting sanctions
against the FRY should take place along with the process
of mutual recognition of those States which have come
about on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

Ukraine, which borders on the Balkan States, which
today is a contributor to the United Nations peace-keeping
troops in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, and which
has in good faith observed the sanctions regime maintained
by the United Nations against the FRY, suffering serious
economic harm, has been following with great attention and
hope developments in the Balkans. Ukraine has always
advocated the earliest possible solution to the Yugoslav
crisis on the basis of a formula of reconciliation acceptable
to all parties. We support in every way possible the peace-
keeping activities of the United Nations and of other
international organizations, and the mediation efforts of the
members of the international Contact Group and of
individual countries, all designed for a comprehensive
solution to the Yugoslav conflict.

Ukraine reaffirms its readiness to take part in the
process of a political settlement in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. Latest evidence of this is the invitation
by President Leonid Kuchma to the leaders of Serbia,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet in Kiev on a
whole series of problems related to a peace settlement.

The delegation of Ukraine expresses the hope that
under your skilful guidance, Sir, the Security Council will
be able to find the only genuine solution which will lead
the long-suffering peoples living on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia to peace.

