We welcome the participation in the discussion with the Security Council of the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell, and took note of his remarks. We completely concur with the task of strengthening multilateralism in international affairs promoted by our European Union (EU) partners. We are convinced that true multilateralism can succeed only with a central role for the United Nations and through clear support for the Charter of the United Nations and international law. We believe that there should be no ambiguity about that, and therefore make a clear distinction between international law and the so-called rules- based order promoted by many EU countries, which can be easily tweaked or even hijacked by a closed circle of like-minded States to serve their collective interests and not those of the international community as a whole. We hope that we are on the same page with our EU partners when we discuss multilateralism. The EU continues to be an important international actor that is very visible from political and economic perspectives alike. That implies huge responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Even after Brexit, the EU is well represented in the Security Council and has all the necessary tools and means to influence the international agenda. We continue to count on our European colleagues to address together the challenges of our times, from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to the peaceful resolution of various conflict situations in the world. We all expect the EU to be an unbiased player, ready to help and facilitate, and not to impose its agenda or conditions on those countries and regions that need its help. We hope that our European partners will adhere to such an approach, permitting us to work together in different country situations. The Russian Federation has always advocated for developing and improving cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in line with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. During our presidency of the Security Council in September 2019, we initiated a discussion on cooperation between the United Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (see S/PV.8626). Cooperation with them, as well as with the European Union and other regional organizations, should be balanced and based upon the United Nations Charter. One of the main priorities for such cooperation is collective response to transborder crimes, first and foremost in the sphere of counter-terrorism. Russia is ready to promote such cooperation. I would stress specifically the global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, which we are waging together, individually and in coordination with United Nations partners and structures, first and foremost the World Health Organization. That being said, we regret to see that the EU still applies multiple restrictive and coercive mechanisms. We repeatedly heard assurances from Brussels and other European capitals that those mechanisms were targeted and carefully calibrated. However, practice has proved the opposite: in reality, the application of such measures considerably undermines the socioeconomic situation in the affected developing countries, thus seriously reducing the living standards of innocent people. The relevant appeal of the Secretary-General, issued at the beginning of the pandemic, is a good signal to that end. We call on the EU to reverse its policies on sanctions, reach out to the population of the countries in question and refrain from punitive and coercive measures adopted beyond and outside the scope of the Security Council. The EU is expected to play a stabilizing role in the wider Europe, from the Balkans and the Mediterranean to its eastern periphery. To live up to those expectations, the EU should adhere to the principles of international law and refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of its neighbours. We regret to recall that it was the EU's Eastern Partnership programme that led to widened divides in Europe, triggered and detonated the so-called Maidan Revolution in Kyiv and led to ongoing civil conflict in Ukraine. We expect Brussels not to cheapen European values and principles when dealing with flagrant violations of the rights of the Russian- speaking population in Ukraine and some Member States, namely the Baltic States, who continue to face discrimination and abuses. We also urge the EU not to turn a blind eye to the rise of nationalism, far right and neo-Nazi movements in Ukraine, xenophobia and anti-Semitism. Today we heard appeals for dialogue from some EU members. But when it comes to frank dialogue and to taking our concerns on board, somehow that does not materialize. We took note of the EU decision to launch the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI with the declared aim of supporting the United Nations arms embargo on Libya. We expect the Operation to fully comply with international law, resolution 2292 (2016) and its operational zone covering the length of the Libyan coast. Any imbalance on such a delicate issue could undermine international efforts to establish dialogue between the opposing Libyan parties. Brussels should not be avoiding contact with any of the parties to the conflict either. We will have to take all those factors into account when the time comes in June to take a decision on extending the inspection regime on the high seas off Libya. In conclusion, I want to reiterate that we value positive examples of cooperation between Russia and the European Union at the United Nations. I am referring to the situation with the Iranian nuclear programme, the Middle East settlement, the fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia and the training of national security forces in the Central African Republic, to name a few. I would specifically highlight the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is currently facing tremendous challenges as a result of the totally irresponsible behaviour of certain actors. We need to be firm in defending what we have achieved. I want to stress once again that the Russian Federation stands ready for and would prefer to see full-fledged cooperation with the European Union. But that is possible only on an equitable basis, when all interests and concerns are mutually taken into account. We are ready for it and believe that the whole world would benefit from such cooperation.
