The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Her Excellency Miss M. Patricia Durrant,
Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United
Nations, for her service as President of the Security
Council for the month of July 2000. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Durrant for the great
diplomatic skill with which she conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in East Timor

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (S/2000/738)

The President: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Mission in East Timor, document
S/2000/738.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
resolutions and the statements of its President on
the situation in East Timor. It welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General of 26 July 2000
(S/2000/738) on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). It takes
note with warm appreciation of the progress made
by UNTAET and pays tribute to the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. The Council also welcomes the
significant progress made in building healthy
relations between East Timor and Indonesia. The
Council acknowledges in this regard the

cooperation shown by the Government of
Indonesia, UNTAET and the people of East
Timor.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
steps taken by UNTAET to strengthen the
involvement and direct participation of the East
Timorese people in the administration of their
territory, in particular the establishment on 14
July 2000 of the National Council and the
reorganization of UNTAET, with a View to
building capacity in the territory in the run-up to
independence. The Council invites the Secretary-
General to report at an early date, on the basis of
close consultations with the East Timorese, on the
process for adopting a constitution and holding
democratic elections.

"The Security Council notes that the
National Council of Timorese Resistance is
advocating the creation of a national security
force. In this regard, it welcomes work being
done on East Timor's future defence and security
needs and their practical and financial
implications. It urges the East Timorese people to
conduct a broad discussion on these issues. The
Council welcomes the humanitarian relief given
by UNTAET to the cantoned troops of the Armed
Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor
and encourages further assistance in this regard.

"The Security Council condemns the murder
on 24 July 2000 of a New Zealand soldier serving
with UNTAET and expresses its sympathy to the
Government and people of New Zealand and to
the family of the murdered peacekeeper. The
Council is determined to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel in East
Timor. In this regard, it requests the Secretary-
General to inform the Council as soon as possible
on the outcome of his investigation into the
incident. It welcomes the establishment on 31
July 2000 of a joint investigation between
UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia and
welcomes also the cooperation of the Government
of Indonesia to bring the perpetrators to justice.

"The Security Council expresses its
profound concern at the continuing presence of
large numbers of refugees from East Timor in
camps in West Timor, at the continuing presence
of militia in the camps and at their intimidation of

staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It
expresses particular concern that this intimidation
reached such a level that UNHCR were forced to
postpone indefinitely their important effort to
register refugees and determine whether they
wished to return to East Timor or to be resettled,
a task that should be completed as soon as
possible given the impending rainy season. The
Council calls for a more determined involvement
in this problem by the Government of Indonesia,
including implementation of their memorandum
of understanding with UNHCR of 14 October
1999 and of a recent security agreement
concluded between local authorities and UNHCR.
The Council calls on the Government of
Indonesia to take effective steps to restore law
and order, to establish conditions of security for
refugees and international humanitarian
personnel, to allow free access for such personnel
to the camps, to separate the former military
personnel, police and civil servants from the
refugees and to arrest those militia extremists
who are attempting to sabotage the resettlement
process.

"The Security Council acknowledges that
the Government of Indonesia has approached
these challenges with an attitude of cooperation,
manifested, inter alia, by the signing of such
important agreements with UNTAET as their
memorandum of understanding of 6 April 2000
on legal, judicial and human rights matters, and
their memorandum of understanding of 11 April
2000 on Tactical Coordination and the
establishment on 5 July 2000 of a Joint Border
Commission. The Council regrets, however, that
serious problems persist and looks forward to
these agreements being translated into concrete
progress on the ground. It also calls on the
Government of Indonesia to cooperate more
closely with UNTAET in the field to end cross-
border incursions from West Timor, to disarm and
disband the militias and to bring to justice those
militia members guilty of crimes.

"The Security Council takes note of the
Secretary-General's intention to reduce the size of
the UNTAET military component in the eastern
sector of East Timor to a battalion size force of
500 by the end of January 2001 in light of the
situation on the ground.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep it closely informed of
the situation in East Timor, including through a
military assessment of the security situation and
its implications for the structure of the military
the

component of UNTAET. It also requests the
Secretary-General to continue to report to it in
line with the requirements set out in its resolution
1272 (1999) of 25 October 1999. It requests the
Secretary-General to present to it, in his next
regular report, detailed plans on the transition to
independence for East Timor, which should be
drawn up in close consultation with the East
Timorese people.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.

