Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco and my
Ambassador, allow me to commend and thank you, Sir,
for taking the initiative to hold this important debate. I
also thank Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra, the Special
Representatives and the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General for their important contributions
to this debate.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Allow me to begin by warmly congratulating the
French presidency on placing peacekeeping at the core
of its monthly debate. Few days separate us from the
upcoming crucial session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, during which we hope to
have a substantive discussion on the ways to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping.

NAM. attaches great importance to the founding
principles of United Nations peacekeeping, namely,
consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
self-defence, and impartiality. The principles of
sovereign equality, the political independence and
territorial integrity of all States, and non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within their domestic
jurisdiction should also be maintained. The tenth
anniversary of the Brahimi report (8/2000/809)
provides us with an opportunity to celebrate and to
renew our commitment to these founding principles.

United Nations peacekeeping operations should
be provided from the outset with political support, full
and optimal human, financial and logistical resources,
and clearly defined and achievable mandates and exit
strategies. This means that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should not be used as a
substitute for addressing the root causes of conflict,
which should be dealt with in a coherent, well-planned,
coordinated and comprehensive manner, using other
2
political, social, economic and development
instruments.

I should like also to stress that transition
strategies are most effective when the relationship
between the host Government and the peacekeeping
mission is based on active cooperation. This entails
regular consultations and the setting up of coordination
mechanisms to allow for a dynamic communication
throughout the lifecycle of the peacekeeping mission.
Moreover, the success of a transition from a
peacekeeping environment to an exit phase necessitates
that due consideration be given by the United Nations
to the manner in which its overall efforts can be carried
out from the early stage of its engagement in post-
conflict situations and continue without interruption
after the departure of the peacekeeping operation, so as
to ensure a smooth transition to lasting peace and
security.

In this regard, the increasingly complex
environment in which United Nations peacekeeping
missions operate requires the building of an
anticipatory approach that would allow the components
of the mission - be they civilian, military,
humanitarian or other - to be prepared for unintended
consequences and to coordinate efficiently among
themselves. This, in turn, calls for an increased
integration of efforts and strategies to facilitate
coherence throughout the lifecycle of a peacekeeping
operation.

While it is important to debate exit strategies, the
closely related need for entry strategies must also be
stressed. This means that when the mandate of a
peacekeeping mission is being designed, adequate
means and resources should be made available. Equally
vital to an entry strategy is a pre-existing political
process supported by the parties concerned. A
peacekeeping mission cannot be deployed in an
environment where there is no peace to keep. The
Security Council is vested with the responsibility to
intensify efforts to revive faltering peace processes.

Exit is not usually an event but a process of
transition. An exit is facilitated by successful mandate
implementation and the ability to refine the mandate to
fit the circumstances on the ground as they evolve.
This requires a degree of flexibility and coordination
that is often difficult to achieve in a multidimensional
and complex peacekeeping operation.
10-23924

There is no single recipe for a successful exit, but
one can easily conceive that the success of a
peacekeeping mission depends on its capacity to
shoulder the implementation of early peacebuilding
activities, which deliver immediate peace dividends to
the population. However, these early activities should
be conceived of within broader peacebuilding efforts.
That would guarantee that the transition and
subsequent exit of a peacekeeping mission is seamless
and successful.

The transition from a volatile environment to a
secure post-conflict context in which security is
guaranteed and conflict management mechanisms are
in place must be managed with the full involvement
and ownership of the host Government. In this regard,
mission strategies must have the flexibility to adapt to
realities on the ground and should be geared to
securing and retaining the support of the national
authorities in carrying out their mandates.

Indeed, one area that needs further attention is the
process by which mandates are set and reviewed. The
mechanism for triangular cooperation among the
Secretariat, the Security Council and the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) can be improved in
order to ensure successful transitions by building on
the first-hand experience of TCCs in developing clear
and achievable mandates. Greater consultation and
cooperation between the Security Council and TCCs
can help address this issue, as stressed in the
presidential statement of 5 August 2009
(PRST/2009/24), and incorporate transition and exit
strategies into mandates.

A central challenge for effective peacekeeping is
to make full use of the synergies between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) stresses the importance of early
peacebuilding action. Early advice from and
engagement by the Peacebuilding Commission would
ensure early and consistent peacebuilding and a
sustained engagement beyond the life of the
peacekeeping mission. The Commission has a clear
comparative advantage as it engages national
Governments in defining their respective needs and
priorities, thus enhancing national ownership. The
Commission also adopts a tailored, country-specific
approach. Equally important is the flexibility of the
Peacebuilding Commission to reach out to international
financial institutions and other development actors
10-23924
within and beyond the United Nations actors, which
are vital partners for broader and longer-term efforts to
sustain peace.

Success factors for early peacebuilding activities
in a peacekeeping context include national ownership,
which remains essential. Peacebuilding is a national
challenge and responsibility. Moreover, the United
Nations needs to enter each new context with a specific
plan, coordinated with national authorities and other
actors. These plans need to be developed in stages and
through a participatory approach.

In determining its priorities and jumpstarting
early peacebuilding activities, the peacebuilding
component of a complex peacekeeping mission should
aim to achieve the earliest possible transfer of
responsibility to local and national authorities. The
international community should support and assist
sustainable development. This means that more
attention must be given to the peacebuilding and
development priorities that should accompany
peacekeeping.

Before closing, I should like to stress that
transition and exit strategies are but components of the
lifecycle of a peacekeeping operation. The conditions
for setting up new peacekeeping missions are equally
vital. The transition from one step to another needs to
be carefully planned, properly resourced and given the
necessary political support, without which the risk of
mission creep becomes high. Peacekeeping is a means
to an end. That end is sustainable peace and
development.

