Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I too
would like to join other Security Council colleagues in
welcoming to the Council Chamber today His
Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdzic', Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would also like to thank the High
Representative for his comprehensive, balanced and
sobering report on developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past six months (S/2010/235, annex, enclosure). The United Kingdom fully supports
and appreciates the High Representative's efforts to
uphold the Dayton Agreement and to facilitate the
reform process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The United Kingdom supports European Union
(EU) enlargement to all the countries of the Western
Balkans. EU integration is crucial to entrench stability
there. We are concerned that, while some countries in
the region have made significant progress over the past
year, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be held
back by political deadlock. We do not want to see
Bosnia and Herzegovina fall behind the rest of the
region.

Like the High Representative, the United
Kingdom welcomes recent positive steps on regional
cooperation in the Western Balkans. The Serbian
parliamentary resolution condemning the Srebrenica
massacre was a welcome step towards greater
reconciliation in the region. Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia
and Herzegovina have sought to improve their relations
through the Istanbul Declaration. We urge Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue to respond positively to such
initiatives. We look forward to the forthcoming high-
level Sarajevo meeting on advancing regional
cooperation.

We share the serious concern set out in the High
Representative's report about the internal political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past six
months. In particular, we regret the lack of political
will to deliver progress on key reforms and the
challenges to the Dayton Agreement and to the High
Representative's authority. The United Kingdom fully
supports all the decisions taken by the High
Representative during the reporting period. We are
concerned about plans for a referendum in the
Republika Srpska entity challenging the legitimacy of
the High Representative's decisions. All actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina need to be clear that the
international community, including the Security
Council, is fully committed to the country's territorial
integrity and to the framework established by the
Dayton Agreement.

The European Union has made clear that a
membership application from Bosnia and Herzegovina
cannot be considered while the Office of the High
Representative remains in place. It is therefore
essential that Bosnian leaders work constructively
together to deliver the remaining objectives and
conditions, which remain necessary for the transition
of the Office of the High Representative to take place.

Furthermore, the European Union has been clear
that constitutional reform is required in order to create
a functional State. Central Government in Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to be effective enough to meet the
responsibilities of EU and NATO membership. The
European Court of Human Rights ruling on minority
rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina underlines that wider
need for constitutional reform. Progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on delivering the necessary reforms for
European visa liberalization demonstrates what can be
achieved when the political will exists.

The High Representative's report highlights the
economic difficulties faced by Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is important, therefore, that the
relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina meet
their obligations under agreements with international
financial institutions, particularly the International
Monetary Fund. This requires the necessary legislation
not only to be enacted, but also promptly and
efficiently to be implemented.

The United Kingdom welcomes the decision
taken by NATO foreign ministers to conditionally offer
Bosnia and Herzegovina a Membership Action Plan.
This is a strong signal of NATO's commitment to
stability and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnian leaders now need to focus urgently on
delivering the one final condition by resolving the
issue of defence property. Unless this issue is resolved,
the recent positive decision on the Membership Action
Plan cannot be progressed further.

We agree with the High Representative's
assessment of the ongoing importance of the role
played by the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in underpinning stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for its contribution to
the work of the Security Council so far this year. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with that
country for the remainder of its time on the Security
Council.

