Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of India, Germany and South Africa
for their reports on the work of the Committees under
their leadership.

Russia considers the future stepping up of efforts
under the Committees as a precondition to enhancing
the effectiveness of the Security Council's contribution
to countering global terrorism, which remains one of
the main threats to international peace and security. We
will continue our active and dynamic work with those
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. Among the
activities of the Committees in the period following the
May briefing in the Council (see S/PV.6536), we note
the following.

The high note of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) was the first-ever
holding, on 28 September, of an open special meeting
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) and the CTC's establishment.
During the event, on the basis of careful and
transparent analysis of the Committee's 10 years of
activity, its important role in and the significance of
establishing a counter-terrorism substrategy within the
United Nations, under its aegis, was acknowledged.
The relevance of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001), including those on counter-terrorism, was also
recognized. We stand ready to support that high-profile
body and the resolution.

In preparation for that event, the Committee
prepared and presented to the Council, together with
the outcome document of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, an updated global survey on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) (see S/2011/463, annex). Russia actively participated in the
drafting of that document. The report objectively
reflects the ongoing work on terrorism, achievements
and gaps in implementing the resolution, and the
defined modalities for future efforts of the CTC and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) for positive cooperation with Member States
on future implementation and the elimination of
identified shortcomings.

The Committee continued its efforts to encourage
States to more actively implement resolution 1624
(2005) on the basis of the CTC plan of action initiated
by the Russian Federation. On the basis of the plan, we
stand ready to identify priorities for the CTC, such as
combating the ideologies of terrorism, preventing the
radicalization of societies and fighting violent
extremism, terrorist organization recruitment,
incitement to terrorist acts and the use of media and the
Internet by terrorists.

In line with the plan, the Committee will conduct
a series of regional seminars on resolution 1624
(2005), the first of which, for African States, will take
place at the end of November in Nairobi. By the end of
the year, the CTC will also prepare a global review of
the implementation of the resolution to define the
status of the situation with regard to priorities. We
attach great importance to that work.

We note the effective expert support provided to
the CTC by CTED. We believe that the work of the
Directorate on assessing terrorist threats and the risks
associated with weapons of mass destruction, in
particular man-portable air-defence systems from
Libya, is in line with the Russian-initiated resolution
2017 (2011).

With respect to the sanctions regime implemented
under resolution 1267 (1999), the Russian Federation
hopes that the resolution's modification in June will
serve to push the Government of Afghanistan to carry
out a strategy of national reconciliation and provide
additional impetus to achieving internationally agreed
upon objectives for reaching a settlement in that
country. The Committee must continue to be one of the
key mechanisms of the Council in counter-terrorism.

We continue to be convinced that, making a clear
distinction between enablers of Al-Qaida and the pure
Taliban is very difficult. That is the reason for the
existence of duplicate listings on the two sanctions

lists, which were unavoidable for objective reasons. We
also believe that the adoption of sanctions with respect
to individuals or organizations participating in terrorist
activities must continue to be done on a case-by-case
basis and in line with relevant procedures. We believe
that the expanded prerogatives of the Ombudsperson in
de-listing under the assigned Security Council mandate
and the new procedures for processing de-listing
requests seem, at the present stage, exhaustive and
reflect optimal levels of transparency in the work of
the Committee, which should be commensurate with
the threats emanating from Al-Qaida, which, as
experience has shown, continue to be significant.

It is well known that in the final analysis the
effectiveness of sanctions in countering terrorism
depends on the implementation by States of their
international obligations in this area. Unfortunately, we
must note that there are significant problems in that
regard. For instance, the July sanctions list included
the terrorist organization Imarat Kavkaz, whose
mouthpiece is their website, Kavkazcenter.com, which
is hosted by an internet provider in Stockholm. In
accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 1989 (2011),
that provider should be subject to financial sanctions to
hamper its activities as a provider of internet hosting
services. To date, the Swedish authorities have not
been able to implement the Council's decision in that
regard. The website continues to disseminate terrorist
propaganda and religious animosity, which is most
regrettable.

We value the work of the 1540 Committee and its
Group of Experts during the reporting period. We
welcome the intention of Ambassador Sangqu to make
the Committee's action more consistent and well
planned. The Committee has continued its assigned
activities to implement its mandate in all areas,
including taking into account the new objectives of
resolution 1977 (2011).

It is important to note that after difficult
negotiations an outcome document was adopted that
reflects the Committee's and the international
community's successes in fulfilling the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004) over the past three years. We
believe that resolution 1540 (2004) is a key
international legal instrument in the effort to stem
terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), their means of delivery and related materials.
The objectives of the resolution guide States in
strengthening national monitoring systems in
non-proliferation by adopting measures to prevent the
illegal production, trafficking and transfer of WMDs
and their means of delivery by ensuring accountability
and the safety and security of dual-use goods through
export control and border exchanges.

Resolution 1977 (2011) strengthened the leading
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in
coordinating multilateral efforts in that regard, spurring
the scaling up of such efforts. We believe it is
important that the Committee continue to give priority
to assisting States in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) by coordinating international endeavours to
those ends.

For our part, we stand ready to support
assistance, particularly in the context of our
cooperation on issues related to resolution 1540
(2004), for Member States that are part of the
Commonwealth of Independent States.

