Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the mediation and settlement of disputes. It
is an important follow-up to the high-level meeting on
mediation and settlement of disputes in September last
year (see S/PV.5979) during the presidency of Burkina
Faso, which reaffirmed the role of the United Nations
in mediation efforts. Therefore I wish to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Pascoe, for presenting the Secretary-General's
report on enhancing mediation and its support
activities.

We commend the United Nations for the role it
has played over the years in helping to mediate inter-
and intra-State conflicts around the world. We have
noted from the report the challenges that confront the
United Nations and its partners in providing effective
mediation assistance to parties in the various conflicts.

Uganda considers mediation to be an important
aspect of dispute settlement efforts, one that can and
should be used at different phases of the conflict. We
see mediation as a broad process that supplements
other processes of conflict management. But its
effectiveness in dispute settlement requires an
understanding of how mediation works, the factors that
influence it and how best to utilize it.

It is regrettable that, despite its proven value in
the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, mediation has continued to receive
remarkably little attention or support. We have heard
that the ability of the United Nations to carry out
mediation has been severely hampered by the lack of
adequate, dedicated human and financial resources.
The Secretary-General's report puts it very clear,
saying that

"efforts have been concentrated on the more
costly tasks of dealing with the shattered
remnants of devastated lives, communities and
institutions of State, while the daunting challenge
of reconstruction has absorbed resources that
could have gone into early dispute resolution"
(S/2009/189, para. 8).

It is therefore imperative that mediation efforts be
properly resourced. Early mediation in a preventive
context can, if successful, obviate the need for
peacekeeping missions. More effective mediation at the
peacekeeping stage could result in peace agreements
that are more implementable. Robust mediation
capacity during implementation could lead to more
rapid and efficient consolidation of peace.

Despite the remarkable efforts by the United
Nations in mediation, as the Secretary-General rightly
states in his report, the United Nations does not have a
monopoly on mediation. Regional and subregional
arrangements have played an important role over the
years, as we have seen in Africa in particular. We
welcome the efforts by the Secretary-General in
working more closely with regional and subregional
partners. We are convinced that a regional approach in
which the challenges are dealt with in a focused and
more coordinated way, such as in the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, concerning
Burundi, is very useful.

Experience has shown that for mediation to
succeed it must be guided by a knowledgeable lead
actor. There is no doubt that there should be careful
consideration in identifying a suitable lead player in
any mediation effort. The complexity of conflicts
requires that mediators have a thorough understanding
of local history, politics, cultures and personalities
before assuming any substantive role. Furthermore,
they should have the perseverance to work with the
parties and the patience to refrain from rushing the
process. An important lesson from recent mediation
experiences is that at critical points it is necessary to
have a mediator who can deal with the main
protagonists at the top, to minimize the influence of
entrenched and hard-line interests.

Furthermore, every effort should be made to
avoid duplication of mediation efforts. Multiple
leadership leads to fragmented responses, reinforcing
fragmentation in the conflict, and complicates
resolution of any dispute.

Mediators require support teams. We welcome the
establishment of a Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs to support the
mediation efforts of relevant United Nations
departments and of the Organization's partners, such as
regional and subregional organizations, as well as of
Member States. We support the role of the Mediation
Support Unit and call for a more sustainable funding
arrangement to support its activities. We are convinced
that this Unit will further enhance the partnership
arrangements envisaged between the United Nations
and regional organizations.

Early warning mechanisms are crucial in the
prevention of conflict and mediation. However, the
challenge is how to transform the information obtained
into a viable response that, by facilitating mediation,
can prevent escalation. An effective early warning
network should be linked at the national, regional and
global levels. This is where the resource-mobilization
capacity of the United Nations is key in facilitating the
establishment of an early warning system that provides
vital input for mediation and early action mechanisms.

Finally, if properly utilized, mediation can do
more than merely achieve a settlement of the conflict;
it can also facilitate in the long run the full
transformation of relations between and within States.
In that regard the Security Council has an important
role to play in support of mediation efforts. It is
therefore our expectation that this debate will generate
greater international support for the Secretary-
General's efforts in mediation. We also thank the
delegation of Burkina Faso for the draft presidential
statement, which we fully support.

