First of all, let me express my gratitude to France for the invitation to today's open debate of the Security Council and to commend it for the placing this very timely and critical issue on the agenda during its presidency this month. I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their very informative addresses. Let me thank the organizers of today's open debate for the opportunity to speak on the important topic of children and armed conflict. Fifteen years ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1612 (2005), which established the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism to provide timely and reliable information on the recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation of applicable international law and on other violations and abuses committed against children affected by armed conflict. By adopting that important resolution, the Security Council made important progress towards ensuring that children caught in armed conflict are protected from violence and related threats to their security and well-being. Today the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict play a vital and positive role in ending and preventing violations against children in situations of armed conflict. We strongly believe that the Security Council should continue to be actively engaged on issues related to children and armed conflict and to promote all possible measures fostering the protection of children affected by armed conflict. The armed conflicts in different regions today increasingly cause pain and concern among the international community. In the unstable situations in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Libya, Gaza, Africa and Afghanistan, armed conflicts and terrorist attacks claim the lives of children every day. The advent and rapid spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on a global scale has had a severe impact on the protection of children in conflict-affected States. We note with deep concern the continued spread of the coronavirus pandemic in all regions of the world, which poses a great threat to children's health and safety. It is obvious that children in conflict-affected States pay the highest price in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. Continuing armed conflicts and the COVID-19 pandemic around the world highlight the need for timely and effective measures to protect children. Unfortunately, according to the Secretary-General's annual report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525), education continues to be under attack in conflict situations. Millions of children in armed conflict lack access to education owing to attacks on schools. Education, as one of the critical needs of children affected by armed conflict and a vital element of reintegration programming for children formerly associated with armed forces or groups and their communities, must be prioritized by all United Nations Member States. It is obvious that all States need to take steps to achieve the full realization of the right to education for all children and to take all feasible measures to protect schools from attack. In that regard, we fully supported and became a co-sponsor of General Assembly resolution 74/275, on the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. We strongly condemn all acts of violence against children. In that regard, Kyrgyzstan fully supports all initiatives of the international community to resolve conflicts and protect children. We ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict in 2003 and are considering adhering to other international documents highlighting the importance of child protection. Kyrgyzstan strongly supports the efforts of all Member States, United Nations entities and other donors to support national institutions, United Nations agencies and civil society organizations working to implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism and other related child-protection activities. In that context, Kyrgyzstan is interested in active cooperation with the United Nations and all international partners in order to fulfil the requirements of all Security Council resolutions related to children and armed conflict.
