Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative Kobler and Ambassador Skoog
for their comprehensive briefings. It is disappointing
that no substantive progress has been reached in Libya
since our last meeting in February (see S/PV.7879).
Despite many efforts, the situation has become even
more unpredictable, and there is a visible danger that
the situation in Libya, on all fronts, could deteriorate
even further. However, we continue to believe there are
ways to prevent that. How can we achieve that?

First, we still believe firmly that the political
deadlock in Libya must be resolved through compromise
and finding a consensus solution. It requires getting
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord, the House of Representatives and other Libyan
actors engaged around a process that addresses the core
issues that are obstacles to the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement. We consider the political
dialogue to be a good platform for a genuine discussion
of this kind. In that regard, the main task of the United
Nations should be to make sure that it talks to all parties
and that the parties talk to each other as well.

The second and no less important point is ensuring
the responsible engagement by those external actors
capable of exercising influence to encourage the parties
to sit around the negotiating table. It cannot be achieved
by creating alliances of convenience but must be done
by working in good faith based on an inclusive transition
process. It is important to ensure the coherence of all
efforts in a Libya-led process under the auspices of the
United Nations.

Turning to security-related issues, my delegation
strongly condemns the escalation of fighting in Sebha,
the oil crescent, Jofra and other areas. The situation
in Libya can have no military solution. We call on the
parties to cease hostilities and join the negotiation
process. Any delay in doing so will only result in

greater suffering for the Libyan people. It is also worth
noting that the volatile environment creates a fertile
ground for the spread of terrorist activities. As we
have learned from the latest Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/283), after the liberation of Sirte, many fighters
ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant moved to the
south, and some ofthem have formed sleeper cells. That
underscores the urgency of establishing coordinated
security policies on the ground and setting up unified
security structures.

We believe that Libya can overcome its current
threats if it returns to the path of development.
Development requires good partners. We welcome the
fact that the Secretary-General is committed to engage.

In that regard, we look forward to the results of
a system-wide strategic assessment review that will
examine the role and shape the priorities for the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in both the short-
term and the long-term.

