Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting, although normally at
this time of year we look forward to a more in-depth
exchange. And, while welcoming all the bemedalled
gentlemen and officers sitting in this Chamber, I would
like to have seen a more interactive format. But
perhaps that can be done at some other time. The
initiative to get views of the force commanders on
peacekeeping themes is commendable. I will briefly
touch on the concepts discussed in today's meeting.

At the outset, I would like to mention that I
endorse a lot of what my colleague from India closed
his speech with.

As a leading troop contributor with vital stakes in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Pakistan has
been supportive of peacekeeping missions with
complex and challenging mandates. That is evident
from our record in the Security Council. Council
resolutions 1509 (2003) and 1565 (2004), which
authorized strengthened missions in Liberia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo respectively, were
supported by Pakistan during its term in the Council in
2003 and 2004. Pakistani troops have also participated
in those very challenging Missions.

But I feel that not enough has been said or
attention paid in the Council. We should have taken the
Council as the absolutely correct forum to discuss the
concept of robust peacekeeping. I have heard the
discussion by force commanders on this issue, and I
would beg to disagree with some of what has been
said. I believe that it is here in this Chamber that we
must make the decisions. While we must listen to them,
we must also encourage them to act more boldly and to
seek to meet the wishes of the Council in a more
decisive manner.

The complex mandates often ascribed as robust
peacekeeping are conceived, drafted and adopted here.
It becomes the responsibility of the Council to ensure
that existing peacekeeping architecture provides for
sufficient troop strength, trained and well-equipped
personnel, force enablers and multipliers, rapid
deployment, tactical and strategic reserve capacities
and logistic backups to sustain the challenges of what
we call robust peacekeeping. Needless to say, sufficient
finances should also be kept in mind as an enabler.
Equally important is applying robust peacekeeping
with reference to a particular conflict zone and not
treating the concept with the broad brush of political
generalizations. Robustness of the required extent is
present in all the missions. Beyond this, generalizing
the concept of robust peacekeeping can risk
overloading the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture.

It is evident that success in complex missions
with robust mandates requires a comprehensive

approach that ranges from conflict prevention to
conflict management to preventing relapse. Protection
of civilians and support to humanitarian assistance are
the cardinal objectives, which cannot be accomplished
without ownership by the host entity. Engagement of
the host Government and local political actors,
however instable and rudimentary they may be, is
therefore essential. Emphasis on security sector reform,
together with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and peacebuilding strategies, will only
cushion the physical challenge inherent in the
protection of civilians and support to humanitarian
assistance. In the context of a comprehensive approach,
engagement of strong regional actors can only be
described as propitious. The African Union's
participation in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the African Union
Mission in Somalia is invaluable in both political and
military terms. We welcome replicating that template
in other missions.

United Nations peacekeeping has graduated from
its traditional form to multifaceted missions with
complex mandates. This evolution is part of the
discourse on peacekeeping reform. Just like the
peacekeeping missions, such discourse must remain
depoliticized. We hope that today's meeting will steer
our collective deliberations on the challenges of
modern day peacekeeping towards professional and
pragmatic realms.

