Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Ijoin other delegations in
thanking the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
other ministers for their presence in the Security
Council this morning. The high-level representation of
many delegations on the Council this morning reflected
the great importance of the theme we are here to
discuss. I thank the Austrian delegation for the concept
paper prepared for this debate (see S/2009/567). I also
thank the Secretary-General; Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their informative briefings.

Giving peacekeeping missions appropriate
protection mandates is important from both a moral
and a pragmatic viewpoint. The United Nations simply
cannot stand by as atrocities are committed against
innocents. The greatest crises of legitimacy in the
history of peacekeeping have arisen when the
Organization has failed to protect civilians in their hour
of direst need. Moreover, a mission's success depends
to a large extent on its ability to earn the trust of the
local population. This will not be achieved if the
Organization is perceived as either unwilling or
unprepared to stop atrocities against civilians.

In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), we have succeeded in building a
consensus around the central aspects of the protection
of civilians. No one disputes the primary role and
responsibility of national Governments in protecting
their own civilians. At the same time, we recognize the
multifaceted role the United Nations may be called
upon to play in helping to protect non-combatants in
accordance with international law and the Charter. The
considerable normative guidance we have already
developed in this area must now be further translated
into concrete improvements in the protection of
civilians on the ground, as indicated by the Secretary-
General in his May report (S/2009/277).

The independent study commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs seeks to
address many of the current gaps in implementation.
My delegation considers that it contains several ideas
and recommendations worth discussing in depth. Today
I wish to focus on one specific issue of particular
relevance, namely, mandate-setting.

Mandates must be clear enough so that
peacekeepers on the ground, especially commanders,
understand precisely what is expected of them, without
hampering the autonomy that leaders in the field
require to do their jobs properly. When it comes to the
protection of civilians, assigning vague tasks leads
either to underperformance and the loss of lives that
could have been saved or to excessive ambition and
inevitable disappointment.

Mandates must also be realistic. This requires the
Council to make often difficult choices and decide
what is feasible and what is not, especially from the
military and political viewpoints. It must also bear in
mind the question of resources, without prejudice to
the functions and powers of the General Assembly. In
this regard, two opposite and grave errors must be
avoided. The first is setting protection mandates the
fulfilment of which would require human, logistic and
financial resources unlikely to be made available to the
Organization. The second is to place budgetary
considerations above moral and political imperatives.

There must also be coherence and solidarity. On
the one hand, Member States that set mandates in the
Council must be ready to face the financial
consequences of their decisions in the General
Assembly; on the other, all Member States must
cooperate in the Assembly to secure the means that will
allow the Council to properly discharge its
responsibilities under the Charter.

Clear and realistic mandates are important to
managing expectations. We must be frank and
recognize that the United Nations cannot protect all
people from every danger all the time. To suggest that
it can, through the adoption of overambitious and
imprecise mandates, is a recipe for disorientation
among Blue Helmets, deep disappointment among
victims and damaging criticism for the Organization.

Protection mandates must also address the
particularities of the situation in question. The nature
and the gravity of the challenges to protecting civilians
vary greatly from one mission to the other. The tools to
use and the manner in which they are handled must be
considered carefully in each case. One-size-fits-all
approaches must certainly be avoided.

The protection of civilians must be seen as a
cross-cutting preoccupation in mandates and not just as
a discrete set of military tasks. Protection concerns
should also be addressed through an appropriate
linkage between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as
well as through preventive activities related to the root
causes of conflict.

In order to achieve our goals in a sustained
manner, we must move beyond protecting individuals.
We must help protect societies. Although the
immediate task will often be defending persons and
groups from actual aggression, peacekeepers must
contribute to laying the foundations for fostering
justice, security and opportunity for all. In the long
term, strong institutions, economic growth and social
inclusion are indispensable pillars of protection.

