Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Today the
Council will adopt the draft resolution before it. It could
and should have been adopted much sooner. Its
significance, therefore, is, in my opinion, rather of a
moral and ethical nature.

Although long overdue, the draft resolution can
ultimately have some positive effects. It cannot bring the
dead back to life, but it can reveal the otherwise hidden
truth of their suffering and their executors. It may not
immediately bring to justice those who have so disgraced
mankind, but it can possibly halt the producing of more
criminals and encourage others to deny them protection
and, instead, to provide the required cooperation and
assistance to the Tribunal in The Hague. This draft
resolution can - if implemented, of course - certainly
have a positive impact on the establishment of mutual
confidence and the healing of the wounds of the survivors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why my Government
welcomes this draft resolution and expresses its gratitude
to the sponsors.

The Secretary-General's report, on which the draft
resolution was based, indicated that the Co-Chairmen's
report on the isolation of Pale Serbs by the Milosevic
regime was unfortunately inaccurate. The report
confirmed that paramilitary forces, war materiel, special
police forces, and vehicles and many other items had
regularly and without interruption been delivered from

 

Serbia to the Pale Serbs. This flow of men and materiel,
not to mention the direct involvement of the military
leaders of the former Republic of Yugoslavia, played a very
important role in the brutal and criminal overrunning of the
safe areas, in contravention of all the Security Council
resolutions on the matter, and led to the exodus of tens of
thousands of civilians and the liquidation of thousands of
unarmed men and boys.

Therefore, the Secretary-General's report indirectly
confirmed that the previous reports by the Co-Chairmen of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
were lacking and that those three-monthly decisions of the
Council to suspend the sanctions against Serbia and
Montenegro were not based on proper evidence.

The Secretary-General's report confirmed the Pale
Serbs' continued and brazen disrespect of resolution 1019
(1995), the clear concealment of the truth regarding the fate
of the missing persons, and the likely destruction of
evidence of the crimes committed under Mladie's orders
and, frequently, in his presence.

After many provocative and disgraceful statements by
Ambassador Vadislav Jovanovie, which have until now
gone unnoticed or produced little reaction, the Secretary-
General's report has furthermore helped to draw attention
to Ambassador Jovanovie's affinity for manipulating the
facts, for disregarding the truth and for pretentious lecturing
to the Security Council itself.

Ambassador Jovanovie's most recent letter to the
President of the Security Council, containing his reaction to
the Secretary-General's report on human rights in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, provokes in the first place amazement,
then sorrow, and then, great alarm. If the representative of
the former Republic of Yugoslavia decided on his own
initiative to be the advocate for war criminals whose
indictments have recently been extended to include mass
murder and genocide in Srebrenica and Zepa, then this
letter to the President of the Council, though still ethically
and diplomatically disgraceful, would be of less concern
than if it reflected the position of his Government.

It is difficult, however, in this context not to
remember the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia's statement, which was transmitted to the
Security Council by Mr. Jovanovie in his letter dated 2
November and contained in document S/1995/916. This
statement calls the murders, criminal attacks on and
destruction of the safe area of Srebrenica

"operations for the liberation of the Muslim military

stronghold of Srebrenica". (S/1995/916, annex)

Thus, Ambassador Jovanovie's latest letter is neither
surprising nor shocking. Those who have followed
Jovanovie's actions since his arrival at the United Nations
realize fully that truth is at the bottom of his agenda and
that he employs various means to create confusion,
deceive his colleagues and blur reality in order to defend
the crimes and abhorrent policies of the self-proclaimed
Serbian leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
and their supporters in Belgrade and to denounce and
insult their victims.

Frankly, it is difficult to expect anything else from
a man who, as chief of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
diplomacy, attempted to convince the world that the
Belgrade regime had nothing to do with the aggression
against Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, that in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia the Serbs had only
responded to the ostensible terror of the Bosniacs and
Croats and so on. Finally, after all, what can be expected
of a man who did not shy away from stating and
instructing his diplomats to claim that those heinous
massacres in Sarajevo, Tuzla, Gorazde and elsewhere had
been invented and staged by "Muslim forces", as he takes
particular pleasure in calling us. Ambassador Jovanovie
could not resist this temptation even in his last letter. He
uses this favourite formula of his in claiming that
Muslims in Srebrenica actually killed each other off.

In brief, Ambassador Jovanovie, in his last letter, has
once again demonstrated the basic diplomatic manners
and methods of the regime that he serves. He has shown
us how the truth can be turned into a lie and how he
arrogantly disrespects not only the most responsible
personalities of the United Nations but also this whole
institution, including the Security Council and its
members. Unfortunately, these methods have been used
with some effect, and sometimes even with some
approval. N ow the question again arises whether anybody
could even contemplate neglecting the spirit and the letter
of the General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
on the status of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the
United Nations. Some may say that by this most recent
letter Jovanovic' is shooting himself in the foot. But, more
importantly, one should fear that Jovanovie is shooting at
the very Dayton Peace Agreement.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Government
has, through the acceptance of the Dayton Agreement and

 

a range of other commitments, at least formally rejected the
policies of Karadzie and Mladie. They have been
characterized as war profiteers and criminals, even by the
Serbian officials and regime-controlled media in Belgrade.
Is it possible that this has gone unnoticed by Ambassador
Jovanovie? Or does he have his own personal opinion on
such issues? Or is this maybe a double game on the part of
the regime in Belgrade? Whatever may be behind this letter
of Mr. Jovanovie, it is most regrettable and disheartening.
I cannot neglect to recall the last statement by
Mr. Jovanovie before this Council upon the adoption last
Friday of resolution 1031 (1995). In it he called for
guarantees of protection, freedom, security, equality and
human rights for Sarajevo Serbs. Those Serbs that he has
in mind and for whom he has shown so much concern are
actually those who engaged in the destruction of that very
Sarajevo for three and a half years, those who killed so
many Muslims, Croats and others, as well as many of those
80,000 Serbs who remained in besieged Sarajevo, rejecting
Karadzie's and Mladie's policy of aggression and genocide.
The Serbs Jovanovie cares for are not Serbian civilians but
those extreme nationalists and militant fanatics who wanted
to erase the traces of this multi-ethnic city so that a Serb-
only Sarajevo could be built on its ruins.

There have long been no Bosniac Muslims or Bosnian
Croats in the parts of Sarajevo occupied by Karadzie's and
Mladic's Serbs, just as there are none remaining in other
parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina controlled by the Serb
forces for which Jovanovie expresses his concern.

The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina will not
expel any Serb civilians from the so-called Serb-held parts
of Sarajevo, nor Serbian soldiers. My Government has
never propagated the idea or carried out the practice of
creating "ethnically pure" territories, as have Karadzie,
Mladie and their hordes.

The Serb people should, rather, be protected from
those who have dragged them into this shameful aggression,
who have forced many of them to expel Bosniacs and
Croats and who have organized "ethnic cleansing" and
genocide.

For the aggressive Serbian warriors and the architects
of a greater Serbia without non-Serb peoples, the danger of
peace is obvious. The danger is that peace will offer the
deceived and fooled Serbian people a chance to understand
where their leaders have led them and, finally, to start
protecting themselves from their own self-proclaimed
protectors. This is why the rebel Serbs, their leaders and
supporters have so far, so long and so persistently
rejected peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I can only hope, however, that the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia's diplomacy will soon begin to distance
itself from war criminals, "ethnic cleansing" and other
objectives of aggressive nationalist policies and will live
up to the commitments the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia made by signing the Peace Agreement in the
middle of this month in Paris.
