Mr. Farhadi (Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People): First of
all, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I am confident that, under
your able leadership, the work of the Council will be
carried out in a constructive and efficient manner. I
also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo, Permanent
Representative of Spain, for the exemplary manner in
which he steered the work of the Council during the
month of September.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
the other members of the Council, for having given me
this opportunity, in my capacity as Vice-Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in this
important debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question and, in particular,
the Israeli aggression in the northern Gaza Strip.

Another crisis is unfolding in front of our eyes in
the occupied Palestinian territories. Against the
backdrop of an already dangerous and highly volatile
situation on the ground, Israel has launched a massive
military operation in the northern Gaza Strip,
particularly in the densely populated towns of Beit
Lahiya and Beit Hanoun and the Jabaliya refugee
camp, home to more than 100,000 refugees. More than
70 Palestinians have been killed since the latest
military operation began on 28 September. More than
200 armoured vehicles, backed by attack helicopters,
fighter planes and unmanned surveillance drones, have
descended upon the area, spreading death and
destruction and exacerbating the humanitarian
situation.

Palestinian civilians are being killed on a daily
basis. Just today, Palestinians, including children, have
fallen victim to Israeli attacks. Some 15,000 residents
have had no electricity or water for days. Since the
beginning of the intifada, more than 3,700 Palestinians
have been killed, and some 35,600 have been injured.
The growing number of Palestinian and Israeli children
directly harmed by the ongoing violence has been
especially disquieting.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is very alarmed by
Israel's disproportionate use of force in the Gaza Strip,
in some of the world's most densely populated areas,
and it calls upon the Israeli Government to fulfil its
obligation as the occupying Power and immediately to
stop the military assault on the Gaza Strip and on the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. Actions that
further harm the impoverished Palestinians will not
bring security to Israelis and will not contribute to
realizing the hope of a negotiated settlement to this
painful conflict.

The Committee urges the Security Council to
send a clear message to the occupying Power to make
it stop wreaking havoc in the Gaza Strip and destroying
the lives of thousands of Palestinians.

We also call on the Palestinian Authority to do all
it can to stop Palestinian militants from firing rockets
against Israeli targets. We agree with the Palestinian
leadership that those actions do not contribute to the
Palestinian cause and only serve to prolong the deadly
conflict.

We call on the international community to step up
its assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), whose dwindling resources severely limit
its capacity to support the growing number of homeless
and destitute Palestinians. We call on the Government
of Israel to allow UNRWA workers unhindered access
to the Palestinian families who desperately need
medical and humanitarian aid.

We also strongly urge the Quartet to do all it can
to get the leadership of both sides back to the
negotiating table and to begin the long-delayed
implementation of the road map, on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and the principle of a
permanent two-State solution to the conflict, based on
the 1967 borders, the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and the right of all
States in the region to live in peace and security.

