Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, let me thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau and Head of Mission for the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), Mr. Modibo Toure, and his team for
the detailed and important briefing on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau. We also thank Mr. Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission, for his
briefing, in which he underscored the configuration's
commitment to the various initiatives in Guinea-Bissau.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has followed
very closely and with great interest the developments in
the political and institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau. It
has paid even closer attention since the country joined
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) in 2014, and now that Equatorial Guinea chairs
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.

In my capacity as Chair of the 2048 Committee, I
would like to voice our concern about the deadlock in
the peace process in Guinea-Bissau, which is hindering
the country's national reform programme, thereby
threatening to undermine progress in the country since
constitutional order was restored in 2014.

Equatorial Guinea lauds the commitment and
considerable effort made, as well as the human and
financial resources made available by international
multilateral partners, in particular the Guinea-
Bissau group of five, comprising the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the CPLP, the European Union and the
United Nations. Undoubtedly, the synergy among
international actors with regard to the issue in
Guinea-Bissau attests to the desire and willingness
of the international community to find a peaceful and
consensus-based solution in the interests of Guinea-
Bissau.

The Conakry Agreement must continue to be the
fundamental reference for national political actors. The
Agreement not only outlines the appointment of a Prime
Minister who is trusted by the President of the Republic,
but whose appointment is the result of consensus
among all national stakeholders. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea has taken note of the rejection of
the appointment of Mr. Augusto Antonio Artur Da
Silva by ECOWAS and the main political actors in
Guinea-Bissau, in particular of the two main political
parties - the Partido Africano da Independencia da
Guine e Cabo Verde and the Partido para a Renovacao
Social. Given the lack of consensus surrounding the
appointment of the Prime Minister, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea calls upon all political actors in the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, including the President of
the Republic, as well as the leaders of the two main
political parties, to work together to form an inclusive
Government that would create the right conditions
ahead of upcoming legislative elections to be held later
this year, and presidential elections in 2019.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports
the electoral calendar as outlined in the country's
Constitution. That is why the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes that an international support
mechanism for the electoral process should be put in
place for the purpose of updating the electoral rolls
and assisting the Independent National Electoral
Commission to effectively shoulder its responsibility,
and with all other preparations that would allow for
the holding of transparent, democratic elections whose
results would put a definitive end to the political maze
the country has had to navigate over the past few years.

The extension of the mandate of UNIOGBIS is
a key element in resolving the crisis. As announced,
ECOWAS has decided to extend the mandate of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau until 31 March.
The actions of the United Nations must be part of that
undertaking. The Security Council's vote, scheduled
for 27 February, must allow the Mission to be extended
for a year or more, until presidential elections are held
in 2019. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes
that international partners should continue to focus
primarily on mediation, good offices, dialogue and
direct negotiations as the only viable paths to breaking
the current political and institutional deadlock.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/110) concludes that
the population's latent frustration with an uncertain
political environment could foster instability and
crime. Equatorial Guinea reiterates its gratitude to the
defence and security forces that have chosen to adopt
a neutral, republican position. Therefore, we urge all
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to put the interests
of the country and its people, love of State and their
responsibility above all other considerations so as to
create the right conditions for the holding of free, fair
and transparent elections.

Stability in the country must not be disassociated
from economic recovery. In that regard, we welcome
the support of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, through the Peacebuilding
Fund, in financing various multisectoral projects. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea will take part in good
offices and negotiations. Equatorial Guinea, as amember
of the CPLP and Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-
Bissau, will support and take initiatives that it believes
are necessary to assist in efforts under way to find a
solution to the situation in the brotherly country of
Guinea-Bissau.

