Judge Meron: It is an honour to once again appear
before the Council in two capacities i as President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I hope
that my remarks today will serve to elucidate certain
key points set forth in the recent reports submitted on
behalf of these two institutions.

However, before I turn to these points, I should
like to congratulate Ambassador Cherif of Chad on his
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I also wish to express again my appreciation
for the efforts of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and particularly to Chile for
its leadership of the Group. I continue to be extremely
grateful for the extensive support that the Office of
Legal Affairs and the Legal Counsel provide to the
ICTY and the Mechanism.
I will first turn to the ICTY. I am pleased to
report that the Tribunal continues to make progress in
completing its last trials and appeals. Indeed, we have
already delivered two appeal judgements in 2014, and
expect to deliver another - in the large, multi-accused
Papovic' et al. case - by the end of January 2015.
Accordingly, we enter 2015 with only four trials
and five appeal cases remaining. By the end of next
year, only two cases - specifically, one trial and one
appeal 4 should remain outstanding.

As our November report (S/2014/827, annex I)
makes plain, and as Council members have been aware
for several years, despite the significant progress we
have made in finishing cases the Tribunal will not be
able to complete all of its judicial work by the end of
this month. Numerous unforeseen and sometimes
challenging circumstances - including the late arrests
of the last ICTY indictees, the disqualification of a
judge, the health conditions ofa number of our accused,
and the size and complexity of certain multi-accused
cases have prevented us from meeting the Security
Council's target date for the completion of our judicial
work by the end of 2014.

 

Although the majority of our remaining cases
are progressing in line with previous forecasts, our
November report also explains that certain trial and
appeal judgements will be later than forecast by the
Tribunal in May. The fact that such delays occur is
disappointing to me and my fellow judges. Importantly,
however, these recent changes to our judgement
schedule are not expected to impact the anticipated date
of the Tribunal's closure in 2017.

I would further note, as I have before, that the
judicial process is inherently dynamic and mutable;
it is a process that takes place against a background
of great legal and logistical complexity, and may be
affected by any matter of unforeseen developments,
such as the discovery of mass graves with possible
forensic significance. In this context, forecasts for
the completion of the Tribunal's judicial work are
inevitably subject to revision. 1 can assure the Council
that the Judges and staff of the Tribunal nevertheless
remain focused on doing all they can to avoid or reduce
delays. The Tribunal also remains fully committed
to transparency; when we know about changes to
forecasts for a case schedule, we always communicate
that information in our reports.

There are two specific issues to which I wish to
draw the attention of the Council. The first involves
the health condition of several of our detainees, which
has impacted two of our trials and which is a matter of
great concern to the Tribunal and to me personally. As
detailed in the November report, the trial of Mr. Goran
Hadzie has been temporarily adjourned since 20 October
for reasons relating to Mr. Hadzie's health. In addition,
the trial of Mr. Ratko Mladie has been reduced to four
sitting-days per week, following medical advice. At
this time, the Hadzie Chamber does not believe the
adjournment will impact on the scheduled judgement
delivery date. By contrast, the changes in the sitting
schedule of the Mladie Chamber, along with the recent
decision to reopen the Prosecution case, mean that the
judgement in that trial is delayed until March 2017 or
later. Finally, Mr. Vojislav Seselj - whose trial was
delayed by the disqualification ofajudge in 2013 - has
been granted provisional release by the Trial Chamber
considering his case, a course of action the Chamber
deemed appropriate in light of developments concerning
Mr. Seselj's health.

Due to the age ofour detainees, health-related issues
are an unavoidable concern and raise humanitarian
questions. Although the Tribunal makes every effort to
ensure appropriate medical care, developments related
to the health of detainees can sometimes fall outside
our control and, as I am sure the Council understands,
can cause delays to the Tribunal's work.

The second matter I would like to address is
staff recruitment and retention. This issue, which
is discussed in my November report, also has the
potential to adversely affect our judgement delivery
schedule. As the members of the Council are aware,
the Tribunal is significantly reducing in size over
this budget biennium, and by the end of next year is
expected to have drastically cut its staffing levels.
This downsizing is inevitable, but also gives rise to
challenges when it comes to maintaining appropriate
staffing levels. Despite staff members' dedication to
their cases and duties, many of them are searching for
other employment, and where offers cannot be deferred
they are leaving the Tribunal, depriving us of valuable
institutional and case-specific knowledge. Unable to
deploy the most effective staff retention strategies, such
as the incentive bonuses unfortunately rejected by the
General Assembly, the Tribunal is attempting to retain
and, where necessary, replace staff members in the
most efficient manner possible. The three principals of
the Tribunal are most grateful to the Office for Human
Resources Management for measures taken to support
the Tribunal in this respect.

By design, my reports to the Council on the
Tribunal focus almost exclusively on procedural issues
and requests for assistance in completing our work.
I very much hope, however, that the nature of these
briefings will not lead any of us to forget the bigger
picture and the tremendously significant role that the
ICTY has played, and continues to play, both in setting
global standards for international criminal law and
justice and in helping to strengthen the rule of law
at the local level. Indeed, just last month I travelled
for several days in Bosnia and Herzegovina, meeting
with representatives of diverse communities there
and paying my respects at sites where terrible crimes
had been found to have taken place. Our discussions
underscored that the ICTY has made, and continues to
make, an invaluable contribution to the restoration of
the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia.

Given the importance of the Tribunal's work, I
would urge the Council to approve the full extensions
of judges' terms requested in my letters of 1 October
and 25 November. The precedents set by the Tribunal
and by its accounting for all of the 161 individuals it
has indicted have been instrumental in inaugurating
a new era of accountability. It is essential that the
international community continue to support us in
this endeavour. One of the best ways to do that is by
granting the extensions needed to complete our few
remaining cases.

I will now turn to the Mechanism. In creating
the Mechanism, the Security Council not only tasked
the new institution with a responsibility for certain
essential functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY. The Council
also, in essence, challenged the Mechanism to serve
as an example of best practices and to learn from the
experience of other international tribunals in order to
operate in the most lean and efficient manner possible,
while respecting relevant procedural safeguards. I am
pleased to confirm that, by almost any measure, the
Mechanism is meeting all of these important aims.

The Mechanism continues to make steady progress
in carrying out its judicial work. Later this month, in
fact next week, in line with previous forecasts, I will be
travelling to Arusha to deliver the Mechanism's very
first appeal judgement. Mechanism judges in Arusha
and The Hague have also been busy deciding a wide
variety of motions, involving issues such as variations
to confidentiality protections and cooperation with
national jurisdictions.

The Mechanism stands ready to adjudicate any
appeals from the four trials ongoing at the ICTY. At
the same time, different sections of the Mechanism are
preparing rosters to allow rapid staff recruitment, and
are undertaking other measures to ensure readiness in
case any ofthe three remaining ICTR fugitive indictees
whose cases have not been referred to Rwanda are
arrested.

As set forth in my written report, responsibility
for a wide variety of functions - including witness
protection, the enforcement of sentences, the
monitoring of referred cases and the preservation of
archives - has been transferred or is being transferred
to the Mechanism. Concurrently, the Mechanism
is increasingly assuming direct responsibility for
administrative functions, such as human resources.

The Mechanism continues to engage with Rwanda
and the States of the former Yugoslavia, as well as with
our host States - Tanzania and the Netherlands. A host
State agreement has already been signed with Tanzania,
while a text with the Netherlands has been initialled.
In Arusha, we are moving towards commencing
construction of the new premises authorized by the
General Assembly, and we are continuing discussions
with the Netherlands concerning the future facility
of the Mechanism. Relying on outside funding, we
are also launching limited programmes aimed at
knowledge-sharing with Tanzanian law schools and
members of the Tanzanian judiciary.

Two key challenges continue to face the
Mechanism. The first is the outstanding arrest warrants
for the remaining ICTR indictees who have yet to be
apprehended, including three who are expected to be
tried by the Mechanism. It is imperative that these
fugitives be apprehended. Just as the accounting for
all ICTY indictees struck an important blow against
impunity, so too a full accounting ofICTR indictees will
provide confirmation of the international community's
commitment to justice and accountability. Accordingly,
I urge the Council to renew its call to all Member
States to cooperate with efforts to arrest the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR.

A second challenge facing the Mechanism is posed
by the persons acquitted by the ICTR and the release of
individuals who have completed sentences imposed by
the ICTR. The Mechanism will assume responsibility for
all such individuals released in Tanzania, on 1 January
2015, having already assumed other relocation-related
functions. I consider the question of resettlement to
be a crucial matter of humanitarian concern for the
international community. These individuals, having
been exonerated or served the sentences imposed by
the ICTR, deserve the opportunity to be resettled and
to rebuild their lives. The total number of the acquitted
and released individuals is very small; just a few States
stepping forward to give them shelter could address the
problem.

These challenges to the Mechanism are real. They
should not, however, obscure the real progress achieved
in launching both branches of the Mechanism and
smoothly transitioning responsibilities according to
the timelines mandated by the Security Council. The
principals and staff of the Mechanism and of the ICTR
and the ICTY should be applauded for their efforts in
making all of this possible.

Despite the challenges that both the ICTY and
the Mechanism face, which I have highlighted in my
briefing today, the world is unquestionably a better
place because of them. That is not simply because of
their adjudication of specific cases, but also because of
the long shadow international courts cast, promoting
more lawful behaviour by States and individuals. With
the support and encouragement of the States Members
of the United Nations, the ICTY, the Mechanism
and other international tribunals have served, and
continue to serve, as the concrete manifestation of a
commitment to ending impunity and as a testament to
the international community's dedication to creating a
world where the rule of law is supreme.

