Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Montenegro; the European Free
Trade Association countries Liechtenstein and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this declaration. In the
interests of time, I will deliver an abbreviated version
of the EU statement. A complete and official version is
being distributed in the Chamber.

At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to you, Sir; the Presidents of both
Tribunals Judge Pocar and Judge Byron; and the
Prosecutors; Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow, for
providing today's briefings on the implementation of
the respective Tribunals' completion strategies.

The European Union wishes to reiterate its strong
support for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). During the

years of their existence, the Tribunals have made an
important contribution to international law. They have
sent a clear signal that transparent and effective
international criminal justice is viable. By bringing to
justice persons responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and by rendering justice
to the victims, the Tribunals have invaluably
contributed to the restoration of peace and stability and
to the promotion of the rule of law in the affected
areas. The Tribunals' achievements have clearly proven
that peace and justice can go hand in hand, and it
remains our firm conviction that they should go hand
in hand. In our view, the Tribunals have invaluably
contributed to the restoration of peace and stability.
Shocking crimes, as we have seen in those conflicts,
should not go unpunished and the perpetrators of those
crimes must be held accountable for their acts.

The EU deeply regrets that, despite the
continuing appeals from the international community,
17 indictees are still at large - four indicted by the
ICTY and 13 by the ICTR - and that among those are
some of the key persons allegedly responsible, such as
Ratko Mladic, Radovan Karadzic and F elicien Kabuga.
Since the most recent completion strategy report was
issued, only one fugitive has been arrested. While the
EU commends the arrest of Mr. Nzabonimana, a top-
level fugitive, by Tanzanian authorities, at the same
time it urges all States immediately and
unconditionally to cooperate with both Tribunals, in
full adherence to their obligations under the relevant
Council resolutions. The EU remains absolutely
committed to ensuring that all remaining fugitive
indictees face international justice.

Full cooperation with the Prosecutor's Offices of
both Tribunals by providing access to archives and
documents; access to and protection of witnesses; and,
in particular, tracking, arresting and surrendering the
remaining fugitives is paramount for the successful
completion process. We call on all those involved to
redouble their efforts to expedite the arrest and
surrender of the remaining fugitive indictees.
In the context of the ICTY, the EU remains
absolutely committed to seeing all four remaining
indictees face international justice. The EU regrets that
Serbia's cooperation during the last reporting period
concerning the apprehension of fugitives remains
unsatisfactory. Statements made by Serbian President
Tadie following the recent elections on making
cooperation with the ICTY one of the new
Government's priorities are encouraging. It must be
emphasized that full cooperation with the ICTY is a
State responsibility, regardless of which Government is
in office.

The EU takes note that much work still remains
to be done to facilitate cooperation between States of
the region in the investigation and prosecution of
alleged war criminals. The EU calls upon States in the
region, in particular Kenya, to fully cooperate with the
ICTR in accordance with their legal responsibilities.
On this occasion, let me remind the Council that the
EU has adopted three common positions and a Council
regulation in order to support the effective
implementation of the mandate of the ICTY.

The EU commends both Tribunals for their
ongoing efforts to take all possible measures to
complete all trial activities at first instance by the end
of 2008 and to complete all work in 2010. However,
the EU takes note of the estimated delay to the original
completion strategy deadlines due a number of factors,
including the late capture and transfer of fugitive
indictees.

The EU further welcomes the work that both the
ICTY and the ICTR have undertaken on residual
issues, and the EU welcomes the discussion of those
issues, under Belgian leadership, within the informal
Security Council working group on international
tribunals.

We acknowledge that the completion strategy has
positive impacts on national judicial systems, and
consequently on societies. The EU welcomes the
creation of specialized institutions for the prosecution
and trial of intermediate and lower-rank accused in
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. The EU
also fully supports the strengthening of the Rwandan
judicial system and the improvement of its capacity to
start prosecuting cases awaiting referral from the
ICTR.

We would like to underline that national judicial
authorities need to carry out fair judicial proceedings
and to provide that sentences are served in accordance
with the appropriate security standards. The EU
therefore attaches importance to the continued
monitoring of referred trials to ensure that they are
conducted in accordance with international standards.
While the transfer of intermediate and lower-rank cases
is a feasible solution in the light of an ongoing
completion process, the EU remains convinced that,
once apprehended, remaining high-level fugitives must
be prosecuted and tried before an international tribunal.

The EU welcomes the recent signing of
agreements on the enforcement of sentences by Estonia
and Slovakia and calls on other Member States to
follow that example.

Finally, the EU commends the outreach
programmes of the Tribunals, which disseminate the
work of the Tribunals to the wider population in order
to assist in achieving our key objective, that is, truth-
telling and reconciliation processes in the respective
post-conflict regions, and consequently to guarantee
peace and security in the international community as a
whole. The EU stands ready to take its share of the
responsibility to achieve those objectives.

