Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for their respective briefings.

Once again, we would like to say how appalled we

are at the terrible situation suffered by the Syrian people,
as the past two months have been the most violent since
the start of the conflict, and civilians, primarily women
and children, are the ones that are suffering the gravest
consequences of this intensification of the war. We call
the attention of the Security Council to the continuing
violations of international law, especially international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as these attacks have targeted civilian infrastructure
such as hospitals, schools and homes.

My delegation would like to express once again
its gratitude to the delegations of Sweden and Kuwait
for their work in promoting the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2401 (2018), which imposes a cessation
of hostilities throughout Syria, which is as urgent as
it is necessary. We urge the parties to implement the
resolution immediately in order to speed up access
of humanitarian assistance without any restrictions,
allow urgent medical evacuations and the entry of
humanitarian convoys, and ensure the protection of
hospitals and medical facilities, especially in eastern
Ghouta, Idlib and north of Hama.

We wish to underscore once again the need for
continued cooperation and coordination among the
Syrian Government and the various humanitarian
assistance agencies, so that the delivery of humanitarian
assistance can be effective, especially in hard-to-reach
areas, and to prevent administrative obstacles from
derailing or negatively affecting the deployment of the
required humanitarian assistance.

We also stress the need to begin, as soon as possible,
humanitarian mine-clearing in areas that require it, in
particular in the city of Raqqa, to allow the return in
dignified and safe conditions of people who were forced
to flee their homes because of the conflict.

As we have stated previously, we believe that if our
aim is to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people in
the face of armed violence, the Security Council has
the major challenge of maintaining its unity so as to
ensure that this organ's decisions are implemented. We
reiterate that the solution to this conflict can be found
only through an inclusive political process based on
dialogue and coordination, led by the Syrian people
and for the Syrian people, that will make it possible to
reach a peaceful solution among all parties involved.
With this in mind, we wish to highlight the various
forums for dialogue, specifically the Astana process, at
which de-escalation zones were agreed on that must be
respected by all parties. We will be closely following
the next round of the process.

We wish also to highlight the other opportunities
for dialogue that could make it possible to reach further
compromises to achieve a definitive end to hostilities,
such as the Sochi national dialogue, which is aimed at
strengthening the Geneva political process, with respect
for the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria and its right to choose its own political, economic
and social system without any external pressure
or interference.

