Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like to start with two introductory
comments.

First and foremost, it would be remiss of me not to
note that we deem completely wrong the engineering
decision that was taken during the reconstruction of
the Security Council Chamber. Mr. Simonovie should
not cover up the historical picture by which the world
recognizes the Security Council. That error must be
corrected.

Secondly, we understand that everyone has the
right to a vacation, including Mr. Simonovie. However,
it is clear that he is a little divorced from reality here.
It is not clear what proposal by President Poroshenko
Mr. Simonovie is praising concerning the start of
talks on a ceasefire. We know nothing about any such
proposal.

Moreover, yesterday the Ukrainian authorities
stated that they were interrupting the ceasefire regime
established pursuant to resolution 2166 (2014) so as
to create the conditions necessary for an objective
international inquiry into the deaths of the passengers
on the Malaysia Airlines airliner, as a result of which
this investigation is confronted by serious problems.

I shall now return to the issue under discussion at
this meeting.

The Security Council did not request the report of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and therefore should not be discussing it, especially
since the report is interesting merely as an example of

elegant political rhetoric, where facts and conclusions
are painstakingly shaped to fit a particular political
requirement. In reading the report, what jumps out is
the absence ofwhat would seem to be the first thing one
would expect of United Nations human rights defenders,
namely, a call on the sides to cease all military activity,
as if the right to life were not the principal right of any
human being.

The report gave no space to a condemnation of the
instances of use by the Ukrainian security forces, in
populated areas, of artillery, multiple-launch rocket
systems and phosphorus shells, which are prohibited
by international conventions. Is there even any passing
reference to the promise made by Ukraine not to
bomb the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and to ensure
their security? Nothing is being said regarding the
flowery promise made by President Poroshenko to the
inhabitants of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions on this
very topic; there is no reference to this treacherous
breach of promises.

The escalation of the so-called anti-terrorist
operation, with its many casualties among the civilian
population, continues. Ukrainian security forces are
shelling residential neighbourhoods and infrastructure.
There is no end in sight to the shelling of Gorlovka.
Yesterday, five individuals died there and 10 were
injured; a church burned down; a power station was
destroyed; and the water supply has been interrupted.
Thursday morning, the centre of Donetsk was again
shelled. Shells hit a hospital admission ward as well
as residential high-rises and a bus depot. Overall, 156
power substations, 18 boilers and seven gas lines were
destroyed. These are but a few examples.

The report pushes the idea that the self-defence
formations are to blame for everything. They are
accused of everything short of cannibalism. For
example, in paragraph 5 it is stated that those formations
were deliberately targeting critically important
infrastructure. In other words, they are not only firing
upon themselves, they are doing it intentionally. What
has led to this brilliant conclusion? And why is there
no similar conclusion regarding the actions of the
Ukrainian authorities, which are methodically bombing
residential neighbourhods'? Sometimes from one day to
the next they are fighting on the same, almost destroyed
high-rise building.

A separate topic is the situation of children.
According to the information we have received, there
are 1,223 child orphans in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. The authors of the report termed the efforts
of the self-defence formations to take those orphans
to safety to the Russian Federation as attempted
kidnapping. The report also contains a reference to
seriously ill children to whom Russia could provide
expert assistance. It states with satisfaction that as a
result of the intervention of the Ukrainian authorities,
the children remained in Donetsk. It seems that United
Nations philanthropists believe that children thrive
under fire.

Russia's requests to human rights bodies regarding
the evacuation of children have not received any
response from Kyiv. What do United Nations human
rights defenders think about this? Do children not
deserve safety?

More than 820,000 Ukrainians are currently
finding shelter in Russia. Requests for regulating their
status total 188,000. In our territory we have set up 643
temporary shelters for those who have nowhere else
to go. Currently there are 47,500 individuals there, of
which more than 16,000 are children.

The report gives plenty of useful advice to the
Ukrainian authorities. It suggests incorporating those
who are eradicating the civilian population of south-
eastern Ukraine, the so-called volunteer battalions,
into the armed forces of Ukraine.

The criminals who are currently killing women and
children and committing other serious human rights
violations must be arrested and brought to justice.
But instead of this, it is proposed that they should be
legitimized. Perhaps one should also legitimize the
foreign mercenaries that are taking part in the so-called
anti-terrorist operation, something the Ukrainian
authorities no longer conceal.

It would be remiss of me not to mention the
extremely biased picture painted by the report
regarding the situation of journalists. Allegedly only
one representative of the Russian media was detained
and then released by the Ukrainian army, and not
a word is said about the detention and beating up of
journalists from the television channels Zvezda and
LifeNews. The reported version, that the two Russian
journalists who died could have been killed by the self-
defence formations, is false.

Regarding the human rights situation in Ukraine,
one cannot focus solely on the territory under the
control of the self-defence formations, which, judging
by the report, suffers from a complete absence of
the rule of law. Is there any rule of law in the rest of
Ukraine? There is a passing reference in the report
to a number of steps that are aimed at banning the
Communist Party of Ukraine. These legitimately
elected parliamentarians are currently being brutally
persecuted, including by law-enforcement agencies, for
their political convictions. This is but another step in
the systematic punishment of those who have come to
power as a result of the armed revolt of their political
opponents, who, by the way, just happen to represent
the south-eastern part of the country.

A clear example of the disregard for the principle
of the rule oflaw is the lack ofprogress in investigating
the serious crimes committed in the Maidan and in
Odessa and Mariupol. In the current atmosphere of
fear, is it any wonder that Odessans and the citizens of
other areas do not trust the investigators sent by Kyiv
and refuse to cooperate with them, even as documents
relating to these crimes are disappearing without a
trace? This is mentioned in the report.

It is clear, and it is confirmed in the report, that
the armed forces, including the Ukrainian security
services, now have unprecedented power and are clearly
violating fundamental human rights. They are seizing
people without due process, using violence against
detainees, and using the tactics of intimidation and
threats to extract testimony from witnesses. Bearing in
mind the fact that the justice system is paralysed, what
sort of impartial investigations and prosecution can we
expect in Ukraine?

The Government of Ukraine is ignoring the
commitments it has undertaken, including under
the Geneva statement of 17 April. The process of
constitutional reform in Ukraine, which envisions
decentralizing power, expanding the authority of the
regions and giving the Russian language special status,
is being put off indefinitely. In fact, there is now talk
of strengthening presidential power, which is exactly
the opposite of what was demanded by the Maidan
protesters demanded, whom the authorities are trying
to get rid of. That begs the question, what did the people
fight for?

We wish once again to underscore the harmfulness
of attempts to resolve the crisis in Ukraine through
violence. We call for an immediate end to military
actions in the country and a solution to the humanitarian
problems.

A very important step should be the speedy
beginning of constitutional reforms, which should
involve all the regions of Ukraine and would be open to
public consideration. As for the unfounded conjectures
in the report regarding the situation in Crimea, which is
part of the Russian Federation, this cannot be a subject
for discussion at today's meeting, which is dedicated to
the situation in Ukraine. Having adopted the historic
decision on reunification with Russia, the inhabitants
of Crimea have delivered themselves from the horrors
that are unfolding for everyone to see in the south-
eastern part of Ukraine.

