Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council once again on the situation in South
Sudan and to present the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l4/ 158).

Little more than three years since the holding of
the referendum that led to the independence of South
Sudan, the country, it must be said, is in a tragic
situation marked by extreme violence. The number of
civilians who have been brutally killed or mistreated
is in the thousands, with at least 800,000 refugees and
displaced persons, 75,000 of whom are in camps of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Despite the signing ofa ceasefire agreement, it must be
reported that both parties continue to fight against one
another, in violation of that agreement. With the arrival
of the rainy season, we fear that the humanitarian
situation, which is already extremely difficult, will
further deteriorate. Moreover, the initial investigatory
findings suggest that atrocities and grave violations of
human rights have been committed by both parties in
the course of the fighting. In that regard, I would like to
welcome the news of the establishment ofa commission
of inquiry by the African Union.

This crisis is fundamentally a national political
crisis. The conflict has spread to the whole country.
No region has been spared. It is true that the violence
has mainly taken place in the states of Jonglei, Upper
Nile, Unity and Central Equatoria, but the political
polarization caused by the conflict now affects the
lives of all South Sudanese and the functioning of
Government throughout the country.

That is why the mediation process, led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
has focused on three priorities, namely, the cessation of
hostilities, the crisis in the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) and the national political dialogue.
As the Council knows and as I stated, the mediation
process conducted by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development led to the signing, on 23 January, of
agreements between the Government of South Sudan
and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) in Opposition on the cessation of hostilities
and on the status of detainees. Mediation under the
auspices ofIGAD has also led to the release of7 political
leaders of the SPLM, among the II who were arrested,
as members may recall, at the beginning of the political
crisis in December 2013.

During the second round of negotiations, the
parties agreed to resolve the political conflict at the root
of the internal dynamics of the SPLM. It is expected
that a meeting will be held between the eight members
of the SPLM. party leadership - four allies of the
Party Chairman, President Salva Kiir, and four of his
opponents - to find a solution to the party's internal
crisis. Those negotiations are to be conducted jointly
under the aegis of officials from the Ethiopian People's
Revolutionary Democratic Front and the African
National Congress.

With a view to ensuring that that exercise in national
reconciliation includes all segments of society, this
week the mediation is convening a civil society forum
where the views of civil society can be considered in
determining the modalities that will allow the country
to move forward.

(spoke in English)

A key demand of the opposition is the release of
all ll political detainees. Seven of them were indeed
released on 29 January, but the remaining four remain
in detention, and trial proceedings against them
commenced on 11 March. The resolution of that issue
will be necessary to make meaningful progress in the
talks.

Furthermore, the gap between the parties on the
content, objective and sequencing of the broad-based
dialogue, as envisaged by IGAD, remains wide. While
agreeing to the conduct of a national conference, the
Government continues to insist that it be held within
the country, once a ceasefire has been agreed upon and
is effectively implemented. The forces opposing the
Government, both the SPLM/A in Opposition and the
released political leaders, on the other hand, demand the
immediate start of a broad-based dialogue, in addition
to the formation of an interim Government ahead of the
elections.

The security and humanitarian situation in South
Sudan will continue to deteriorate until the parties
engage fully in the political talks, until they respect the
cessation of hostilities and allow freedom of movement
for the United Nations and its partners. Both parties
continue to prioritize the pursuit of military gains over
talks towards a comprehensive political settlement. The
crisis has already affected the security of the region.
The longer it goes on, the more the chances for further
regional intervention will grow.

In that regard, the immediate establishment of the
monitoring and verification mechanism is essential. A
joint technical committee has been established, with a
functioning headquarters in Juba, and monitoring and
verification teams are being trained for deployment
to six sites in conflict areas. With a view to ensuring
effective and robust monitoring and verification, the
IGAD Heads of State decided on 13 March to deploy
by mid-April a robust protection and deterrent force
to provide security for the monitors. This week, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNMISS
are sending planners to Addis Ababa to work with
IGAD and other partners in developing the concept
of operations of the force and the modalities of its
cooperation with UNMISS. IGAD has indicated that it
will require the financial support of Member States to
deploy and sustain the force. We shall keep the Council
informed closely of further developments in that regard.

UNMISS was deployed to help South Sudan
transform into a democratic State and to assist its
leadership in delivering long-awaited dividends of
peace and independence to its citizens. Today, the
leadership stands divided, its security institutions are
fragmented and the society is victimized by communal
tensions. Under those conditions, and as discussed with
the Council, the initial raison d'etre of UNMISS no
longer applies.

It is for that reason that the Secretary-General's
report on South Sudan before the Council highlights
the need for a strategic shift in the posture ofUNMISS.
Accordingly, we will temporarily put on hold activities
aimed at the extension of the authority of the State and
focus on five main priorities, all within a posture of
impartiality. They are the protection of civilians, the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance, human rights
monitoring and reporting, the prevention of further
intercommunal violence and support to the IGAD
process, as and when requested and within capabilities.

The troops of UNMISS are operating under a
Chapter VII mandate, which allows the use of force to
protect civilians and ensure the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and assets. The protection
priority will be for those sheltering at United Nations
compounds and other locations where they have sought
sanctuary, which the Mission will try to support by
facilitating humanitarian access. Subsequently, as
additional troops arrive and conditions are created for
the safe, voluntary return of the internally displaced
persons, upon a request from humanitarian partners,
the protection operation would spread further so
as to contribute to creating the conditions for safe
and voluntary returns. To implement that protection
mandate, UNMISS will, let me say again, uphold strict
impartiality, interacting with both sides as necessary,
to reach out and facilitate access to civilians at risk.

As far as other activities ofUNMISS are concerned,
they will be guided by two cardinal principles. First,
UNMISS will not undertake any activity that could
enhance the capacity of either side to engage in military
or hostile operations, and, secondly, the Mission will
not participate in any activity with the parties that
could jeopardize the mediation process led by IGAD.

That new posture of the Mission will remain
in place until the parties finalize a comprehensive
political agreement. At that time, we shall conduct a
more comprehensive integrated review of the mandate,
posture and capabilities of UNMISS and provide
further recommendations to the Security Council.

At this point, I need to raise a very serious
question. There has been a negative campaign against
UNMISS and its leadership in South Sudan, which
seems systematic and organized. There has been an
unacceptable vilification of the United Nations by some
local and national officials, with public demonstrations,
media articles and harassment of United Nations
personnel, including to the point of putting their lives
in danger. Under those conditions we will need to
consider further drawing down our staff and limiting
our activities to the absolute minimum related to
protection, human rights monitoring and support to
humanitarian assistance.

The incident of 7 March in Rumbek, during
which national authorities seized the weapons and
ammunitions of a United Nations contingent, has been
used to excite the negative climate regarding UNMISS.
I dispatched a high-level team last Wednesday to
investigate where mistakes were made in the shipping
of that equipment. We offered to the Government to
conduct a joint investigation, simply to prove our good
faith and provide full transparency. Unfortunately, that
offer was declined.

The situation is grave. World Food Programme
operations have been brought almost to a standstill,
despite the dire need for humanitarian assistance. Cross-
border movements of humanitarian supplies - for
instance, food and seeds to plant the next crop - which
urgently need to be prepositioned before the rainy
season sets in, are being delayed. United Nations flights
are being searched, convoys stopped and personnel
harassed by South Sudan security across the country.
Organized demonstrations against the Mission have
increasingly begun to adopt a very aggressive tone.
The Mission's freedom of movement has been severely
restricted, despite repeated de'marches, including from
the Secretary-General to President Kiir.

We very much hope that the situation changes soon,
as its continuation is not sustainable, nor indeed is it
acceptable. I would urge the Security Council and its
members to intervene on behalf of UNMISS, condemn
the campaign and request President Kiir to condemn it
himself immediately and issue instructions to national
and local authorities and SPLM. cadres to stop it.

(spoke in French)

Last December's decision by the Security Council
to authorize the deployment of additional troops and
police units to UNMISS was certainly timely and
greatly contributed to saving human lives on the
ground. In the light of the obstructions to a political
resolution of the crisis, the Secretary-General is asking
the Security Council to raise the ceiling for UNMISS
military and police personnel for one year, outside
the inter-mission cooperation framework. The ceiling
would therefore increase from 7,000 to 12,500 soldiers
and four mobile police units.

The deployment of additional military personnel
would take place in three phases. The second phase
will be completed between now and the end of June,
with 2,800 soldiers deployed and three mobile police
units on the ground. The third phase provides for the
deployment of the two remaining infantry battalions
and will be realized once the Mission has re-evaluated
the situation and its own absorption capacity.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
people of South Sudan have suffered too much and for
far too long. Its sole wish is that the crisis end as quickly
as possible. It is now the duty of the political authorities
to stop the violence, and to do so immediately. They
must give orders to their respective forces to cease
military operations without delay, participate in a
significant and constructive manner in the talks that are
taking place in Addis Ababa and work towards building
a State that exercises its functions through democratic
institutions and transparent processes, accountable
for their acts before the representatives elected by the
people. The international community was a guarantor
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement that allowed
South Sudan to gain its independence. Now more than
ever, it is our duty to remind the South Sudanese parties
of the commitments they undertook therein.

