Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the delegation ofJapan for organizing
this open debate and for presenting the concept note
(S/2017/1016, annex) to guide the discussion at this
meeting. We greatly appreciate that the presidency of the
Security Council proposed discussing this important and
crucial issue on addressing the complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, which
is the primary responsibility of the Security Council.
My delegation also takes this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for
his briefing.

Since its founding, the United Nations has striven
to prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts by means of a
series of measures, from support for respect of human
rights and inclusive development to prevention, the
establishment of peacekeeping and peacebuilding and,
in the longer term, recovery and reconstruction, in order
to implement the founding principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. For that reason, the Security Council
plays a fundamental role in addressing the numerous
conflicts by faciliting peace processes, as was the case
in my country with the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala, which demonstrated that, with
efforts and political will, it is possible to work to
strengthen peace processes and democracy and, in that
way, to promote development and sustainable peace. At
the time, the Mission played an important role in the
phase following the peace process.

It is important to be clear that the withdrawal of
peacekeeping missions or special political missions
does not imply the end of peace processes or of United
Nations participation in building lasting peace in host
countries. On the contrary, as the Organization and
its Member States, we must improve and strengthen
the role of the United Nations system in supporting
the efforts of Governments and civil society to
implement the various peace agreements in order to
promote a smoother transition from peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations, as appropriate, towards a
sustainable peace.

As a follow-up to the different collective calls for
an urgent change in the way in which we understand
peace and security mechanisms, Guatemala views with
optimism the various steps taken by Secretary-General
Guterres to promote and to discuss an internal review
in order to strengthen and improve the implementation
of the peace and security pillar entrusted to
the Organization.

My delegation is firmly convinced that prevention
and mediation must return to the forefront of the efforts
of the Organization. It is important to recall what the
Secretary-General has said in various forums, namely,
that perhaps the best prevention tool we have is the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the treaties
to which it gave rise. The rights established in the
Declaration not only identify many of the root causes

of conflict but also provide genuine solutions through
real change on the ground. At the same time, the early
participation of the Security Council, when it is united
and decisive, can effectively apply political and other
resources to deteriorating situations in the field.

The Council must also bear in mind that the lessons
learned from failures, as well as from best practices,
serve as to guide our future work. The Human Rights
Council, the International Criminal Court and the
special tribunals have a relevant role to play in that
regard in the pursuit of sustainable peace.

Guatemala's commitment to multilateralism and
to the United Nations is an axiom of our foreign
policy. Our strong multilateral mission is based on
our conviction that global challenges, such as the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
fight against poverty, the promotion of sustainable
development, the promotion of the rule of law and
the pursuit of sustainable peace, can be effectively
addressed only in the context of comprehensive and
consistent multilateralism.

In conclusion, we therefore believe that it is
necessary that the Security Council join the efforts led
by the Secretary-General with regard to institutional
reforms in the area of peace and security and be able
to work together in order to ensure a multilateral
Organization that can solve the challenges on the
ground and adapt to the various international contexts.

