Mr. Sauer (Finland): I align myself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.

I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Finland.

In today's world, conflicts are not only increasingly
present, but also more complex. The need for rapid,
flexible and preventive peacebuilding work is greater
than ever. We must therefore ensure that the tools at
our disposal are sharp and fit for purpose. We have
a collective responsibility to make the whole United
Nations system deliver better - before, during and
after violent conflicts.

The review of the peacebuilding architecture
provides us with an excellent opportunity to move this
agenda forward. Allow me to highlight five aspects to
which the Nordic countries pay particular attention:
integration, prevention, inclusiveness, gender equality
and institutions.

First, we need a more effective and integrated
United Nations system. This means breaking the silos
and bringing the three pillars of the United Nations
system together. Cooperation must be seamless.
Peacebuilding is inherently about linking security
and development better together. Only through this
comprehensive approach can we truly address the root
causes behind fragility and conflict, while subsequently
also enhancing the effectiveness of our work with
our partner countries. Political analytical capabilities
should be enhanced and our analysis of conflict drivers
improved. There is also a need for a coordinated
planning process of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities, in order to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping operations to longer-term development.

Secondly, the message from all recent United
Nations reviews and processes is clear. We must once
and for all put prevention of conflict at the centre and
guarantee adequate resources for preventive action;
otherwise, we will continue aiming our resources at
curing symptoms. In the long run, prevention not only
saves money, but, most importantly, it saves human
lives and alleviates suffering.

Peacebuilding not only prevents countries from
relapsing into conflict but also from lapsing into
conflict in the first place. Peacebuilding is an inherently
political process, and, as such, an important answer to
the call for the primacy of politics.

Another common message stemming from the
peace and security reviews is the need for a more
people-centred approach. This leads to my third
point: inclusiveness. Inclusive national ownership
is crucial to a successful peacebuilding process. The
participation of local communities and civil society,
including women and youth organizations, in peace
and reconciliation processes must be given higher
priority. The potential of youth as agents of positive
change must be recognized, and we welcome Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, adopted last December. The responsibility and
accountability to ensure this widest possible inclusion
remains with every individual country.

Fourthly, the genuine participation of women in
all aspects of peacemaking and peacebuilding is an
indispensable foundation for solid peace and sustainable
development. Women's participation is crucial to the
success of economic recovery, political legitimacy and
social cohesion. Women bring to the table questions and
concerns that are important to the entire population.
Promoting gender equality and women's empowerment
is an investment in the stability of societies and the
prevention of conflict.

Finally, I would like to highlight the critical
importance of strengthening the rule of law in countries
emerging from conflict in order to help stabilize the
situation, end impunity, tackle the underlying causes
of conflict and build lasting peace. Effective and
impartial institutions and judicial and security sectors
are essential for peacebuilding. We must do more to
create responsive institutions based on the rule of law.

To conclude, I want to reiterate the commitment of
the Nordic countries to the review of the peacebuilding
architecture. The Security Council can count on us to
be engaged also in the next phase as we move towards
the actual implementation of the reforms.

