Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for
his comprehensive and objective briefing, and to
emphasize the extent of France's concern at the recent
developments in the humanitarian situation in Syria. In
that context, I would like to highlight three points that
are essential in our view: the critical situation of the
people in eastern Ghouta, who are besieged and without
humanitarian assistance; attacks against hospitals and
medical facilities; and the persistent restrictions on
access to humanitarian assistance in Syria.
First, in eastern Ghouta, the Syrian regime has
established a veritable blockade that has trapped the
Syrian people. Dozens of civilians have died in recent
days, victims of the intensified bombing by the regime,
which continues to use famine as a means of war.
No United Nations convoy has been authorized since
that sent to Duma on 12 November. The population,
exhausted by over four years of siege carried out in
disregard of the fundamental principles of humanitarian
law, has been subjected to every kind of suffering.

Therecentfiguresreportedbythenon-governmental
organization Medecins Sans Frontieres in eastern
Ghouta are terrifying. Hospitals sponsored by that
organization treated 576 wounded and recorded 69
dead between 14 and 26 November. One-quarter of
those victims were women and children. Moreover,
as stressed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/982), the regime continues to refuse to deliver
the necessary authorization for emergency medical
evacuations. More than 470 people are concerned,
including 193 Children. France once again calls on
States with influence on the regime to persuade it to
authorize enable those evacuations. Attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure must end.

More broadly, and beyond eastern Ghouta, the
regime continues to remove medicines and medical
material from convoys. Medicines and medical material
for more than 12,000 people were removed from
convoys last month. In total, over 630,000 medicines
have been removed since the beginning of the year. We
have already had occasion in the Council to strongly
denounce that practice, which is entirely unacceptable.

Equally unacceptable are ongoing restrictions on
access for humanitarian assistance in Syria. The report
of the Secretary-General is clear. De-escalation zones
have not led to a genuine improvement in humanitarian
access. Violations of humanitarian law are still being
observed. Humanitarian assistance across the front
lines remains greatly limited despite the establishment
of a tripartite coordination mechanism. On average, in
2017 only 26 per cent of those targeted were able to
benefit each month, and only 10 per cent were able to
benefit in October. Obstacles remain to the provision
of humanitarian assistance, including, inter alia,
myriad bureaucratic restrictions that have been duly
documented and reported.

We can never sufficiently emphasize that the
priority is to ensure safe, full, immediate and
unimpeded humanitarian access throughout Syrian
territory. Any form of obstacle to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance is unacceptable and must be
firmly denounced and condemned as such. France calls
on the States guarantors of de-escalation zones to fully
exercise their responsibility so as to put an end to the
violence and to ensure that humanitarian assistance can
reach people in need without obstacle.

Cross-border assistance remains absolutely
essential to the humanitarian response in Syria. Nearly
800,000 people enjoyed such assistance last month.
Since the establishment of the cross-border monitoring
mechanism in July 2014, the United Nations has provided
significant humanitarian and health assistance, as well
as medical treatment for millions of Syrians, through
that channel.

The Council will soon address the renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014), and we call for it to demonstrate
unity and responsibility to safeguard that fundamental
achievement. It is indeed vital - in the true sense of the
word - to ensure access to people in need as promptly
and effectively as possible. The renewal of resolution
2165 (2014) is therefore a top priority for France. The
critical situation requires more than ever before an
effective cessation of hostilities throughout the entire
territory, with a genuine monitoring mechanism and
sanctions in place for violations. Ongoing bombardment
makes humanitarian operations more difficult. We
therefore call on the guarantors to do their utmost to
ensure effective implementation.

As a new round of intra-Syrian talks began
yesterday in Geneva, I recall that a lasting cessation of
fighting and improvement in the humanitarian situation
will hinge solely on a political solution, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). United Nations mediation, with
all of our support, despite our differences, is the only
way to bring about a negotiated democratic transition.
We reaffirm our support for Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura.

Lastly, we strongly reaffirm France's ongoing
support for humanitarian operations, but neither
reconstruction efforts nor requests for financial
contributions to that end will make sense until a lasting
political solution is implemented in Syria, with the
support of all.

