Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): We, too, wish to thank Staffan de Mistura for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/120*), and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement.

The Secretary-General's report paints a somewhat
mixed picture of the overall situation in Afghanistan.
Its assessment closely resembles that which we made
here in the Council in December 2010 during a similar
debate (see S/PV.6464). Given the situation, one might
readily draw the conclusion that the security issue must
remain a priority of the Afghan Government with a
View to a successful and sustainable transition in that
country. Like the Secretary-General, my delegation
believes that the conclusion of the political transition
process, the strengthening of regional security and
cooperation, the protection of civilians and respect for
human rights in general must be at the heart of the
concerns of the Afghan Government.

As regards the political and institutional process,
my delegation regrets the fact that it is having trouble
taking root. The current controversy surrounding
representation clearly shows that the political transition
in Afghanistan is weak. There is a fear that such
divisions could delay the rebuilding of the country and
undermine the gains achieved in the national
reconciliation process. Even so, the seating of
Parliament on 23 January was to the credit of the
political process. Its effectiveness could be a decisive
factor in the democratic evolution of that country, and
consequently a useful tool for the success of the
transition period.

My delegation welcomes the large number of
women elected to Parliament, which highlights their
interest in the political future of their country. We also
stress the fact that the transitional process must be
inclusive by involving the largest possible number of
Afghans, if not all, in the development of their country.

It will be agreed that the political situation in
Afghanistan cannot evolve without a simultaneous
evolution in the security sphere, which has barely
improved. The recent proliferation of violence and
indiscriminate killing throughout the country, in
particular in the south, offer the international
community little reassurance with respect to the
ongoing transition process. My delegation still believes
that a solution to the Afghan crisis must be political
and not military. The military dimension can only
support the political strategy. We therefore stress the
need for the Afghan Government to emphasize the
strengthening of its political institutions and the
national reconciliation process.

The promotion and protection of human rights are
another area to which the Government must redirect its
efforts. The protection of the rights of civilians, in
particular women and children, is an increasing source
of concern, as are the enrolment of children in armed
groups and the fight against corruption and drug
trafficking. In that regard, my delegation encourages
the Afghan Government to fulfil its commitments to
pursue cooperation with neighbouring countries.

Afghanistan's future is at stake. We should take
up our collective responsibility for the reconstruction
of the country, which has for many years been affected
by violence and internal division. Lasting peace in
Afghanistan could have positive effects on the entire
region. It would also bring hope to the millions of
women and children whose outlook continues to be
characterized by uncertainty and lack of hope in a
bright future for Afghanistan.

We would like to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
important contribution to stabilizing Afghanistan. My
delegation is aware of the need to support the
Government and people of Afghanistan in making the
transition process a success through national ownership
over their destiny. We support the Secretary-General's

l 1-26621
proposal to extend UNAMA's mandate for an
additional 12 months.

