Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Almost one year ago, on 15
September 1995 to be precise, we were holding a similar
meeting in this Chamber, welcoming the Abuja
Agreement of 15 August 1995 on Liberia. The Council
will recall that on that occasion we were generally
confident and optimistic that at last Liberia was on the
road to peace and security, after the nightmare of the civil
war of the previous six years.

The leaders of the subregion had made an appeal to
the international community to assist the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the
implementation of the Accord. They also sent a message
to the factional leaders about their frustration at their lack
of cooperation in implementing the Accord and the need
for them to deliver on their commitments in the interest
of peace. Members of the international community
collectively reaffirmed on that occasion their commitment
to the cause of peace in Liberia and promised not to
abandon its people. A pledging conference on Liberia and
the requirements of ECOMOG was subsequently held
here at United Nations Headquarters.

Unfortunately, we are meeting here today in the
Security Council not to welcome the installation of a new
Government in Liberia, as called for in the
implementation plan, but to support the extension of the
implementation schedule of the Abuja Accord, by a
period of almost another year.

There is enough blame to go around for the setback
that we have witnessed, but the major responsibility lies
with those who signed an Agreement to end the war in
their country but later reneged. During the open debate on

 

Liberia last May, Council members and other United
Nations Member States carried out a critical assessment of
the state of play in Liberia and agreed to delay further
action until after the meeting of ECOWAS leaders in
August of this year.

Fortunately, we have achieved some positive results,
which is the basis of our deliberations today. After
intensive consultations with all parties concerned and
painstaking preparations, the ECOWAS Committee of Nine,
at its Summit Meeting in Abuja on 17 August 1996, came
up with a new implementation schedule for the Abuja
Agreement. While we welcome what has been achieved in
Abuja, for which we commend the leadership of ECOWAS,
my delegation is all too aware that only with the
commitment to peace and national reconciliation of the
Liberian parties, particularly the factional leaders, and with
the continued support of the international community will
we be able to ensure that this will be the last extension of
the implementation schedule.

None the less, we believe that on the basis of past
experience, the new plan, with its provision for the periodic
review of progress in the implementation of the Agreement
and the formulation of a code of conduct for members of
the Council of State and transitional government, as well as
the decision to impose sanctions against any party not in
compliance with these measures, may well help to usher in
peace and stability in Liberia. We, however, need to be
vigilant in ensuring strict adherence by the parties to the
implementation plan and schedule, and to this end, a well-
equipped and highly motivated ECOMOG force is
essential - even more so since in the ninth preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution it is suggested that a
continued presence of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL) is predicated on the presence of
ECOMOG and its commitment to ensure the safety of
UNOMIL. We would in turn suggest that the Council
ensure that ECOMOG is enabled to do so through
assistance to it. In this regard, the recent steps taken by
ECOMOG to enhance its capability need to be
complemented by international assistance in the form of
logistical and financial resources. Such assistance should be
unfettered and given to ECOMOG directly so as not to
undermine its cohesiveness as a unified peace-keeping
force. We are happy to note the indications of positive
response from various quarters. We hope that the pledges
of support will soon materialize. Time is of the essence. As
we have come to realize at great cost in human lives and
material resources, any long lull between a cease-fire and
demobilization of combatants risks jeopardizing the
tentative gains that have been made on the path to peace.

At the same time, UNOMIL's presence needs to be
beefed up significantly and in timely fashion to
complement ECOMOG's deployment. We note the
intention of the Secretary-General in this regard and urge
him to consider further increases in line with his own
assessment of the situation and on the basis of the
mandate which he already possesses.

For so long we have addressed the Liberian parties
and factional leaders. We have called upon them and
appealed to them to try to overcome their political
differences in the interest of peace and reconciliation in
their country. They have so far failed to heed those calls
and appeals. This is unfortunate. One positive
development, however, out of the recent unfortunate
fighting in Monrovia, is the increasing assertiveness and
visibility of the civilian population concerning the
direction of their country. We welcome this trend, and
believe it can only have a salutary and positive impact on
the peace process. We hope the Liberian parties and
leaders will now agree to conduct themselves in the
interest of peace, national reconciliation and
reconstruction. The new implementation plan offers them
that opportunity.

In concluding, we wish Ms. Perry well as she
assumes next Tuesday the mantle of leadership of the
Liberian Council of State.

With regard to the draft resolution, we agree with its
general thrust and import. It is a continued commitment
by the international community to the cause of peace in
Liberia. Expressions of support are, however, not enough,
and in this context, we note the request to the
Secretary-General in operative paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution to come up with concrete proposals to assist
the process. We hope those proposals will also take into
account the requirements of ECOMOG in its leading role
in finding a solution to the Liberian crisis.

