Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
Foreign Minister Kurz for his exhaustive briefing. I
congratulate Austria for assuming the Chairmanship of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is a pleasure to see so many old friends and
colleagues in the Austrian delegation. We are looking
forward to working together as members of the Troika
this year and, as the incoming Chairperson-in-Office,
in 2018.

The OSCE is the largest regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. At the very roots of both the United Nations
and the OSCE lies the same vision and goal of a rules-
based international order, anchored in multilateralism,
territorial integrity and equal sovereignty of nations.
We stand committed to those principles and to the need
to respect them.

Synergies and complementarities between the
United Nations and the OSCE remain still untapped
potentials to be developed, considering that the
OSCE stands as an essential forum for dialogue and
cooperation, not only among its participating States,
but also with its Mediterranean partners. In that regard,
I would like to briefly outline what we consider two
main priorities.
First, we deem that the OSCE plays an irreplaceable
role in facilitating the settlement of most of the
conflicts still affecting Europe. Its prompt engagement
in the crisis in Ukraine - which Italy supported by
contributing to the activities of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine - demonstrated the
organization's vitality and capacity to respond with
monitoring and mediation mechanisms. The OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission and the OSCE's role in
the Trilateral Contact Group are crucial to respect for
and implementation of the Minsk agreements and to
pursuing political efforts for a sustainable solution to
the crisis. We also support the efforts of the Normandy
format in seeking a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

The OSCE mediation role in protracted conflicts
must be underscored. With regard to Nagorno Karabakh,
Transnistria and Georgia, diplomatic tracks promoted
and coordinated by the OSCE stand as the main
frameworks to put an end to instability. As the incoming
OSCE chair, in 2018, Italy will redouble efforts in that
endeavour. Those conflicts are not frozen. Talks have
never stopped and should be relaunched especially for
the sake of the communities that are involved and bear
the heaviest burden.

Secondly, with regard to the Mediterranean
dimension, as a member of the OSCE Troika, Italy
is chairing the OSCE Contact Group with the
Mediterranean Partners for Cooperation for maintaining
relations with the six Mediterranean partner countries:
Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Israel and Jordan.
Emerging challenges and conflicts in the Mediterranean
and Middle East have an impact on security for the
entire OSCE membership. The organization has a role
to play in engaging Mediterranean partner countries
in political dialogue on transnational threats to our
common security.

I would also like to point out the relevance of
migration issues for the OSCE. With its holistic
approach, field offices and missions, the organization is
well equipped to contribute to the international efforts
to manage the movement of populations, starting with
the exchange of best practices and cooperation with
the Mediterranean partners. We therefore welcome and
strongly support the decision adopted by the OSCE
Ministerial Council in December 2016 in Hamburg
endorsing that view on migration that we will prioritize
on our agenda in 2017 and 2018.

As Chairman of the Mediterranean Contact Group
and as a Mediterranean country, Italy will focus its
programme on combating human trafficking, illicit
trafficking of cultural property, cybersecurity, gender
equality, economic cooperation, especially among small
and medium-sized enterprises, and dialogue among
think tanks and policy planners from both shores. To
that end, we intend to constructively associate OSCE
partner countries with the Contact Group activities.
We will build on successful initiatives such as the
Carabinieri training course organized by the Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Unit in Vicenza, Italy,
under the auspices of the OSCE training project entitled
"Combating Human Trafficking along Migration
Routes", which includes participants from partner
countries and whose second phase will begin in June.
We also have proposed organizing the annual OSCE
Mediterranean Conference, under our chairmanship
in Sicily in late October, with those priority issues on
the agenda.

I should like to conclude by underscoring that
the transnational nature of the challenges and threats
to international security that we confront requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach. We are strongly
committed to promoting such a cross-dimensional
approach within both the United Nations and the OSCE.
The nexus between security, development and human
rights, with a special focus on conflict prevention and
the role of women in mediation and in conflict and post-
conflict situations, is at the core ofthe the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the sustaining peace
agenda. Therefore, it must be further integrated within
the United Nations system and in its cooperation with
regional organizations.

