Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we convey our deep condolences
to the Permanent Representative of Sweden to the
United Nations following the tragedy that took place
in Stockholm.

On the night of 7 April, the United States carried
out an attack on the territory of sovereign Syria.
We describe that attack as a flagrant violation of
international law and an act of aggression. We strongly
condemn the illegitimate actions by the United States,
whose consequences for regional and international
stability could be extremely serious. The attack was
a flagrant violation of the 2015 memorandum on
preventing air incidents and ensuring security during
operations in Syrian airspace. The Russian Ministry of
Defence has stopped its cooperation with the Pentagon
under that memorandum.

In recent times, the United States Administration
has often talked about the need to combat international
terrorism, and that provided the justification for
American troops and their allies being present on Syrian
soil, although they were there without the invitation
of the legitimate Government of Syria and without
the approval of the Security Council. Manipulating
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations is beyond
any criticism. The aggression by the United States has
merely served to strengthen terrorism. The attack was
directed at Syrian armed forces infrastructure and its
air force. In other words, it was directed at those, who
over all these years, have been involved in the fight
against terrorism. It is not difficult to imagine how
much terrorists' spirits were raised after the attack
by Washington.

Immediately following the attack, major attacks
were perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front against Syrian
military sites. Once again, we repeat that the Syrian
armed forces will continue to be the main anti-terrorist
entity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Who will combat
terrorism? Will it be the illegal armed groups that
have entered Syria by the hundreds of thousands?
Iraqi and Libyan military bases have been destroyed,
and look at what then happened. Such actions are
contrary to international decisions, including the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), which we all
played a part in designing. The communique includes
references to settlement, while ensuring that national
institutions remain intact. Are those actions the way to
ensure sustainability?

The Russian Federation, from the tribune of the
United Nations, has stated the need to establish an
international coalition to combat terrorism, which
would be based on international law. On many
occasions, we have sent signals to Washington about
our readiness to undertake such cooperation. As we see
it, Washington has chosen a different path. We must
recall that unilateral actions lead to reprehensible and
tragic consequences for region and its inhabitants.
Think about the consequences and remember the
outcome of United States actions in the Middle East.
Think about the steps it has taken and their impact
on the process to bring about a political settlement in
Syria. Unfortunately, today's appeal to move forward
the political process after the military attack shows its
hypocrisy. With regard to the Astana and Geneva tracks,
clear progress has been made in recent days. What
goals guided the United States when it undermined that
progress, especially given that the progress achieved
was no thanks to the United States at all.

Returning to the use of chemical weapons as
a pretext yet again, the United States, the United
Kingdom and France put forward a draft resolution
(S/20l7/172) that was quite erroneous in its very logic.
The logic behind predetermining that Damascus was
guilty was deeply flawed. What about the gold standard
of the presumption of innocence? Why do they apply it
in their own capitals but forget about it when it pertains
to the Middle East and or to other regions? Why do the
capitals of those countries forget that principle when
it pertains to the Middle East and or to other regions?
Why do they forget the presumption if innocence in such
cases? All of that is taking place because Washington,
London and Paris - I have spoken about this topic
in closed consultations and would like to reiterate
it - are paranoid about overthrowing the legitimate
Government in sovereign Syria. That was clearly
shown by non-diplomatic actions and the statements
made by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Rycroft. Stop putting forward such
unprofessional arguments and levelling accusations
against my country; they fly in the face of diplomacy.
They are all lies. Once again, I warn them not teven try
to sow the seeds of discord between us and the Arab
world. Nothing will work or be achieved. That is why
they are becoming annoyed. All Arab countries recall
the colonial hypocrisy.

In his statement, Ambassador Rycroft tried to
divert the attention from the core issue. Once again it
did not work. That is why I would like to recall exact
events. Those who put forward this initiative are in
no way interested in an impartial investigation by a
competent international body to determine exactly
what took place in Khan Shaykhun. In addition, I would
also state that they fear such an investigation. They are
afraid of a genuinely independent investigation. What
would happen if the outcome of that investigation were
to contradict their anti-Government paradigm? They
feared investigations into the events in Khan al-Asal,
then in eastern Ghouta and now in Khan Shaykhun.

With regard to Khan Shaykhun, the Permanent
Representative of the United States stated that there is
credible evidence from the United States intelligence
services who claimed that Syrian Government forces
used chemical weapons. We said, "Show us, and experts
will determine whether or not that was the case". I
would recall that General Powell talked in this very
Chamber about chemical weapons and weapons of mass
destruction, which were not found (see S/PV.4701).

Let us work together as professionals, and not
issue ultimatums. We are living in a very complex and
multipolar world, and we cannot live like this. Russia
has proposed a constructive alternative to its partners
in the Security Council. They just didn't have a trump
card or a winning alternative. They have not put forward
any professional alternative or good arguments to us.
Our initiative was specifically based on the appeal
for specialists, chosen on a geographical basis by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-finding Mission and the United Nations-
OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism on chemical
weapons in Syria to visit the site where this incident
took place in Khan Shaykhoun, as well as neighbouring
areas, as soon as possible, in order to carry out a
professional investigation.

All Syrian parties were asked to grant these expets
immediate access to where the events took place. It
is not irrelevant to recall that the Syrian Government
does not control that area of Idlib province. Supported
from aborad, military groups that are closely linked
to Al-Nusra Front terrrorist units rule over those
territories, and they have things to hide, including in
the context of chemical weapons. But some are trying
to back them again, as they backed notorious bandits
in eastern Aleppo. However, everything became clear
once Aleppo was freed. It is no coincidence that the
many complaints of the Syrian Government related to
the massive entry of chemical weapons into the country,
their warehousing by extremists in special warehouses
and their use against the army and civilians have simply
been ignored - or it has been considered for month
after month with comtempt and without any outcome.

The OPCW Fact-finding Mission does not work in a
conscientious manner. It prefers to be guided in its work
by statements from opposition groups, Internet blogs,
social networks and a whole range of non-governmental
organizations of highly dubious reputation. They do not
even look at information and evidence from areas where
the incidents took place. And they want us to agree with
that information? It is not even worth looking at.

In our draft resolution we also set out the need to
establish a geographical balance with regard to staffing
the investigation group. That is an important point,
which has a direct bearing on the issue of impartiality
and trust. Thus far, the Fact-finding Mission was
usurped by representatives from a single country that
is in the forefront of anti-Damascus parties.

Proof of blatant double standards includes ignoring
the chemical attacks carried out by terrorists in the
Middle East as a whole. In that regard, members could
recall the recent events in Mosul, Iraq. Where was the
international community's reaction? Where was their
warning - first and foremost, of those who carried
out this headline-grabbing public action in regard to
Khan Shaykhoun? Are these victims of a different
category? Are they perhaps second-rate victims? Why
do we not see in their countries' headlines the tragedy
in the besieged town of Mosul? We are talking about
hundreds of thousands of people.

Thus is the attack in Syria an attempt to distract
attention from the many victims among the peaceful
populations in Iraq and Syria caused by unilateral
actions, including attacks on homes and other civilian
targets. There are no properly working Hhumanitarian
corridors. Let us recall the little girl from Mosul named
Hawra. No one said anything at all about this little
girl, who became a symbol of this tragedy: everyone
in her house was killed when a coalition bomb fell on
her house. Thank God, the little girl lived. She had to
fight for her life, but is now out of danger. However, she
is almost blind. We will not set up a cynical show and
hold up photographs here in the Chamber. But people
must know about the Mosul tragedy.

Do not tell me that we are trying to draw attention
away from Syria when we talk about Mosul. That is
a lie. Those who know our position on this will know
that this is a shameless lie. We do not want to draw
anyone's attention from anything, in particular from
what terrorists are doing. We merely want to say that if
we are fighting terrorism, we should do it on the basis of
single standards and not by dividing parties into good
and bad, allies and foes. Let me say once again that no
one should try to set us at odds with Iraq. No one will
be able to ruin our relations that country. They should
look at our relations with Iraq, as opposed to their own.

The 10 non-permanent members of the Security
Council did try to find compromise last evening during
the consultations we called for. They thanked the
American delegation for the fact that voting had been
postponed. However, there really was nothing to thank
them for. Our colleagues did not even imagine that
the decision was made with totally different ideas in
mind. It certainly was not with the idea of continuing
constructive and conciliatory dialogue. Washington had
already chosen to take military action, which took place
with members barely having left the United Nations
building. We call upon the United States immediately
to cease its aggression and to join the efforts being
made towards a political settlement in Syria, as well as
to work together to combat the terrorist threat. We are
still prepared to engage in such cooperation.

We have heard many insulting words today with
regard to our right to the veto - our right. We have
won it and have exercised it in a responsible manner,
but we use it only in such circumstances when others in
the Security Council try to impose their irresponsible
geopolitical projects. The Council must develop agreed
international decisions. Reckless geopolitical schemes
will never be supported.

