Mr. Ladsous (Spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your invitation to brief the
Security Council along with my colleague and
friend Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare, on the
overall developments in the situation in Mali. 1 take
this opportunity to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Mali, Mr. lssa Konfourou.

After four months of calm, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) was once again the target of a
series of coordinated attacks on 3 October. Although
the relative calm in recent months might have given us
some hope that there could possibly be improvement
in the situation on the ground, unfortunately we need
to realize that the persistent delays we have seen in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the latest
violations of the ceasefire are incompatible with lasting
stabilization, even if that were temporary.

At the meeting of the Security Council on Mali in
June (see S/PV.7727), Foreign Minister Diop announced
the agreement of the parties on the modalities for the
appointment of interim authorities and the timing
for establishing them in the five northern regions of
Mali during the June-September period, as well as the
establishment of security arrangements, including the
structures for the Operational Coordination Mechanism.
In that context, the Council adopted resolution
2295 (2016) to call upon the parties to accelerate the
implementation of the Agreement, notably by agreeing,
inter alia, to prioritize certain provisions.

Unfortunately, three months, later I am compelled
to report to the Council that, since July, clashes have
resumed among signatory groups in the Kidal region,
thereby seriously threatening the peace process and
postponing once again the appointment of the interim
administration. Those institutional and security
arrangements should have been in place for nearly a
year, and the joint patrols should have been launched
in November 2015. I also deplore the lack of progress
regarding the process of cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

The situation in the centre of the country has
become worse. On 29 May, in Sevare in the Mopti
region, an improvised explosive device - if such
devices really are improvised - was exploded during
a convoy of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
killing five Blue Helmets returning from a civilian-
protection operation in Tenenkou Cercle. On 18 July, a
column of 18 vehicles and several motorcycles attacked
installations of Malian armed forces in Nampala in the
Se'gou region, killing 15 and wounding 34 people. On
2 September, armed individuals briefly occupied the
locality of Boni again in the Mopti region.

In that context, it is very important that the
Government of Mali, with United Nations support,
continue its efforts to prepare a national counter-
terrorism strategy that is multifaceted and coherent and
includes comprehensive measures to prevent violent
extremism. This is necessary because repeated attacks
against the authority of the State are taking place
against the background of general degradation in the
rule of law and social cohesion. In the region of Mopti
alone, intercommunity violence led to 18 deaths and
44 wounded in June, as well as 6 dead and 9 wounded
in the period from late August to early September. In
that regard, we must welcome the announcement by
President Keita, during the ministerial meeting on the
sidelines of the General Assembly on 23 September,
that a conference of national accord would be held
later this year, which could be an important step in
strengthening cohesion and national reconciliation to
find a long-term, as inclusive as possible, solution to
the deep-rooted causes of the crisis in northern Mali.

In the past three months since the adoption of
resolution 2295 (2016), MINUSMA has spared no effort
to proactively adjust to its new mandate. The fact that
Malian stakeholders resort to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Annadif's good offices
even on issues with indirect links to the Peace
Agreement - such as when he facilitated discussions
between opposition parties and the Government on the
draft revised electoral law - demonstrates the level of
trust that Mr. Annadif has been able to establish in the
nine months he has been in office. While there is a high
level of trust with the parties, unfortunately it must be
said that the parties to the Peace Agreement are yet to
leave aside their differences - for example, on Kidal
and other issues - and to sit down with our colleague
to prioritize implementation steps in order to finalize
benchmarks and concrete timelines, as requested in
the resolution.

With regard to additional capabilities, they have
not yet been generated. The force has utilized the tools
at its disposal to the fullest extent in order to project a
more robust and proactive posture to protect civilians.
Following the clashes in July in Kidal, the Mission
launched an operation to deter clashes and protect
civilians by showing a robust presence with patrols and
checkpoints. It was therefore a very active posture. In
August, the Mission launched another operation, again
establishing checkpoints and conducting coordinated
patrols with the Malian armed forces along the
Timbuktu-Douentza-Hombori access from Timbuktu to
the Mopti region. Furthermore, in spite of the Mission
doing its utmost, civilians continue to suffer from the
consequences of military operations by both the armed
groups and the Government.

New violations of the ceasefire have further
hampered access for humanitarian actors, who are
doing their best to answer the most pressing needs of
the population, pending the resumption of basic public
services by the State. I also regret to note that there have
been serious allegations of human rights violations,
notably by the Groupe d'autodefense des Touaregs
imghad et leurs allies in the Kidal region, and we also
continue to receive reports of the excessive use of force
by the Malian army in the centre of the country.

Pursuant to resolution 2295 (2016), MINUSMA
has developed a plan to support the redeployment of
the Malian armed forces, which is fully in line with the
human rights due diligence policy of the Organization.
While the state of play of the peace process currently
precludes the return of the Malian army to the north part
of the country, the Mission has already taken concrete
steps to support them in the centre of the country, for
example, by upgrading protection for the armed forces
at its base in Nampala and by deploying troops with air
support to aid them in reasserting control over Boni.

Meanwhile, in parallel, MINUSMA continues to
seek to enhance collaboration with Mali's neighbours
and to support a regional security initiative to more
effectively address all the common security challenges.
It is in that context that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Annadif has been engaging the
Governments of the Group of Five Sahel Member States,
while the Mission is currently planning the deployment
of liaison officers as stipulated in the resolution.

The participants in the ministerial meeting of
23 September unanimously stressed that the primary
responsibility for the success of the peace process in
Mali lies with the parties. MINUSMA will not be able
to fully implement its mandate as long as the signatories
to the Peace Agreement do not resolutely engage in its
implementation. The time has come - it is certainly
time - to rise above those immediate localized
interests and to think of the long-term expectations of
the constituents directly affected, as well as the needs
of the country as a whole. As tragically illustrated by
the attacks on Monday, the Mission's capacity to protect
civilians and counter asymmetric attacks in active
defence of its mandate has further been hampered by
the absence of the capabilities recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report issued in June, which
the Council authorized in resolution 2295 (2016).

In that context, I regret to have to inform the
Security Council that MINUSMA, instead of receiving
reinforcements, will soon be facing the loss of key
enablers. For example, two troop-contributing countries
have recently apprised us of their decision to withdraw

three of the Mission's five helicopter units by early
2017.

I can assure the Council that we will make every
effort to generate assets to replace them. We take every
opportunity to work towards that goal, including at
the London peacekeeping defence ministerial held a
few weeks ago and at the ministerial meeting on Mali
held here on 23 September. I attended a meeting in
Europe, in Slovakia, last week, and I have also spoken
to all interlocutors. But the reality is that no Member
State has so far committed to filling in the gaps in our
capabilities or to provide us with the capacities that
have been authorized by resolution 2295 (2016) and
previous resolutions.

Indeed, there is a glaring lack ofvolunteers. I deeply
regret the sombre tone of my presentation today, but I
would be remiss if I did not draw the attention of the
Council to the persistent absence of concrete progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement and
the deterioration of the security situation, 18 months
after the signing of the Algiers Accord. The situation
poses serious questions as to the sustainability and the
very relevance of the overall framework for peace and
stability in Mali, a framework that the Malian parties
have agreed to and that Mali's international partners
have committed to supporting.

