Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting on the Brahimi
Report on United Nations peacekeeping operations.

My delegation would like to pay tribute to Mr.
Brahimi and to the members of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations for the important document
they have crafted. This document has given rise to
particular interest in the United Nations because of the
importance of the topic it addresses, its useful
assessment of peacekeeping operations, and the scope
of the recommendations it contains to remedy the
shortcomings in the present system and better meet the
needs of peacekeeping operations.

The Security Council has set up a Working Group
charged with examining those recommendations that
fall within the purview of the Council. This
consideration is part of a process of collective review
undertaken within our Organization, in which the
General Assembly and the Secretariat, each in keeping
with its own responsibilities, are also participating.

I should like in this connection to express my
delegation's deep appreciation to Ambassador Ward of
Jamaica for the competence and determination he
displayed in guiding the deliberations of the Working
Group. The important document that the Security
Council has just adopted is the result of great efforts
undertaken in a spirit of cooperation and compromise.

I shall not comment on all of the provisions of
this document, but I will make a few observations.

We would like first of all to emphasize how
important it is, in our view, for peacekeeping
operations to conform rigorously to the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the political independence of
States, as well as that of non-interference in internal
affairs, is indispensable in the framework of efforts to
promote international peace and security.

We share the View that strengthening the United
Nations peacekeeping capacity requires, in addition to
political will on the part of Member States, that
improvements be made to their structure and
management in order to adapt them to current realities
and recent developments. The necessary resources also
are required. Peacekeeping operations require a clear-
cut mandate, objective and structures, as well as
reliable methods of financing. Before withdrawing a
mission, the United Nations must ensure that its
objective has indeed been achieved.

Turning to the rapid deployment of peacekeeping
operations, we must recognize that the United Nations
has sometimes been slow to deploy. This slow pace has
been interpreted by some as indicating an inability on
its part to shoulder its responsibilities and meet its
obligations in respect of certain conflicts. Others have
accused the Organization of selectivity in handling
conflicts, depending on the regions in which they
occur. To avoid this kind of situation, equal priority
should be given to the maintenance of international
peace and security in every region of the world, as the
Council reaffirmed in resolution 1318 (2000), adopted
on 7 September at the level of heads of State or
Government.

The resolution of problems related to insufficient
numbers of troops and a lack of equipment for
peacekeeping operations is obviously a fundamental
issue in the context of the overall process. This is a
collective responsibility incumbent upon all Member
States, in particular those having greater means and
capacities.

The Brahimi Panel has underlined the usefulness
of institutionalizing consultations between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries. This
recommendation is, in fact, one of the main requests by
troop-contributing countries. Troop-contributing
countries play an indispensable role in the
implementation in the field of the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations established by the Security
Council. Past experience has shown the need to
significantly enhance the quality of the consultations
between the Council and those countries from the very
outset of the planning stage, when new operations are
being envisaged, as well as throughout the entire
process. Close and meaningful consultations will
improve the chances of success of these operations.

The Panel rightly recommends that more effective
conflict prevention strategies be adopted. Indeed,
prevention is today a top priority of the international
community. We believe that unremitting attention must
be paid to the deep-rooted causes of conflict, according
to the specific characteristics of each case. This
requires a comprehensive approach to which the organs
of the United Nations should contribute in keeping
with their prerogatives.

The Panel also very aptly underlines the
importance of the elaboration of better peace-building
strategies, because a lasting peace cannot be built if
reconstruction efforts are not addressed as well. We
share the conviction that peace and development are
intimately linked. Poverty and underdevelopment are
among the major causes of conflict, and therefore a
greater commitment on the part of the international
community to reduce poverty throughout the world and
promote lasting development would represent not only
a step towards conflict prevention but also a
contribution to the consolidation of peace.

The work done by the Security Council on the
Brahimi Report, which has led to the document we
have just adopted, will undoubtedly represent an
important contribution by the Council to the collective
efforts deployed within the United Nations in the quest
for ways of strengthening our Organization's capacity
in the field of peacekeeping operations.

