Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the African

group.

I should like to begin by congratulating you, Mr.
President, upon your accession to the Presidency of the
Council. Your extensive experience and renowned talents
as a veteran diplomat augur well, we are sure, for the
success of the Council's work. We are proud to see a
highly skilled son of Africa presiding over this august body
and participating actively in consolidating peace in Africa
and in the world.

We take this opportunity to thank your predecessor,
the Ambassador of the United States, Mrs. Madeleine
Albright, for her praiseworthy efforts in presiding over
the Council last month, when it dealt with African issues.

The Security Council is considering the situation in
Burundi for the second time in a month. That assuredly
is a sign of grave concern on the part of this body and on
the part of the international community as a whole, in
view of the duration of the crisis and the persisting
instability of the country. Meanwhile, the humanitarian
situation is seriously deteriorating, the political institutions
are hamstrung and the economy and infrastructure of the
country are gravely threatened.

Can it ever be repeated enough to the parties
concerned in Burundi that violence is a poor adviser; that
recourse to force, far from resolving problems and
differences, only aggravates them and that the only path
to safety and security is that of dialogue and national
reconciliation? That alone can foster a peaceful settlement
that will spare the people of Burundi from bloodshed.

The relative improvement of the climate of security
in Bujumbura is a positive sign of which we take note,
and we encourage the significant efforts made by the
Government of Burundi to restore peace and security.
However, at the same time we cannot fail to note the
absence of tangible progress towards a solution to the
substantive problems the country is experiencing. We urge
the people of Burundi, particularly the political and armed
forces, to demonstrate a firm commitment to dialogue,
peace and national reconciliation. We launch an appeal to
all these forces to work together to implement the
Convention on Governance in order to restore and
consolidate peace and security and bring democracy back
to Burundi.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU), which
opportunely sent military observers to Burundi and
extended their mandate by three months last December,
has already considered the situation in the country
through its Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution. That organization, under the
leadership of its acting chairman, is making tireless
efforts to assist the parties in Burundi to achieve a lasting
political settlement. To that end, it is important that
consultations and coordination in support of joint political
dialogue be continued between OAU, the Security
Council and the United Nations Secretariat.

The international community must continue and
strengthen, by all appropriate means, its assistance and
encouragement to the parties concerned in Burundi for the

 

commencement and speedy conclusion of such a dialogue.
In this context, it seems to us that silencing the radio
stations sowing hatred and discord is one of the priority
needs.

We reiterate our appeal for greater cooperation
between the countries of the region in their search for a
lasting solution to the problems of insecurity and instability.
At their last meeting, held in Addis Ababa from 26
February to 28 February 1996, the Council of Ministers of
OAU reiterated its support for the convening of a regional
conference on security, stability and development in the
Great Lakes region.

In the humanitarian field, urgent and increased
assistance to displaced persons in Burundi and to Burundian
refugees in neighbouring countries is necessary, especially
within the context of the implementation of the Bujumbura
Action Plan.

Following the Cairo Conference, held on 28 and 29
November 1995, a second international conference on the
Great Lakes region, in which the Presidents of Rwanda,
Burundi, Uganda, Zaire and Tanzania will participate, will
be held in Tunis next week. This conference will consider
a number of issues, particularly humanitarian issues relating
to refugees and the economic and security situation of the
region. It will contribute to the restoration of security,
peace and stability and will be a landmark on the road to
development and reconstruction in Burundi and in all the
countries of the subregion.

Finally, we launch an appeal to the Burundi authorities
to improve measures to ensure the security and protection
of the personnel of international and non-governmental
organizations so as to facilitate their humanitarian efforts.

