Judge Byron: I would like first of all to wish the
new Turkish presidency the best of success for their
tour of office. I would also like to recognize the
presence of the Prime Minister of Croatia.

It was 15 years and two months ago, on 7 April
1994, that the Rwandan genocide started. Three months
later, at least 800,000 people had been killed, not to
speak of the number of victims of rape, mutilation and
torture and not to mention the psychological damage
done to millions. Only a few months after the end of
the atrocities, the Security Council created the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
with high expectations and ambitious goals. The
Council was:

"Convinced that the prosecution of persons
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law would contribute to the
process of national reconciliation and to the
restoration and maintenance of peace "
(resolution 955 (1994), seventh preambular

paragraph)

I would suggest that the Tribunal has fulfilled many of
those expectations and we remain committed to
ensuring that our legacy will be satisfactory to all
Rwandans.

As I present the eleventh completion strategy
report to the Council today, I am mindful that I am here
not merely to report the achievements of the Tribunal,
but to acknowledge that the credit for those
achievements belongs to the Council. At no small
expense Council members have supported this
Tribunal, which marks a milestone in articulating and
protecting fundamental human rights without regard to
ethnicity, local politics or national boundaries. The
Council's support of our efforts demonstrates its
commitment to the proposition that man's inhumanity
to man cannot be excused as an inevitable trait of
human nature. It is a choice for which every
perpetrator of atrocities can be and must be held
responsible.

The ICTR has accomplished much since it was
established in November 1994. It has rendered
judgements concerning forty-four defendants in
complex cases under difficult conditions. Yet, equally
important, the Tribunal has established a judicially
verified factual record of the events in Rwanda that
will serve as a background for the remaining trials, a
resource for historians and as a major contribution to
the process of reconciliation.
But we are not complacent. In the six months
since I last reported to you in December, the Tribunal
has rendered three judgements involving six accused.
Between now and the end of the year, we expect six
judgements in other single-accused cases. The first
months of this year have also seen the completion of
the evidence phase in two of the largest multi-accused
trials; the Butare trial and the Military II trial. These
two and the Bizimungu case are now all in the
judgement drafting phase, involving in total some 14
accused. In the fifth multi-accused case, the Karemera
trial, we are currently awaiting the decision of the
Appeals Chamber with respect to our order to sever
one of the defendants whose continued illness has
delayed the proceedings.

The maximum possible number of ten new cases
projected for 2009 during my last presentation to the
Security Council did become a reality. Four of these
ten new cases have commenced as of today and in one
of them the evidence phase has already been
completed.

The Tribunal continues with its efforts to improve
the management of the trials, from the pretrial stage to
the drafting of judgements. Nevertheless, the
commencement of several of the new trials had to be
adjourned for a variety of reasons, including disclosure
issues, the unanticipated resignation of counsel in three
cases shortly before the scheduled start of the trial, the
death of one of the defence counsels and the recusal of
a presiding judge. But despite those delays, we
continue to make all efforts to meet the projections and
to conclude the evidence phase by the end of this year
to the extent possible.

However, the delayed start of some of the trials
requires contingency planning for a possible spillover
of those hearings into the first months of 2010. The
delays could also affect the schedule for the judgement
drafting process, both in the new and the ongoing
cases, as the same judges will be in trial and in
deliberation for judgements. However, with a caveat
for the Karemera trial, we expect judgement to be
delivered in all of these cases during the course of
2010. It is in this context that we invite the Council to
approve the extension of the mandates for our trial
judges until 31 December 2010.

Three new ad litem judges joined the Tribunal in
January and are part of the bench in several new trials.
Our efforts to recruit a fourth additional judge from the
roster were not successful, and the roster has been
depleted. However, as evidence of our commitment to
downsizing wherever possible and to prevent further
delays that might be incurred by the nomination
process, we have decided to try the remaining new
cases with judges currently serving at the Tribunal and
not to request the appointment of additional ad litem
judges. At the same time, this decision undoubtedly
puts an additional burden on the currently serving
judges, who are all sitting in at least two and often
three cases in parallel.

The inequality between permanent and ad litem
judges with respect to certain entitlements remains a
major source of concern. Following resolution 1855
(2008), which abandoned the requirement for a
permanent judge to be included in each bench, the ad
litem judges are now nearly identical in authority to the
permanent judges and on equal terms regarding
responsibility and case load. Ad litem judges will
preside in several of the new cases. Addressing the
inequality in status is crucial not only to ensure the
motivation and commitment of those judges, but also
as a matter of simple equity.

The ICTR is faced with a turnover of staff that is
constantly increasing and is exacerbated by the
insecurity stemming from the short-term duration of
the contract currently being offered by the Tribunal.
Loss of experienced staff translates into loss of
institutional memory, which is not easily overcome by
engaging new staff. This fact emphasizes the need to
ensure that experienced staff members are retained as
long as their services are required.

Although much has been achieved, important
tasks remain. Fifteen years after the genocide, 13
fugitives are still at large, four of them earmarked for
trial before the Tribunal as high-level accused. I
reiterate strongly my call upon Member States to
cooperate fully with the Prosecutor's efforts to ensure
their arrest and transfer to Arusha during this last
period of the Tribunal's mandate. For an international
community committed to the fight against impunity,
letting those indicted for the most serious crimes
escape trial is not an acceptable option.

The cooperation and assistance of Member States
remains a cornerstone for the successful completion of
the Tribunal's mandate in many respects. Two weeks
ago, I signed decisions for the transfer of a further nine
convicts to a Member State for the enforcement of their
sentences. The support of the international community
is still urgently required for the relocation of the two
acquitted persons remaining in Arusha. I would like to
reiterate my call for the Council's cooperation in this
matter.

As the Council is aware, the Tribunal is currently
in the process of preparing budget proposals for the
2010-2011 biennium. The remaining work load is
enormous, and our ability to successfully complete it is
dependent on the adequacy of both financial and
human resources and is relevant to this discussion even
though the Security Council is not the forum for
discussing budgetary matters. Kindly allow me to seize
this opportunity to ask for the support of Member
States in ensuring that the Tribunal is provided with the
resources needed to complete its tasks. Even in these
difficult times of economic crisis, I am convinced that
all Member States remain committed to the goal of
delivering high quality justice to the victims of the
Rwandan tragedy. We can achieve these goals set for
our work by the international community only if the
necessary resources are provided.

While the Tribunal continues working at full
speed, preparations have to be made for the future after
the closing down of the Tribunal. The Secretariat has
been consulting the Tribunal extensively during the
preparation of the report to the Security Council on the
residual mechanisms and the archives. I am confident
that the report will provide a very solid and
comprehensive basis for the difficult decisions the
Security Council will have to make on these matters. I
trust that our joint goal of effectively avoiding
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Rwanda in 1994 will be the
overarching principle guiding its decisions.

Let me conclude by expressing, on behalf of all
the judges and staff members of the ICTR, our sincere
appreciation for the continuous support of the esteemed
Governments represented on the Council. I would also
in particular like to thank the staff members of the
United Nations Secretariat for their invaluable advice
and support. I would especially like to single out the
Office of Legal Affairs in this regard.

Our joint efforts to bring to justice those who
committed the most atrocious crimes in Rwanda in
1994 are sending a powerful message to the world.
Even if fifteen years have passed, even if it has been a
burdensome process containing challenges and flaws,
even if not all indictees have been arrested as yet, we
must and we will continue to fight against the culture
of impunity and for accountability and justice. The
goal of successful reconciliation and enduring peace in
the Great Lakes region will only be achieved if all
those concerned can trust the power of this message.

