Mr. Okuda (Japan): Since this is the first time
that my delegation takes the floor in this Chamber
under your presidency, Mr. President, allow me to start
my remarks my congratulating you, Ambassador llkin,
for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation to the Russian representative
and his staff for the very professional way in which
they conducted the work of the Council during the
month of May.

At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the respective Tribunals for briefing us on the most
recent developments concerning their completion
strategies. The contribution of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) to the development of international criminal
law cannot be overstated. In this regard, we would like
to extend our appreciation to all the judges,
Prosecutors and staff members for exerting their
utmost efforts to ensure the fair and expeditious
operation of these important judicial bodies.

Today's briefings clarified the estimated
timetables for future proceedings. Japan has been
expecting and strongly urging the Tribunals to
complete all judicial proceedings in 2010, in
accordance with resolution 1503 (2003). Based on
today's reports, we have to admit that meeting these
goals is no longer realistic. Nevertheless, we strongly
encourage the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
complete their work as expeditiously as possible,
hopefully by the end of 2012 rather than the latest
estimated completion date of mid-2013.

We have heard that the Tribunals' requests for
measures such as the extension of the terms and
redeployment of some of the judges, which are
necessary to accomplish the completion strategy in an
expeditious and cost-effective manner. Based on this
understanding, Japan is prepared to work on the
necessary measures to be taken by the Council at this
stage.

Resolving the issue of the fugitives is of
paramount importance for the success of the Tribunals.
It is regrettable that two suspects indicted by the ICTY
and 13 by the ICTR, including Kabuga, have yet to be
apprehended. We encourage the relevant States to
cooperate in order to arrest them as soon as possible. It
is also unfortunate that the transfer of cases to national
courts has not been completely successful. However, in
the light of further efforts to address this issue on the
part of the national courts, we expect that additional
transfers will be possible in the near future.

Given that the ICTY and the ICTR were
established by Security Council resolutions adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter as exceptional
measures, they are facing challenges unique to ad hoc
Tribunals, namely, a residual mechanism after
completion, which was not fully anticipated at the time
they were established. Japan attaches great importance
to the rule of law and considers that impunity in cases
of the most serious crimes should not be condoned and
that the individuals involved should be brought to
justice in accordance with international standards. The
residual mechanism should serve to this end, while
efforts must be made to maintain as cost-effective a
system as possible.

Since January this year, there has been an
extremely useful and intensive discussion taking place
in the Informal Working Group on international
tribunals under the chairmanship of Austria, with the
assistance of the Office of Legal Affairs. We will
continue to take active part in the discussion, paying
due attention to the progress of the proceedings at the
Tribunals. We also take note of the briefings on the
necessity of staff retention for the work of the
Tribunals.
