Mr. Baba Cisse (Senegal) (Spoke in French): First,
on behalf of Senegal, I would like to firmly condemn the
attack that occurred in London yesterday and express
the sincere condolences of the Government of Senegal
to you, Mr. President, and to the Government of the
United Kingdom and to the families of the victims.

I would also like to thank President Farmajo for his
important statement, as well as Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and
Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia for
their briefings.

The delegation of Senegal also wishes to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for having taken the
initiative of convening this debate on Somalia, where
successful presidential elections in February resulted
in the election of Mr. Farmajo as new President of
the Republic.

That election, combined with the adoption of a new
constitution and a transparent, democratic and inclusive
electoral code, is undoubtedly a great step forward.
On behalf of the Government of Senegal, I once
again convey our warm congratulations to the Federal
Government of Somalia for the successful political
elections, and I encourage regional and international
actors to maintain their coordinated and cohesive
support so as to consolidate the country's progress.

Our debate is certainly timely, given the current
state of affairs, which reflects the seriousness of
the other challenges facing Somalia - the most
recent being the severe drought, which, according to
humanitarian agencies, puts some 3 million people at
risk of starvation. That risk is all the more worrying,
as the country is still quite exposed to terrorists.
Al-Shabaab continues to be a threat as it still occupies
parts of the country and engages in harmful actions,
such as carrying out asymmetrical attacks, thus greatly
undermining the country's security.

I also pay tribute to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali defence and
security forces for their ongoing and outstanding work
alongside the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in difficult and often dangerous conditions
in their efforts to support this brotherly country in
establishing the rule of law.

However, despite the significant progress that the
successful holding of presidential elections represents
and the progress made in the fight against terrorism,
the security and humanitarian challenges remain a
source of concern in Somalia, owing to the residual
capacities of the Al-Shabaab group, but also to the
growing foothold of the Islamic State in the region.

The increase in violence against civilians attributed
to Al-Shabaab is compounded by the use of children
in clashes, the attacks on humanitarian workers, the
embezzlement of aid and hindrances to its delivery, all
of which are reprehensible practices that we all strongly
condemn, whoever the perpetrators.

In order to better address those challenges, my
delegation believes that substantial reform of the
security sector is necessary and even urgent. In addition,
we encourage Member States to support AMISOM
by providing the necessary assistance to the African
Union and troop-contributing countries by paying for
troops, training, technical assistance and ammunition,
consistent with the exemption to the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia, as well as by making financial
contributions outside of the United Nations trust fund
in support of AMISOM.

Confident of the efficiency of regional processes,
we also remain convinced that the full cooperation
of regional States, particularly Intergovernmental
Authority on Development member States, through the
regional frameworks and mechanisms established for
that purpose, can promote a coordinated, and therefore
sustainable, response to the problem of Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist groups that threaten the region.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, according
to statistics cited here by many speakers, including
even the President of Somalia, some 6.2 million people
in Somalia need humanitarian aid and protection, of
which 2.9 million are directly at risk of starvation. We
make an impassioned plea for international solidarity
to help Somalia cope with that alarming situation. The
newly elected Somali authorities must continue to focus
on the fight against corruption in many sectors and the

improvement of human rights in Somalia, particularly
those of women and children. Senegal condemns
all violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, irrespective of the perpetrators.

In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to continue to support the Somali Federal
Government in all of its efforts to advance the political
process, eradicate the Al-Shabaab threat, improve the
humanitarian situation and promote peacebuilding and
sustainable development.
