Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation
joins others in thanking you, Sir, for convening
this timely and relevant open debate under the item
"Preventing catastrophe: A global agenda for stopping
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors".
My delegation welcomes and appreciates the
leadership demonstrated by Spain as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and as the facilitator of the 1540 comprehensive
review process this year. South Africa is looking
forward to the release of the report that we hope will
strengthen the resolution and provide an added impetus
in tackling the challenge of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs). Allow me to share South
Africa's perspective on the theme before us.

South Africa is of the view shared by the majority
of States Members that have expressed grave concern
about the catastrophic consequences of use or the
threat of the use of weapons of mass destruction,
including by non-State actors. South Africa reaffirms
that no cause could ever justify the use of WMDs
anywhere, by anyone or under any circumstances. In
that context, since the dawn of our democracy in 1994,
South Africa has remained steadfast in its commitment
to muitilateralism in addressing peace and security
challenges facing the global community, including the
horizontal and vertical proliferation of WMDs and their
means of delivery. South Africa reiterates its view that,
given the existential threats that I have described and
that are succinctly outlined in the concept paper (see S/2016/1013, annex), the only guarantee that WMDs
will never be used by anyone is their total elimination
and the legally binding assurances that they will
never be produced again. We therefore encourage all
Member States to participate constructively in the
United Nations Conference to begin in 2017, which will
negotiate a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons.

The global threats and challenges of the use and
continued existence of WMDs can be addressed in
a balanced, non-discriminatory and comprehensive
manner within the relevant multilateral instruments
and organizations, including those covered by
resolution 1540 (2004). However, that requires the clear
commitment and necessary political will of all States
to faithfully fulfil their obligations in a non-selective
manner. Furthermore, while dealing with the challenges
posed by WMDs, it is imperative that no warranted
restrictions be imposed on the inalienable right of
States Members, particularly developing countries, to
use any related materials, equipment and technologies
for peaceful purposes. In that context, the opportunities
provided by such technologies, for example in the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and particularly in such areas as food security, public
health and clean energy, cannot be overlooked.
Regarding the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), over the years South Africa has strengthened
its implementation capability through comprehensive
national legislation focusing on WMDs and their means
of delivery, which includes the establishment of the
Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction, whose role is to coordinate the national
implementation of our international WMD obligations
and regulations, and to monitor compliance across all
relevant stakeholders. The Council has also played
an invaluable role in assisting countries of our region
and beyond in strengthening their national controls,
legislation and capacity over sensitive items that may
contribute to the development of WMDs.

South Africa's experience with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) has demonstrated that the
challenges of WMD proliferation can be overcome
by, first, strengthening national legislation and
implementation capabilities, including export controls;
secondly, building capacities and strengthening
technical expertise, especially in developing countries,
including in Africa; thirdly, strengthening international
cooperation with other related international
organizations and agencies; and fourthly, strengthening
coordination with regional organizations, such as the
African Union, that play a critical role in supporting the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Ultimately,
South Africa's experience has illustrated that the
transparent, irreversible and verified elimination of
WMDs and measures prohibiting their production,
transfer and use remain the most effective means to
address the threats posed by such weapons.

In conclusion, the challenges and threats posed
by the proliferation of WMDs and their possible use
by non-State actors require the increased cooperation
of the international community. Equally important
are the strengthening and increased capacity of
relevant multilateral institutions and instruments.
Non-proliferation is not a goal in itself, but a means
towards a world free of WMDs and their means of
delivery. Therefore, selective and discriminatory
practices will not serve our collective interest in
strengthening peace and security. What is needed is a
balanced implementation of the various international
legally binding instruments.

