Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We
congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April and thank
France for its productive presidency during a very
busy month of March. We also thank the briefers and
welcome the Ministers who arejoining us today.

We thank the President and Minister Le Drian
for convening this morning's Arria session and this
afternoon's briefing on safeguarding humanitarian
space. The topic is vital to improving our ability to
save lives and ease the suffering of millions of people
affected by conflict around the world today. The United
States strongly believes that full implementation
of international humanitarian law by all parties to
a conflict is the best way to provide protection for
civilians, including humanitarian personnel. We also
believe that additional guidelines and policies should
avoid inadvertently diluting principles of humanitarian
assistance. Unfortunately, we know that the laws of
war are not always universally observed, with grave
consequences for civilians in need of protection and
humanitarian assistance. Mr. Maurer and Mr. Lowcock
know these consequences all too well.

The United States pairs its role as the world's
largest single largest humanitarian donor with strong
diplomatic efforts to promote respect for humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. We do this by speaking out against
States that impede humanitarian organizations from
meeting basic human needs. We have consistently
called on the Syrian regime to implement the many
Security Council resolutions calling for unimpeded
humanitarian access across that country. Nonetheless,
the Al-Assad regime continues to obstruct aid to those
in need, including in areas under the regime's control.
We do this by condemning physical attacks directed
against humanitarian personnel. South Sudan has for
many years consistently ranked as the most dangerous
place in the world for aid workers with blatant disregard
for protections that should be afforded to them as
civilians by all parties to the armed conflict. Attacks
on health facilities and responders, including recent
incidents in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of Congo are unacceptable. They
must end. We do this by opposing resolution language
that would require the "full consent" of affected States
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in
need. States that use humanitarian access as a cudgel
to deny starving women and children of food and water
or prevent desperate people from having access to
life-saving medical care cannot be allowed to rely on a
resolution by the United Nations to justify their actions.
And we do this by correcting outrageous, dangerous
and baseless allegations against humanitarian workers
like those Russia consistently levels against the heroic
White Helmets in Syria.

Many of us are deeply engaged in protecting
humanitarian space, but we can all do more. The United
States supports efforts to widely disseminate accurate
information about international humanitarian law
among all parties to conflicts. A thorough understanding
of international humanitarian law in principle and
practice is fundamental to the training of United States
military personnel at all levels. We further integrate
international humanitarian law topics and principles
into training that we provide to international military
partners. For example, international humanitarian
law principles are actively addressed in peacekeeping
predeployment training that we provide to partner troop
and police contributors deploying to United Nations
and regional peace operations. The work that the
United States has undertaken to ensure that civilians,
civilian infrastructure and humanitarian locations and
personnel are protected in some of the world's most
fraught conflicts is important, but it cannot replace the
full adherence to international humanitarian law by all
parties to conflict.

We encourage Member States to engage more
closely with non-governmental and faith-based
humanitarian actors that can provide valuable
insights about how to ensure the most vulnerable are
protected and receive assistance. We welcome the joint
initiative between Switzerland and the International
Committee of the Red Cross aimed at strengthening
the implementation of international humanitarian law,
which included multiple rounds of dialogue designed to
allow States to share best practices in a non-politicized,
non-country-specific setting. We hope this type of
exchange can continue.

Finally, the United States calls on Member States
to implement domestic frameworks, including counter-
terrorism laws and sanctions, in a manner consistent
with their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law.

