Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative and insightful reports
and briefings. Allow me to express our gratitude for
their commitment to ensuring accountability, which
is manifested in the high quality of the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Given the fact that today's is the last briefing
of Judge Meron to the Security Council in his capacity
as President of the Mechanism, I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to him for his tireless efforts
and great achievements in the challenging quest for
international justice. I thank him in particular for his
important contribution to strengthening international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law, and to the prevention of atrocity
crimes. I believe that it is particularly fitting to do so
70 years after the adoption of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Poland is encouraged by the priorities of the work
cited by the President and the Prosecutor. We note with
satisfaction the significant progress the Mechanism has
achieved in the realization ofits functions. In particular,
we appreciate the focus on the expeditious completion
ofjudicial proceedings and welcome the innovative and
efficient solutions adopted to that end. We commend
the efforts to provide protection and support services
to the victims and witnesses of the atrocities, and we
applaud also the follow up on the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services audits.

We therefore agree with the positive assessment of
the Mechanism's functioning in the period in question.
We also look forward to its further achievements. We
would like to recognize particularly the determination
and efforts of the President, the Prosecutor and the staff
to carry out their work effectively and efficiently, while
observing in full all applicable rules and procedures.
Their commitment to that end is all the more
commendable in that they are faced with a considerable
workload and a heightened judicial activity, amid
budgetary cuts and downsizing.

Poland takes note of the challenges the Mechanism
faces, including those that are resource-related. We
would also like to highlight the importance of sustained
cooperation with and assistance to the Mechanism from
the Secretariat and Member States. They influence
in an important way the prospects for the timely and
efficient fulfilment of its mandate. In that context,
we call on all States to fully cooperate with the
Mechanism, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and to render necessary assistance
to it, especially with regard to the location, arrest and
surrender of all remaining fugitives indicted by the
Mechanism as soon as possible.

In conclusion, let me underline that international
criminaljustice institutions, including the International
Residual Mechanism, play a crucial role in upholding
accountability and fighting impunity, which can
contribute to the deterrence and prevention of atrocity
crimes. Such efforts remain in compliance with Poland's
engagement in the strengthening of international law.
Allow me to reaffirm Poland's continued support for
the Mechanism and readiness to cooperate with it,
which corresponds to our commitment to international
criminal justice. We call on others to take the
same stance.

