Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
de Mistura's presence here and his briefing this
morning. We also appreciate the latest quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2010/318),
the presence of Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan and
the briefings provided today on the recent Security
Council mission to Afghanistan. That level of direct
engagement in the field by the Council is very
reassuring.

The Secretary-General's report and today's
briefings underline some crucial and evident factors:
the need for an intelligent, hard-headed political vision
for Afghanistan's future and a credible political process
to achieve that vision; the fact that while military
efforts alone will not resolve Afghanistan's conflict, we
cannot lose sight of the importance of security to
making progress in other areas, such as governance,
development and human rights; the indispensability of
a credible and effective partner in the Afghan
Government itself that can provide basic services and
take action against corruption; and the obvious need to
give priority to developing Afghan capabilities in order
to transition to Afghan ownership.

Australia believes that the basic International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) strategy - which
emphasizes protecting the population, increasing and
integrating civilian activity within a truly civilian-
military approach and focusing on building Afghan
capacity - provides a sound basis for addressing those
priorities. We look forward to working with General
Petraeus in furthering that strategy's implementation.
Equally, of course, we look forward very much to the
results of the Kabul Conference in July, which should
be seminal for determining how Afghanistan sees its
own future.

Australia remains fully committed to doing its
part in international efforts in Afghanistan. We recently
welcomed the decision by ISAF to establish new
multinational arrangements, for instance in Uruzgan
province to replace the Netherlands lead in that
province from 1 August. Most of Australia's troops are
in that province. We will continue to play a substantial
role in those new arrangements. We will provide a
senior civilian to head the provincial reconstruction
team as well as the core members of the civilian
elements of the team, including diplomatic and
development assistance and policing personnel.

Those new civilian enhancements will build on
our military contribution, which overall totals some
1,550 Australian defence personnel. The focus of this
effort remains on mentoring and training the Afghan
National Army's fourth brigade in Uruzgan province so
that it can conduct independent security operations and
provide security for the Afghan people. Our military
personnel are also involved in providing force
protection for civilian efforts and in conducting and
supporting operations more broadly across regional
command south.

We would like to recognize and thank the
Netherlands for its achievements in Uruzgan. Australia
looks forward to working with the United States as the
future lead in the province, as well as with our other
ISAF partners, Slovakia and Singapore, to assist in
stabilizing the province. We also look forward to
continuing engagement with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
expanding civilian efforts across Afghanistan. We
strongly support UNAMA's focus on the three-plus-one
priorities, namely, support for elections, reconciliation
and reintegration and regional cooperation and aid
coherence.

We welcome the work under way in preparation
for the September Afghan parliamentary elections. We
also note that, vitally, that process is Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led. The United Nations of course retains a
necessary and very important role in coordinating
international support for that electoral process.

As Ambassador Tanin has said today, it is
important that the Afghan Government learn from the
experience of the 2009 elections. Progress to date has
been promising, but there is of course, always, more to
be done. The Government needs to press ahead with
key electoral reforms, with a focus on strengthening
anti-fraud measures and improving the capacity of the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. Those reforms will obviously
be critical to building a strong democratic foundation
for the elected Government.

We strongly support Afghan-led reconciliation
and reintegration. We believe that work in that area, at
both the grass-roots and the political levels, is critical
to ending the conflict, and we will contribute
$25 million to the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund.
We greatly welcome the Afghan Government's draft
peace and reintegration plan, and we believe that it
obviously marks an important step towards Afghan
ownership of the reintegration process.

As the Special Representative and others have
emphasized today, regional cooperation involving all
Afghanistan's near neighbours is vital to securing
stability in Afghanistan and regional stability,
including combating transnational issues, such as the
narcotics trade and the illegal movement of people.
UNAMA's efforts to encourage regional countries to
cooperate in halting those activities and to support
Afghanistan in its own efforts to achieve security and
stability are very welcome.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
that this is a critical year for Afghanistan. There have
been setbacks and there will be more, but we are also
seeing real progress. In 2002, 9 per cent of Afghans
had access to health care; today, 65 per cent do. Afghan
women hold almost a quarter of all seats in
Afghanistan's National Assembly, which, I should say,
is above the average of 18 per cent right across the
world when one does an aggregation. This is a stark
contrast to conditions under the oppressive Taliban
rule. The number of teachers has almost doubled since
2002 and access to education has, of course, grown
dramatically. We need to extend and intensify that
progress, but there is progress.

In conclusion, it is obviously important that the
Afghan Government and its international partners,
including Australia, remain committed to and focused,
with fortitude and resolve, to use the words of
Ambassador Tanin, on the task at hand: fighting the
insurgency, combating corruption, and improving
governance and the delivery of essential services to the
Afghan people.

