Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, and the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank for their
presentations regarding the situation in the Central
African Republic. I would like in particular to welcome
the presence among us today of the Minister of Culture
of the Central African Republic. I also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation
of Mauritius, who was with us earlier today.

The report of the Secretary-General describes a
state of affairs that is of concern to my delegation. We
believe that today's open debate is a good opportunity
to analyse the role of the United Nations in post-
conflict situations.

The efforts of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) continue to move ahead. We are happy to
learn that there has been progress in the areas of
disarmament, restructuring the defence and security
forces, and in respecting and promoting human rights.
However, we note with concern that the current social
and political tensions are threatening the steps that
have been taken towards national reconciliation and the
creation and strengthening of democratic institutions.
The absence of dialogue among the country's political
forces and the difficult economic situation imperil the
efforts being made by both the Government and the
international community.

We are also concerned about the repercussions of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo in
the Central African Republic. We hope soon to hear the
opinions and recommendations of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Amara Essy, as to how the
negative effects of the Congolese conflict on the
Central African Republic can be reduced, especially its
humanitarian, economic, social and security
consequences. As the Secretary-General points out in
his report, the proliferation and illegal circulation of
arms originating in neighbouring zones of conflict
could contribute to a deterioration of the situation in
the country.

It is clear that the responsibility for building
peace and bringing about national reconciliation lies
first and foremost with the people of the Central
African Republic themselves. We believe, however,
that the international community's contribution to this
process is of fundamental importance, as the Central
African Republic is a country with high rates of
poverty, unemployment and malnutrition and few basic
services. We therefore believe that there must be a high
level of commitment and responsibility on the part of
external actors.

Without ignoring the positive contributions of
donor countries and multilateral organizations such as
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,
we are concerned about the inadequate financial
resources and the prolonged delay on the part of the
donor countries in honouring their commitments. This
has made it difficult to implement the demobilization
and reintegration programme, as the Secretary-General
also mentioned in his report.

We should like to encourage the Government of
President Patasse and all the political actors in the
country to continue to work tirelessly towards
reconciliation and dialogue. We also appeal to the
international community and the Bretton Woods
institutions to cooperate closely with the Government
of the Central African Republic in continuing to
support the strengthening of its democratic institutions
and its political and economic stability.

My delegation supports the text of the
presidential statement to be adopted as the outcome of
this open debate.

