Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas for
his briefing and for his team's work in West Africa
and the Sahel. His efforts continue to be an invaluable
bulwark against the forces of instability in the region.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress set out
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
this morning but remains concerned by the security
and political situation in large parts of the region.
Many of our concerns are reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l8/ll75), including the threats
from terrorist groups such as Boko Haram in countries
including Nigeria and other groups operating in the
Sahel that wreak havoc on vulnerable populations and
systematically violate women's rights.

As we have discussed many times before in the
Council, both military and non-military action is
required to address these threats. We must understand
their root causes and the political, security, development
and humanitarian needs ofthe population. It is essential
that we adopt a coherent, whole-of-United Nations
approach to tackle existing problems and prevent
further deterioration in the region.

I would like to begin by addressing the situation
in the Lake Chad basin. The magnitude of this crisis
is profound; the combination of terrorism, extreme
poverty and climate change has rendered some
10 million people dependent on humanitarian aid. More
than 2.4 million people have been forced to abandon
their homes, and the cholera epidemic is the worst in
nearly a decade. A regional response to the crisis in
the Lake Chad basin is critical. We therefore welcome
the collaboration between the United Nations Office
for West Africa (UNOWAS) and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, as well as the joint
summit of the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) held in July, which demonstrated
the commitment of both organizations to strengthening
their cooperation.

Leaders of the States members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission also met in December to reinforce
the region's approach to tackling Boko Haram. Regional
counter-terrorism cooperation is vital to addressing
a threat that does not respect borders. The Secretary-
General reminds us in his report that cooperation
between terrorist groups is growing in the Sahel region.

But the region cannot be left to manage this
crisis alone. That is why the United Kingdom led the
drafting of resolution 2349 (2017), in 2017, and why,
at last September's high-level conference in Berlin, the
United Kingdom committed $186 million to supporting
an integrated response to the crisis.

It is vital that we follow up the success of the
Berlin Conference and ensure that the international
community strengthens its commitment to tackling the
problems of the region, including through supporting
the implementation of the United Nations support plan
for the Sahel.

In the light of the importance of the Sahel, the
United Kingdom is in the process of scaling up our
diplomatic, defence and development assistance in the
region. We are opening new embassies in the Niger and
Chad and increasing our presence in Mali. We have
deployed Chinook helicopters to provide logistical
support to the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force
through Operation Barkhane and will be significantly
increasing our development assistance to the region in
the coming years.

At last month's Council briefing on the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel (see S/PV.8435), we called on
international actors to ensure that organizational
responsibilities were clearly delineated and that strong
lines of communication were set up between them. I
am encouraged in this respect by the close cooperation
between UNOWAS, the Office of the United Nations
Special Adviser for the Sahel, ECOWAS and others. We
also recognize the efforts made by UNOWAS elsewhere
in the region and the close engagement of the Special
Representative with national efforts to sustain peace, as
in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.

UNOWAS has a crucial role in supporting the States
of the subregion in the holding of timely, transparent
and inclusive elections and in supporting the efforts
of ECOWAS and others to lay the groundwork for the
structural prevention of election-related violence. With
elections scheduled in several countries in the region
in 2019, this will be an important theme of the year
to come.

One of the strengths of UNOWAS has been to
act as a bridge between national players and regional
and international actors. We would encourage this
to continue. In Burkina Faso, for example, regional
cooperation and international support will be Vital to
tackling instability and the risks to the wider region,
and UNOWAS has the credentials to leverage and
facilitate such cooperation.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the role that
the Peacebuilding Fund and its implementing partners
are playing in supporting reconciliation in Burkina
Faso and hopes that United Nations will maintain its
commitment to using the resources of the Fund to
support reconciliation activities across the region.

UNOWAS has demonstrated that it can be a valuable
partner for regional Governments and organizations.
We look forward to engaging with the strategic review
process later this year to ensure that UNOWAS is best
equipped to fulfil its mandate.

