Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to begin by congratulating the French presidency for
having organized this briefing, and in particular I
would like to thank Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her valuable statement
to the Council.
Uruguay attaches great importance to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Uruguay highly values the role played
by the European Union in upholding international
peace and security. The cooperation of the United
Nations with regional organizations such as the
European Union is essential to preventing, managing
and resolving conflicts.

Allow me to reiterate what I said last month during
the open debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (see S/PV.7694). At
the time, we said that it is no accident that all recent
considerations of the United Nations peace and security
component have reached the same conclusion. The
challenges of the twenty-first century are too broad and
complex to be dealt with in the sphere of the United
Nations alone. It is essential to revitalize the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter to more effectively
guarantee international peace and security.

New challenges and the serious ongoing
humanitarian crises call more than ever before for
coordination among international and regional bodies,
so as to make it possible to more effectively respond
to existing threats. Such coordination must respect
the jurisdiction of each organization, boost synergies
and promote complementarity. Terrorism, violent
extremism, transnational crime, the current migratory
and refugee crisis and piracy are just a few of the
challenges that we must face together and that call for
such synergies and complementarities.

Allow me to touch briefly on one ofthose challenges.
Uruguay is closely following the development of the
migration issue in Europe. Uruguay belongs to a region
where the phenomenon of migration is and has been an
essential element. We received European immigrants
who, during the various wars that struck Europe,
decided to leave for the Americas in search of a better
life. Also, because of internal political issues, Uruguay
was the source of major political and economic migrant
flows that headed, inter alia, to Europe, where they
were able to integrate into and positively contribute to
the societies in which they settled.

The migratory phenomenon is very complex and
multidimensional, as it touches on aspects of security,
development and human rights. Respect for the human
rights of migrants and their families is a subject to
which Uruguay attaches the greatest importance.
Uruguay notes the new policies and regulatory
frameworks of the European Union to prevent and
combat terrorism, which without any doubt is one of
the major threats to international peace and security.
Besides destroying human lives, it poses a threat to
the rule of law, democracy and peaceful coexistence
among civilizations, as well as to economic and social
development.

The global dimension of the terrorist threat in the
Sahel calls for a commensurate solution. In this vein,
the assistance provided by the European Union to
address the terrorist threat in Mali and the Sahel is a
clear example of its cooperation with the work of the
United Nations. This kind of complementarity is both
timely and necessary.

In the area of health care, the European Union
provided important financial and logistical cooperation
in responding to the terrible Ebola epidemic affecting
a number of West African countries. The European
Union, as a member of the Quartet for the Middle East,
also has a very important role and responsibility in
the context of the peace process in order to achieve a
sustainable solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
as was pointed out by several of the members of the
Council who spoke before me.

I wish also to mention the contribution of the
European Union in the framework of the E3+3
negotiations with Iran, which led to the lifting of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council on Iran
because of its nuclear programme.

The European Union also plays a major role in the
Balkans. I wish to highlight the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, under the auspices of the
United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
contribution made by the EU to the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
presence of the multinational EU Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR Althea) is an
important factor in ensuring the political and social
stability of the country.

To conclude, I would like to note that the process
of European integration, which began decades ago,
is a model that has contributed to peace among its
members and that, we believe, will continue to make a
contribution to international peace and security.

