Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the pleasure of
speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland, and Ukraine align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union attaches great importance to
the issue of children and armed conflict and I thank
you, Sir, for having given me the opportunity to
participate in this discussion today. I would also like to
thank Ms. Coomaraswamy, the Special Representative
of the Secretary General, for her briefing, as well as for
her excellent report.

Despite the almost universal ratification of the
Convention of the Rights of the Child, millions of
children continue to have their human rights violated
and to suffer in situations of armed conflict. Every day
children are killed, maimed, abducted or recruited as
child soldiers, become the victims of rape or other
grave acts of sexual violence, or suffer as a result of
attacks against schools and hospitals that prevent them
from enjoying their right to education and health care.
Also, because of the denial of humanitarian access,
children in conflict areas are deprived of their right to
survival and development, to food, water and
medication.

Children in armed conflicts suffer from physical,
emotional and social problems. In addition to the
suffering of children and families affected by armed
conflict, the development of society as a whole suffers
when its children are denied a safe childhood. No
society can afford to put its children at risk; nor can the
international community.

Ten years ago, Graca Machel, in her report, laid
the foundation for putting the issue of children and
armed conflict on the international agenda. The
important resolution 1612 (2005) came five years after
the first resolution on children and armed conflict was
adopted in the Security Council. During those five
years, important steps were taken to improve the
situation, but it also became clear that further efforts
and better-coordinated actions were required. The EU
therefore warmly welcomes the establishment of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the setting up
of the Security Council Working Group which resulted
from resolution 1612 (2005).

As stated in the report, there have been both
negative and positive developments in the past year.
The escalation of violence in the Middle East has cost
several hundred children their lives, and thousands
more have suffered other serious grievances. The
conflict in Sri Lanka has escalated, and children have
been recruited by both the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE) and the so-called Karuna faction. In
Somalia, a long period without a central government
has left the majority of children without an opportunity

to get even a basic education, and humanitarian access
in some parts of the country has been seriously
hampered. Various armed forces and groups in the
Sudan use children for military purposes, and in Darfur
many girls are victims of ethnically targeted sexual
violence. A serious development is the "migration" of
recruitment and the use of child soldiers within
regions, such as, for example, the Mano River and
Great Lakes region in Africa. A way must be found to
stop rebel groups from preying upon children and
recruiting them.

The report provides important recommendations.
All grave violations of human rights and international
law suffered by children in all conflict situations
should receive equal attention. Killing and maiming,
abduction, recruiting, rape and other grave sexual
violations, attacks against schools and hospitals, and
denial of humanitarian access to children all are grave
violations that seriously affect the future of those
children that are forced to live in situations of armed
conflict. The reporting mechanism should also address
all relevant situations in equal terms.

The European Union also stresses the need to
recognize gender-based issues in the drawing up of
peace agreements, the assignment of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, and in the planning of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes. The report underlines the need to
recognize the special concerns of girl combatants and
girls associated with armed groups. Rape and grave
sexual violence against children is a particularly severe
violation of their rights and can constitute a war crime,
genocide or a crime against humanity. Impunity must
never be allowed in such cases, and child victims need
to be able to seek meaningful redress and
compensation through child- friendly mechanisms.

The sustainability of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes can be
enhanced by supporting national initiatives and by
encouraging national ownership of the programmes,
but adequate international funding must be ensured so
that it is available for the rehabilitation and
reintegration of all children that have been associated
with armed forces.

The report encourages States to strengthen
national and international measures against the
recruitment of children, particularly by ratifying and
implementing the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. The European Union also
urges those States that have not yet done so to ratify
and fully implement the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, which classifies enlisting children
under the age of 15 as a war crime.

The European Union is proceeding with the
mainstreaming of children's rights into its advocacy,
policies and programmes. The EU has continued its
efforts towards the implementation of its plan of action
relative to its Guidelines on Children and Armed
Conflict. Cooperation with the relevant stakeholders is
ongoing, and the EU continues to monitor the situation
of children in armed conflict.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict for its work. The EU continues
actively to support and work closely with the Special
Representative, UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other actors, including non-governmental
organizations, and thanks all those actors for their
efforts to protect children and children's rights in
armed conflict situations. We would like also to
underline the importance of briefings such as this one
by the Special Representative to the Security Council,
as well as to other relevant United Nations bodies such
as the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council.

We welcome the 10-year review of the Graca
Machel report, which will provide us with an
opportunity to assess the situation of children and
armed conflict and highlight the challenges ahead.
There is a need for in-depth and more systematic
research relating to different issues relative to children
and armed conflict.

Since the publication of the Graca Machel report,
much has been achieved. Monitoring of and reporting
on the situation of children in armed conflict have
improved. While some parties are making real progress
in protecting children from grave violations in
situations of armed conflict, others continue to violate
the rights of the most vulnerable - the children. There
is therefore a need for the international community to
proceed from monitoring and reporting to response.
The Security Council should call on parties to follow
up on its strong call for parties to prepare concrete,
time-bound action plans. The Security Council should
also consider measures against parties that
systematically commit grave violations of children's
rights.

Failure to protect children's rights in situations of
armed conflict undermines the ability of children to
develop and to participate in society. It also poses the
risk of intensifying discrimination and exclusion and of
making children's needs invisible. The European Union
is working actively to protect and enhance children's
rights during armed conflicts as well. However, the
most important protective factor for children, their
rights and their healthy development is peace and non-
violent solutions to conflict, to which the European
Union is fully committed.

