Mr. Al-Khal (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, despite the very tragic conditions under
which this meeting is being held, I would like to begin
my statement by offering my congratulations to you for
presiding over the work of the Council this month. I am
fully confident that your wisdom and experience will
crown the work of the Council with the desired
success. My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Said
Ben Mustapha, the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Tunisia to the United Nations, on the
effectiveness and efficiency with which he managed
the Council's work during his presidency. I would also
like to extend my thanks to you for holding this
meeting at the request of the Permanent Representative
of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations as
Chairman of the Arab Group this month.

We have come once again to your Council, Mr.
President, to review the serious developments that are
occurring in the occupied Arab lands and that to date
have resulted in the killing of more than 350 innocent
civilians, including women and children. Many
thousands of others have been wounded because they
are demanding the right to live in dignity.

Over the last few months the Council has
hesitated to take decisive action concerning these
developments in the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories, despite the many interventions by peace-
loving States, the last of which was a visit by the
ministerial delegation of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference led by the Qatari Minister for
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin
Jassem bin Jabr Al-Thani. That visit set a precedent
that some considered to be an embodiment of the
seriousness with which the situation in the region is
being dealt with. All this hesitation and pussy-footing
had an adverse impact and led to an escalation of the
events and to an increase in the number of those killed
and injured, and to an increase in unemployment on the
Palestinian side due to the policies of isolation and
siege and deliberate killing exercised by the occupying
Israeli authorities.

The State of Qatar calls upon the Member States
in the Security Council that abstained on the draft
resolution submitted by the States members of the non-
aligned group in the Security Council to review their
previous positions.

The Israeli Government has shown its true face
since the Israeli forces, beginning 11 March 2001, have
implemented a serious aggressive plan against the
Palestinian people that includes taking provocative
measures on the ground, namely the dismantling of the
West Bank into 43 parts and dividing the Gaza Strip
into four parts or cantons. This has been accomplished
through the deployment of military forces and tanks,
digging trenches and setting up dirt barriers around
population centres in Palestinian cities and villages in
order to restrict the movement of citizens and thus to
entrench the suffocating economic siege. All this is
being done to subjugate the Palestinian people and to
prevent them from earning a livelihood. This step on
the part of the Israelis is a complementary measure to
what they took in other areas with the aim of isolating
the Palestinians within the occupied Arab territories
from the outside world, as well as destroying the
Palestinian economy. The policy of siege and
suffocation and setting strict restrictions on the
movement of people and goods has not only effected
the Palestinian economy as a whole but has also
individual Palestinian families, since students cannot
get to their schools and labourers cannot get to their
places of work. One can imagine the reaction when
children are without schools and heads of families
without work.

The tragic situation in the Palestinian territory at
the moment forces the Security Council - in
accordance with its mandate and responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security under
Articles 24 and 37 of the Charter, and taking into
account the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 on the
protection of civilians in occupied territories - to
assume its responsibilities. First, it needs to provide
adequate protection for the Palestinian people, which is
exposed to the most brutal forms of repression and
aggression as practised by the Israeli occupying forces,
until it can exercise its full rights in accordance with
the resolutions of international legitimacy without the
pretext of compliance by the two parties to set up such
a force, since Palestine is under the power of the
occupying authority. It is not just that the Palestinians
be informed that the United Nations cannot provide
protection for them because those who are occupying
their territory do not accept the provision of such
protection. Secondly, the Council must put the
necessary pressure on the present Israeli Government
to force it to comply with the agreements that have
been reached in the previous stages of the peace
process, as well as to respect what has been achieved in
the previous negotiations and to resume those
negotiations where they had stopped.

The State of Qatar believes that a comprehensive
and permanent peace in the Israeli-Arab conflict will
not be achieved unless Israel complies with all the
Security Council resolutions, particularly 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), and the principle of land for peace,
thus enabling the Palestinian people to restore their
legitimate rights. Foremost among these rights are the
rights to return, self-determination and to establish
their independent State on their national soil with
Al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital, complete Israeli
withdrawal from the Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June
1967 as well as complete Israeli withdrawal from
Lebanese territory to the internationally recognized
borders, including the Shab'aa Farms, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), and releasing all prisoners of war in Israeli
prisons.

In conclusion, it must be understood that the
Palestinians are not the cause of the security problems
that Israel is facing. Israeli insistence on occupying
Palestinian territory and its continuous aggression
against the Palestinian people is the real cause of these
problems. Eliminating Israeli security problems will
not be achieved unless we put an end to the occupation
and dismantle the settlements. Priority should be given
to putting an end to the repression of the Palestinians,
and measures for confidence-building should form the
foundation that will enable the peoples of the area to
live in permanent peace and security. The bloodletting
that we witness daily must lead to a just settlement
through negotiation based on the principle of land for
peace, on international legitimacy and on the
resolutions of the Security Council, and not on the use
of force.

