The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Czech Republic.

Resolution 986 (1995) is of tremendous importance
for several reasons - first and foremost because it is a
humanitarian resolution aimed at providing for the
essential humanitarian needs of the Iraqi population. As
a consequence of actions taken by its leaders, Iraq has
been subject to a variety of United Nations sanctions. It
was never the intention of the Security Council that the
poorest, most vulnerable strata of the Iraqi public should
suffer unduly under these sanctions. Many have felt that
if they do suffer, it is a result of their leaders' rather
callous attitude towards the distribution of wealth in the
country. With this resolution, however, the Security
Council is demonstrating very clearly that it has not
forgotten the hard-pressed ordinary people of Iraq and
that it is ready to go one last mile in order to provide
mechanisms that could alleviate their troubles.

We especially appreciate in this context the new
wording of paragraph 8, in which the ordering of the
distribution of payments clearly shows the priority
accorded the humanitarian aspect and which also
satisfactorily formulates the manner in which the aid will
be distributed all over Iraq, including the northern part of
the country.

 

Nevertheless, the Security Council can still only
alleviate, not resolve the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
Resolving it in all its aspects still depends on the activities
of Iraq's leadership itself, on how completely and how
expeditiously it responds to all the requirements of previous
Security Council resolutions that are still outstanding.

In this respect, the second important aspect of this
resolution comes into play: it sends a clear signal to the
Government of Iraq that the Security Council's position is
not unjust or politically prejudiced. In this resolution, Iraq
should see some reassurance that the same approach will be
taken by the Council on other issues relating to that
country. Most especially, by adopting resolution 986 (1995)
we are not prejudging further developments that in the
future might, and hopefully will, lead to the modification of
the sanctions regime.

We note with particular satisfaction that the resolution
does not preclude the implementation of paragraph 22 of
resolution 687 (1991) and that it reaffirms the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq, something my delegation
has frequently emphasized in this Chamber.

In addition to its importance for Iraq, however, this
resolution has a far broader significance. Doubts are
sometimes cast on the entire philosophy of sanctions,
precisely because many observers feel that their burden
falls unjustly and preponderantly on weaker strata of the
targeted country's population. This resolution, if its
provisions turn out in practice to have the effect we expect,
may show a way of refining the generally blunt instrument
of sanctions for other situations around the world.

When, as President of the Security Council, I met
earlier this week with His Excellency Mr. Tariq Aziz,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq, I told him
that I would hope and pray that the draft we were
working on would be adopted unanimously and that the
Iraqi authorities would then actually make use of it.
Resolution 986 (1995) has just now been adopted
unanimously, and we will be anxiously awaiting
developments in the next few weeks that would indicate
the position of the Iraqi authorities for, in fact, the spigot
to the oil that is to be piped is, in the last analysis, in
Iraqi hands, and it is now purely an Iraqi decision
whether this resolution remains a dead letter or whether
it is filled with real meaning.

In conclusion, let me express my delegation's
admiration and thanks to all those who worked on the
final text: seldom has the Council seen such earnest,
sincere and intensive cooperation between parties with
different points of view result in a unanimously adopted
resolution, and I wish to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina, whose delegation
initiated the work on it. It is his particular combination of
expertise in diplomacy, the law, banking and the oil
industry, combined with his personal tenacity and
sincerity which, we feel, had a lot to do with today's
SUCCCSS .

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.
