Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation believes Iraq should implement the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council in a
comprehensive manner. Meanwhile, the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, as well as the
reasonable security concerns, of Iraq should also be
respected. The agreement signed between the United
Nations Special Commission and Iraq last year on the
question of inspection should be implemented.

The report (S/1997/774) of the United Nations Special
Commission (UN SCOM) shows that in the last six months
UNSCOM. has made a great deal of progress in the
inspections it has carried out in relevant fields. All together,
it has carried out over 800 inspections. In most cases, Iraq
has cooperated with UNSCOM. The difficulty that has
occurred in the course of inspection is something that we
do not wish to see.

We have taken note of the fact that UNSCOM. is to
conduct consultations with Iraq on the problems that have
occurred in the course of inspection. We hope that the two
sides will, in a spirit of cooperation, solve the problems that
have occurred in the course of inspection. We also believe
that to solve the problems that have followed the Gulf War
is in the fundamental interests of Iraq and other countries
of the region.

The Chinese delegation is never in favour of imposing
sanctions against any State indiscriminately; nor is it in
favour of using sanctions as a threat. Experience shows that
doing so can only run counter to our objectives. Nor will it
contribute to a proper settlement of the problems. We
believe that, in order to solve problems, our priority now is
to enhance the cooperation between Iraq and UNSCOM,
rather than further complicating the matter, thus making it
more difficult to solve.

We believe the current draft resolution is not
conducive to the settlement of the problems concerned. In
the course of consultations, quite a number of delegations
proposed amendments. Regrettably, however, those
amendments were not accepted.

In the light of the above, the Chinese delegation will
have to abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

