Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to join other colleagues who
preceded me to convey my condolences for the passing
of our colleague and friend Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-
Boutchoue, Permanent Representative of cote d'Ivoire.
We will truly miss him. He was always a smiling
and loving friend. We will miss his presence today
and in future. Bernard served his country with high
professionalism. He was a distinguished diplomat whom
I knew for more than 20 years at the United Nations. In
my name and on behalf of my colleagues in the Kuwaiti
Mission, and on behalf of the Government of the State
of Kuwait, allow me to express our condolences to the
family of Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, his
colleagues in the Permanent Mission, his friends as
well as the Government of C6te d'Ivoire.

Turning to the topic at hand, I would like at the
outset to welcome the participation of the Vice-President
and the Foreign Minister of Colombia in this meeting.

Their presence here today is a clear indication of the
interest shown by the Colombian Government in
achieving a durable and stable peace in Colombia. I
also thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his valuable
briefing and comprehensive presentation on the most
prominent achievements made as well as the challenges
that face the peace process in Colombia. We take this
opportunity to renew our support for the Colombian
peace process, which will be an example to draw upon
in order to resolve other conflicts before us.

I would like to focus on three main aspects:
first, the current political developments; secondly,
the reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP); and, thirdly, the role of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

With regard to current political developments, the
results of the parliamentary elections held last month
are a clear indication of how serious the Colombian
Government and parties to the conflict are about
achieving a durable and stable peace in Colombia.
That has always been one of the aspirations of the
Colombian people. The success ofthe elections, with the
participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) political party, previously FARC-
EP, and the increase in participation by 5.2 per
cent - or approximately 3.6 million voters - constitute
an important stage in the reintegration of the party into
the political scene after its members had directed their
weapons against the Government for over 50 years.
This is an additional step in the transition of Colombia
from conflict to peace and stability.

We call on all political parties to participate in the
presidential elections next month in order to consolidate
sound and comprehensive political practices. We also
value and encourage the resumption of the peace
talks that started on 15 March 2018 in Quito between
the Colombian Government and the Ejercito de
Liberacion Nacional.

As for the reintegration of former members of
FARC-EP, now the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun, we stress the important role played by
the Colombian Government in cooperation with
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, UN-Women and the United
Nations Mine Action Service, as well as international
non-governmental organizations, in implementing the
Peace Agreement and build capacities. The Colombian
Government has issued a number of decrees on the
Special Jurisdiction actions and the creation of a
Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as
Missing, estimated to number 60,000 people, due to the
conflict. All those important steps will help enhance
trust between the relevant parties.

It is now essential that needed measures be taken
in relation to security, legal, social and economic
guarantees to protect and reintegrate former FARC-
EP members into civil society as stated in the Peace
Agreement, given that violence has again erupted
in the most affected areas. Three members of the
Ecuadorian press were killed recently. We stress that
there is an urgent need to protect media personnel and
humanitarian workers.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the great
efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, led by Mr. Jean Arnault, in coordination
with national, regional and local authorities, civil
society organizations, the private sector and the
international community. The Mission has played
a positive role in enhancing dialogue with women's
associations in cooperation with UN-Women, and has
provided protection to children through a reintegration
programme for children associated with former FARC-
EP members.

