Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Geir Pedersen for being with us today on the eve of
the second meeting of the Constitutional Committee in
Geneva, as well as Ms. Al Hallak for her intervention.

There is an urgent need to silence the guns
everywhere in Syria in order to create the conditions
conducive to a political settlement. We must prevent at
all costs a resumption of hostilities in the north-east
that would be disastrous on the humanitarian level
and would only benefit Da'esh, to the detriment of our
collective security. Our priority is therefore to remain
united in the fight against Da'esh and to preserve the
hard-won progress made by the Coalition. Da'esh
continues to pose a major threat. It retains significant
action capabilities, as evidenced by the resurgence of
asymmetric attacks on the ground. France is pleased
that the members of the International Coalition
against Da'esh have reaffirmed their determination to
pursuing their engagement in Syria and Iraq, including
by maintaining a military presence in the north-east.
France will continue to assume all its responsibilities
against Da'esh.

The sharp deterioration of the situation in the
north-west since late October is another source of
concern. France condemns the ongoing indiscriminate
strikes by the regime and its allies in Idlib, in violation
of international humanitarian law. In particular, I
condemn the strike of 20 November against a camp for
internally displaced persons near the Turkish border, as
well as those against medical facilities, some of which
are supported by the European Union and France.

The fight against terrorism is a priority for my
country, but it cannot be waged at the expense ofrespect
for international humanitarian law. The protection
of civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, and civilian infrastructure is an obligation
on all. We also condemn the repression of peaceful
civilian demonstrations by the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
group. In this context, it is necessary to reaffirm the
full and complete restoration of the ceasefire on Idlib
in order to join forces against the terrorist groups listed
by the United Nations.

I wish to reaffirm France's full support for the

efforts of the Special Envoy to reach a political
settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
I congratulate him on the holding of the first meeting
of the Constitutional Committee, which is a positive
step. We hope that the second meeting of the drafting
committee, to be held on Monday in Geneva, will bring
progress towards giving Syria a new constitution. In
order to move in that direction, it is important that all
members of the Committee, particularly the delegation
of the regime, engage in good faith in the discussions
and resort to disingenuous procrastination. We will
remain vigilant with regard to any manoeuvre aimed at
hindering the discussions and ask the Special Envoy to
report to the Council in a transparent manner.

The Constitutional Committee is not an end in
itself and represents only a first step. It is necessary
to make parallel progress on the implementation of all
the elements of resolution 2254 (2015), as the Ministers
of the small group reaffirmed on 14 November
in Washington, DC. This involves working on
confidence-building measures, especially with respect
to detainees. It also requires creating a safe and neutral
environment for the holding of credible elections under
the supervision of the United Nations, in which all
Syrians, including refugees and internally displaced
persons, must participate.

Without progress in that direction, the positions
of France and the European Union on reconstruction
and sanctions will remain unchanged. That should in
no way prevent those who believe that the conditions
for reconstruction have already been met, and who
are eager to begin forthwith and on a large scale, from
financing that reconstruction and from rebuilding that
which they, to a large extent, helped to destroy. It is
also an illusion to imagine that the dignified, safe
and voluntary return of refugees is possible without a
comprehensive agreement, including real political and
security guarantees and ensuring full and unhindered
United Nations access to observe and support that
return on the ground.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my call to
all who have influence on the regime to bring pressure
to bear so that it genuinely engages in the political
process. We must all do our part in order to make
progress towards peace.

