Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank the Ambassador of Bolivia for his briefing to
the Security Council today and for Bolivia's continued
efforts as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the important
developments in the 1540 Committee's work during
2017, which included the appointment of six new
members to the Group of Experts. We are pleased that
three of the new experts have already commenced their
work and that the remaining three will join the Group
in the coming weeks. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Japan and Egypt for their contributions
during their time on the Council as the coordinators of
Working Groups I and 111, respectively. We welcome
Peru and Cote d'Ivoire as the new coordinators of those
two Working Groups and look forward to working with
them. They can be assured of our full support.

We hope that the appointment of the Coordinator
for the Group of Experts will also be agreed on soon.
I would also like to take this opportunity to stress the
importance of taking gender balance into account when
appointing coordinators.
Sweden remains strongly committed to strengthening
the multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes, to which resolution 1540 (2004) is a essential
complement. The threat of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to and through non-State actors is
constantly evolving, and the global non-proliferation
framework is under immense pressure. Again and again
in recent years we have witnessed the use of chemical
weapons by both State and non-State actors. In line with

the comment by the British Ambassador, this cannot
be allowed to become the new normal. It is imperative
that we hold perpetrators to account and show the world
that the use of these weapons remains unacceptable. We
must recognize the changing nature of the threat, react,
adapt and step up our efforts.

I would like to reiterate once again our regret that
the Council has failed to establish a new attribution
mechanism for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We will continue to support efforts that aim to achieve
that objective. Accountability for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria is crucial and must be ensured.

We were pleased that the programme of work could
be adopted this morning. The adoption was essential
for the Committee to remain effective, and Sweden,
as Vice-Chair of the Committee, thanks all Council
members for their flexibility and spirit of compromise.
I would also like to mention the important joint
meeting that took place last year between the 1540
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Such meetings have proved useful, and we encourage
further exchanges and strengthened cooperation with
other relevant Security Council Committees, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

There remains a need to highlight the risks
associated with intangible transfers of technology
whereby sensitive know-how may be transferred through
research, industry or social media. This is an issue
that we raised repeatedly during the comprehensive
review in 2016. As Vice-Chair of the 1540 Committee,
we are currently considering ways to further those
efforts. We remain committed to contributing to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
through the nuclear-security cooperation programme
of the Swedish Radiation Safety Authority and our
engagement in the Group of Seven Global Partnership
Programme, where we currently co-chair the Biological
Security Sub-Working Group.

As we have seen in the past few days, the threat
posed by weapons of mass destruction to international
peace and security is clear and present. It is only by
working together, in full support of the multilateral
institutions that we have put in place, that these threats
can be managed and overcome.

