Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire) (interpretation from French): It is an honour for my delegation to be the
first to address the Security Council under your presidency,
Sir. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June and also to congratulate the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of France on his
outstanding presidency last month.

Zaire welcomes the draft resolution the Council is
considering for adoption and believes that the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) is a positive step that will contribute
to helping Rwanda emerge from the quagmire in which it
is sunk. Zaire welcomes the adjustment of UNAMIR's
mandate and hopes that UNAMIR will bring all its weight
to bear so that the objectives enumerated in paragraph 3 of
the draft resolution are accomplished.

My country fervently hopes that the provisions of
subparagraph (a) of paragraph 3, which calls on UNAMIR
to

"Exercise its good offices to help achieve
national reconciliation within the frame of reference of
the Arusha Peace Agreement",

will be speedily implemented.

Furthermore, the Government of the Republic of Zaire
hopes the objective outlined in subparagraph (b) of
paragraph 3 will be met. That subparagraph states that
UNAMIR will

"Assist the Government of Rwanda in facilitating
the voluntary and safe return of refugees and their
reintegration in their home communities, and, to that
end, support the Government of Rwanda in its
ongoing efforts to promote a climate of confidence
and trust through the performance of monitoring tasks
throughout the country with military and police
observers".

These measures should be accompanied by a specific
timetable for the speedy repatriation of those refugees still
in camps in Zaire. My country, which has borne the
greatest burden of the Rwandan crisis can do no more. My
Government appeals to the international community to help
Rwanda to take back the half of its population now in our
territory. It is not normal for any Government to claim the
participation of all its people when half its population is
living in confinement in camps. The Kigali authorities must
get down to creating conditions that will make possible
the speedy return of refugees to their homes.
Paragraph 6 of the draft resolution

"Requests the Secretary-General to consult the
Governments of neighbouring countries on the
possibility of the deployment of United Nations
military observers in order to monitor the sale or
supply of arms and materiel referred to above".

On behalf of the Government of Zaire, I wish to inform
the Council that Zaire is not an arms producer, much less
an arms merchant.

Explicit reference is made to my Government. We
thank the Council for its acknowledgement of the burden
the Rwandan tragedy has placed on my country.

In order to put an end to the fantastic accusations
often levelled at my country, I should like to reiterate
publicly the request made by the Republic of Zaire's
Foreign Minister at the Bujumbura meeting for the
creation of an independent commission of inquiry to
establish the truth about alleged arms transfers across
Zaire's borders. Zaire is astounded at the Council's short-
sightedness and wishes to remind it that the international
community would benefit if it were provided with all the
information relating to the countries from which those
weapons - if any - come. The Government of the
Republic of Zaire commits itself to participating actively
in the consultations that are to be conducted with the
Secretary-General and in due time will state its views on
how the observers should be deployed along the border.

I should like to conclude by appealing for the
question of a specific timetable for the repatriation of the
refugees to be discussed by the Council when the
question of Rwanda is next studied, i.e., one month from
now, as stipulated in the draft resolution before the
Council now.

