Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): This is the fourth
statement in two weeks by the delegation of Sierra
Leone in the Security Council. The frequency of our
appearance before the Council within this short period
is an indication of the relevance to Sierra Leone of the
issues on the Council's agenda and of the high level of
seriousness our Government attaches to these issues.
To Sierra Leone, a poor country struggling to recover
from one of the most horrendous conflicts in recent
years, these issues are matters of life and death. My
delegation appreciates the opportunity to express its
views on them.

As a country in a post-conflict phase, Sierra
Leone heartily welcomes this debate on the role of the
United Nations in post-conflict national reconciliation.
The fact that we are here to define the role of the
United Nations in this phase of the peace process
underscores the Council's understanding of the
decisive significance of the phase in the pursuance of
sustainable peace. While our contribution to the debate
is based mainly on our own situation, there is no doubt
that what obtains in Sierra Leone could be applied to
other post-conflict situations, especially in Africa.

Our practical experience in Sierra Leone
irrefutably confirms that reconciliation is the single
most important aspect of post-conflict peace
management. The guns may be silent - and, indeed,
they have been silent for nearly two years now - but
the divisions remain and reveal themselves in many
ways, some in subtle ways, others in overt ways. We
are aware that these differences can only disappear if
the wounds of the war are healed and the scars are seen
only as reminders of conflict-relapse prevention. We
are also aware that genuine national reconciliation is a
process that is driven by the courage to forgive, the
common sense of peaceful coexistence, a deep sense of
belonging that compels parties to the conflict to
compromise in the interest of their country, and the
desire to participate in the effort to address the issues
that engender discord.

In its quest to promote national reconciliation as
the pivot of durable peace, Sierra Leone has instituted
two accountability mechanisms that are running rather
uniquely concurrently. These are the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court,
established on the principles that meaningful peace is
possible only with proper understanding of the causes
and character of the conflict, and that peace without
justice is like a house without foundation.

Specifically, the Commission, with no punitive
power, has the responsibility to create an impartial
historical record of violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law related to the
armed conflict in Sierra Leone, to address impunity and
respond to the needs of victims, to promote healing and
reconciliation, and to prevent a repetition of the
violations and abuses suffered. The fact that both our
President and the minority leader of Parliament have
testified before the Commission emphasizes the
importance the leaders and people of Sierra Leone
attach to it as a national reconciliation mechanism.
On the other hand, the Special Court has been set
up to try those who bear the greatest responsibility for
human rights excesses committed in the conflict, thus
facilitating national reconciliation through justice.

The history and operation of these two
transitional post-conflict institutions in Sierra Leone,
especially the Special Court, and similar institutions
elsewhere are very well known to this Council. The
Special Court in particular is a joint creation of Sierra
Leone and the United Nations. They demonstrate that
the United Nations is in fact playing major roles in
post-conflict national reconciliation, especially to
ensure that people are held accountable for human
rights excesses in conflict, to promote the rule of law,
to eliminate the culture of impunity and to promote
constitutionally legitimate ascendancy to political
leadership - all of which have considerable
contributions to make to national reconciliation.

Already, United Nations agencies, notably the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Children's Fund, are engaged in
activities that are fundamental to national
reconciliation in Sierra Leone. In my delegation's view,
therefore, the United Nations should now expand these
activities in the following ways.

First, since the post-conflict phase is absolutely
critical in the transition from conflict to durable peace,
it should be made an integral part of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Second, as the most important element of the
post-conflict phase, national reconciliation activities
should be adequately funded and intensively and
extensively monitored and evaluated by the United
Nations. Properly designed and executed, post-conflict
programmes can serve as a barometer of successes in
the peace process.

Third, the United Nations should work closely
with civil society groups, formal and non-formal
institutions, and traditional and cultural leaders to
promote national reconciliation in post-conflict phases.

Fourth, the United Nations should conduct a
comprehensive assessment of the post-conflict national
reconciliation needs of every conflict, bearing in mind
the causes, nature and consequences of the conflict and
the welfare of the victims, who are critical in national
reconciliation.

Fifth, a United Nations committee to facilitate
and coordinate the reconciliation activities of every
post-conflict situation should be formed.
Sixth, a mechanism for post-conflict
reconciliation should be included in all peace
agreements, as in, for example, the Sierra Leone 1999
Lorne Peace Agreement, in which some mechanisms -
notably a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, a
Commission for the Consolidation of Peace and a
National Commission for Democracy and Human
Rights - were provided for.

Seventh, the United Nations should actively
support the process of reintegration as an essential
component of national reconciliation, with special
focus on ex-combatants.

Although this debate is on post-conflict national
reconciliation, I would like to remind everyone that
there is hardly any conflict in the world today without a
regional and/or international dimension - at least, I
cannot think of any conflict in Africa today that is an
exception to that. Measures to address post-conflict
national reconciliation, therefore, should go beyond
national boundaries and actively engage external
players. The fact is that the fate of some countries in
conflict is inextricably bound up with the fate of
neighbouring countries. The role of regional
organizations such as ECOWAS, with the support and
collaboration of the United Nations, in regional and
bilateral reconciliation will be critical in that respect.

In conclusion, post-conflict national
reconciliation can be a long and expensive process,
depending, of course, on the cause, duration, character
and effects of the conflict and the willingness or
readiness of the parties to the conflict to reconcile. The
best results can be achieved if these issues are
addressed immediately after the cessation of active
hostilities. A vacuum can result in costly reversals, and
since the United Nations cannot afford reversals in its
peacekeeping efforts, post-conflict national
reconciliation should be compulsory and of high
priority on its peacekeeping operations agenda.

Let me conclude by reminding the Council that
the success story of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Sierra Leone will never be complete
without adequate and sustained support for post-
conflict national reconciliation, bearing in mind that
national reconciliation is the guarantee for lasting
peace, security and development.

