Mr. Obasanjo: I thank you, Mr. President, for
your invitation to address the Council. I do so on
behalf of my brother and colleague, former President
Mkapa, and on my own behalf.

On 7 November 2008, the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
together held an extraordinary summit in Nairobi. This
brought together regional heads of State, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission to try to identify a
solution once and for all to the crisis in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The summit endorsed my appointment as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on the Great
Lakes Region. Along with that responsibility, it
proposed that I should also represent the African Union
and the Great Lakes region as a facilitator and that I
should be joined in these tasks by President Mkapa, a
choice that the Secretary-General endorsed.

The Nairobi summit displayed a real sense of
urgency. In the last two months of 2008, President
Mkapa and I met with Presidents Kabila, Kagame, Dos
Santos, Kibaki, Kikwete, Museveni and Sassou
2

Nguesso. All called for a comprehensive solution to the
crisis, based on dialogue. We have also met on four
separate occasions with the leader of the Congres
national pour la defense du peuple (CNDP), Laurent
Nkunda.

Following these meetings, a dialogue between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the CNDP opened on 8 December in Nairobi. That
dialogue is ongoing. Much remains to be done, but as
compared to where the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region found themselves on
7 November 2008, I am happy to report some progress.

First, in November, relations between Kinshasa
and Kigali had sharply deteriorated. I am happy to tell
the Council that Presidents Kabila and Kagame both
now talk of considerable warming in the relationship
and enhanced cooperation.

Secondly, in November, the Kinshasa
Government was ill-disposed towards direct talks with
the CNDP. Now, those talks are well under way.

Thirdly, in November, the CNDP threatened
Goma. While Goma is still under pressure, particularly
in terms of the dire humanitarian situation, the prospect
of a military takeover of the town has considerably
receded.

Concerning the dialogue, progress has remained
slower than desirable. For the first month, it remained
narrowly focused on procedural matters. Moreover, in
the run-up to the end of the year, the CNDP was
unwilling to sign a formal recommitment to its existing
unilateral cessation of hostilities. It accused the
Government of incursions into areas that it had called
on the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
occupy after it had vacated them.

During the holiday period, I remained in touch
with Presidents Kagame and Kabila and with Laurent
Nkunda. At first, Nkunda appeared reluctant for his
delegation to return to Nairobi. Additionally, as the
dialogue resumed on 6 January, the CNDP's military
Chief of Staff, Bosco Ntaganda, announced his
takeover of the movement. As of the present moment,
the internal dynamics within the CNDP remain unclear.

On 8 January, I travelled to Kinshasa, Kigali and
Jumbo, North Kivu Province, to consult with
Presidents Kabila and Kagame and to meet with
Nunda. All of these parties strongly reaffirmed their
09-20963
commitment to the Nairobi dialogue. I was heartened
to hear from Presidents Kabila and Kagame that their
interaction and the relationship between their two
countries had significantly improved as a result of
frequent direct contact and ministerial-level meetings.
Both presidents expressed satisfaction with the
progress made in finding common ground to deal with
issues of joint concern, in particular the issue of the
Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda
(FDLR). In line with the Nairobi communique of 2007,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
have agreed on a military plan to put pressure on the
FDLR. Both countries seem encouraged by the
political message their enhanced cooperation is
sending.

In Jomba, I met with CNDP leader Laurent
Nkunda and a group of his political cadres. Again, he
insisted that Government troops should Withdraw from
Kibati, near Goma, as a precondition for signing a joint
cessation of hostilities declaration. But he showed
flexibility concerning the CNDP's previous demand
that the Presidents of the National Assembly and the
Senate participate in the Nairobi dialogue as
facilitators. Both of those figures have given both
President Kabila and me their assurances that any
outcomes of the dialogue which might demand action
by the Congolese legislature would be examined
sympathetically. Accordingly, I was able to reassure
Nkunda.

Following these discussions, and with President
Mkapa's able work with the parties in Nairobi, the
dialogue, which resumed in Nairobi on 6 January, has
begun to move a little more positively. In particular,
the atmosphere between the two delegations has eased,
with confidence beginning to be built and the parties
increasingly working directly together.

On 12 January, the parties agreed the last of three
documents that together lay the ground rules for the
substantive discussions to follow. This last document,
the terms of reference, is important also because it
reflects a common understanding on the desired
outcome of the Nairobi dialogue

"to conclude a comprehensive agreement
incorporating the Actes d'engagement signed in
Goma and their modalities of implementation
through a framework to be agreed by the parties".

This is critical, as it reaffirms the parties' commitment
to the principles of the Goma process but calls for new
09-20963

implementation mechanisms, as well as for a
comprehensive agreement on addressing the root
causes of the conflict.

Just as important, the parties have now
re-engaged in discussions towards a joint cessation of
hostilities declaration. I must let the Council know,
however, that in the past 48 hours, there have been
reports and rumours in the subregion of a web of plans
and counter-plans and of deals within deals. This has
once more slowed down the momentum of the
dialogue. Both sides have once again become
intransigent, the Government side in particular. As we
have done in the past when we observed such
intransigency developing, we have today called for a
brief recess in the dialogue. We will resume towards
the end of next week.

If, on resuming, the parties can arrive at a joint
cessation of hostilities declaration, this would be an
important step forward. It would need to be
undergirded by an effective and trusted independent
monitoring mechanism. I trust that, when the time
comes, I can count on the support of Council members
to help establish, as soon as possible, such a
mechanism, which would report directly to the
mediation. Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Doss and MONUC Force Commander Gaye,
with Whom I have been maintaining close and
concerted contact since the beginning of this initiative,
have indicated their willingness in principle for
MONUC to lend its logistical support to such a
mechanism.

Until such a time as agreement can be reached
and an independent mechanism established, I have
pleaded with both parties - and in particular the
CNDP, which remains suspicious of MONUC - that
they accept that MONUC monitor and verify the
effective cessation of hostilities declarations currently
in place. Looking ahead, dialogue must then proceed
with critical discussions on humanitarian and security
issues, to be followed by negotiations on political and
economic matters. In my View, it is critical that we start
with the humanitarian and security issues in order to
allow for the safe and secure return of internally
displaced persons to their homes and the establishment
of security corridors and/or buffer zones, as well for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
modalities for the integration of former combatants
into the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The long-suffering populations of the Kivus
3
must be able to return safely to their homes before the
planting season in September.

We are still at a very early stage in the process.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, the region,
President Mkapa and I will need the Council's
continued political and material support, as well as that
of its Governments, in bringing about durable peace.

Significant challenges remain. The first, as I have
said, is that, while it is slowly picking up, the pace of
the dialogue remains slow. I would appeal to the
Council to use whatever leverage it may have on the
parties to improve matters. If there continues to be
obstruction, the Secretary-General may call upon the
Security Council to consider what other measures may
help encourage progress.

The second is that, at the CNDP's insistence, the
dialogue remains a bilateral one, exclusively between it
and the Government. But more than 20 armed groups
signed the Goma Acts of Engagement in January 2008,
along with many representatives of the different
communities of North and South Kivu. Their interests
must not and will not be left out of any comprehensive
solution. We must together find the most effective way
to link their interests and their commitments made
under the Goma Agreement to the final outcome of the
present dialogue.

Thirdly, the long-term presence on Congolese soil
of foreign armed groups - the FDLR, the Lord's
Resistance Army and others - remains a major factor.
We will seek the right combination of measures to
resolve that issue but, again, we will need the
Council's help in finding it and in making it stick.
Finally, too often previous agreements have
faltered because of the lack of political will, and
because implementation and follow-through were
neglected. I can assure the Council that I will leave no
stone unturned to help the concerned parties arrive at a
comprehensive, realistic and implementable agreement.
All the agreements and accords in the world will help
the people of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo not one bit if they are not faithfully
implemented. The engagement of the region and of the
continent as a whole will be crucial.

Much has been accomplished, but much more
remains to be done. The momentum for peace
generated so far cannot, must not and will not be
allowed to die. The people of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who have suffered so much and
for so long, warrant better than that. They deserve, and
indeed demand, full and lasting peace. Africa and the
world must help make that peace a reality in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the whole of
the Great Lakes region.

I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to report to the Council.

