Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Allow me to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita and Permanent
Secretary Sidikou for their important briefings to the
Security Council today. I also thank the Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU), Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, and the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida, for their
useful contributions to the discussion.

During the Council's visit to the Sahel in October
last year, we witnessed at first-hand the strong
determination of the countries of the region to address
the security challenges they face. We commend them for
their efforts for peace and security in the Sahel, which
are being pursued under difficult circumstances. That
is evidenced by the tragic loss of lives - of civilians as
well as of security forces - in recent months. Let me
take this opportunity to extend our condolences to all
those affected.

We are encouraged by steps taken so far in the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including the conclusion
of a technical agreement and the execution of two
operations by the force. It is now time for outstanding
elements of resolution 2391 (2017) to be implemented.
In particular, we call on the G-5 Sahel countries to
deploy the remainder of the troops committed to the
Joint Force and to ensure the transfer of authority of
their battalions to the Force Commander. That is crucial
for the full functioning and credibility of the force.

The implementation of the human rights and
conduct and discipline compliance framework to
prevent, investigate, address and publicly report
violations of human rights law and violations of
international humanitarian law is also critical for the
long-term success of the force. We welcome the seed
funding for the compliance framework provided by
the Peacebuilding Fund. We are preparing to provide
further support through the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The functioning of the Joint Force and the
compliance framework will be dependent on a functional
civilian and police component. For that reason, we
welcome the decision taken by the G-5 Sahel Defence
and Security Committee last week in Ouagadougou to
continue to deepen collaboration between the police
forces of the G-5 Sahel countries. We also welcome the
support being provided by the United Nations Office
for Drugs and Crime in this area.

We encourage all parties to actively explore how
the concrete contribution and perspectives of women
can be ensured and integrated in the implementation
of the compliance framework and the operational
planning of the force, as well as in the police and
civilian components.

We welcome funding pledges made so far in support
of the G-5 Sahel, including at the Brussels conference
in February. We call on all donors to swiftly disburse
funds to allow for the operationalization of the force.
We hope that donors will earmark funds for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to provide engineering support for the
camps of the Joint Force in line with resolution 2391
(2017). That is urgently needed, not least in the light of
the continuously deteriorating security situation.

We welcome the Secretary-General's strong
engagement with the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The options
for further United Nations support to the Joint Force
laid out in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/432)
must be seriously considered. As we move forward,
predictable and reliable funding is vital for the Joint
Force to be able to carry out planning and operations
in an effective, predictable and sustainable manner.
It is also essential if the Council is to ensure that our
repeated calls for regional ownership, demands for
accountability and expectations of force output are
matched with adequate resources and support.

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is one of many
instruments that make up an integrated, sustainable
and regional approach to the situation in the Sahel. The
primacy of politics should guide that work, and we agree
with the Secretary-General that the Joint Force should
be embedded within a larger political and institutional
framework as part of a broader and more comprehensive
strategy for the region. The establishment ofthe support
group and coordination with regional structures and
organizations are important elements in that regard. We
also encourage a continued and deepened cooperation
and dialogue among the United Nations, the AU and the
G-5 Sahel.

Sustainable peace and prosperity in the Sahel
region can be achieved only through political solutions,
respect for human rights, an equal distribution of
social and economic opportunities to the population
and a restored and expanded State presence across the
region. The situation in Mali is key to that aim. It is
therefore important to ensure that the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
proceeds more rapidly and that peaceful, fair and
transparent elections are held in July.

The challenges facing the Sahel are many and
interlinked. They have implications not only for the
millions of people facing insecurity and hunger but
also for the wider region and, indeed, the world. The
collective efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries to address
those challenges, step up development efforts and move
towards the full operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force are essential and deserve our full support.

