Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Establishing collective approaches necessary
for effectively overcoming today's threats and
challenges requires that we consistently increase the
cooperation of the United Nations and the Security
Council with regional and subregional organizations.
This cooperation is established in the Outcome
Document of the 2005 Summit and must be based on
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.

The United Nations and the regional
organizations must harmoniously complement one
another, objectively using their comparative
advantages. For the United Nations, this means its
universal membership and sphere of activities, its
globally acknowledged legitimacy. In turn, the regional
organizations have the best knowledge of the situation
in their areas of operation and are often better equipped
with their own sources of financing. A clear division of
labour in maintaining the prerogatives of the United
Nations and the Security Council will allow us to
increase the international community's ability to
counter crises.

An important part of the partnership of the United
Nations with regional organizations is peacekeeping in
the broadest sense: the elimination of crises, their
settlement, post-conflict activities and peacebuilding.
We believe in the need to increase the experience of
positive cooperation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional partners in Africa, including
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Southern African Development
Community and the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development. Russia is contributing to the training of
African peacekeepers and will expand this
contribution.

An important role in finding solutions to many of
the problems in these regions will be played by the
League of Arab States, the Gulf Cooperation Council,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Organization of American States and other Latin
American organizations.

We would also like to see further development of
interaction between the United Nations and structures
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the European Community and NATO, where
mechanisms to react to crises are being established. Of
course, in this regard we must fully respect the
Security Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace, including
approving the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

Russia is continuing to assist in intensifying
cooperation, first of all in the area of peacemaking,
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). As is known, in the
Georgian-Abkhaz conflict, for example, under almost
critical conditions, the CIS peacekeeping forces, in
close contact with the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia, are supporting security and
stability.

Russia is also providing support in the context of
peacemaking operations in South Ossetia and
Transdniestria, where the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is participating in the talks. We
believe that those conflicts can be resolved if all the
parties conscientiously observe existing agreements.
Any attempt to settle the conflicts by breaking with the
established mechanisms would prove to be very risky
and counterproductive.

There are also substantive prospects for the
developing cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO). Intensive work is being carried out in this
context to establish our own peacemaking capabilities,
which could contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The establishment of relations between the
CSTO, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime opens up particular opportunities for
cooperation in those areas.

It would also be useful to ensure cooperation
between the CSTO and NATO in fighting the drug
threat in Afghanistan. We hope that NATO will respond
to the proposals made in that regard two years ago; that
would move us some way forward, at least.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
playing an increasingly important role in ensuring
stability and security in the Euro-Asian region. Its
members have called for the development of
interaction with the United Nations in a number of
topical areas, including counter-terrorism, the illicit
traffic in drugs and post-conflict reconstruction in
Afghanistan.

Russia currently holds the chairmanship of the
Council of Ministers of the Council of Europe, the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Council and the
Arctic Council. We are therefore very much aware of
the work of those organizations, and believe that they
could cooperate with the United Nations. That would
help to promote what we are doing.

We believe it is urgent to hold regular meetings
between the Secretary-General and the leadership of
regional organizations. The agenda of United Nations
cooperation with regional partners is becoming
increasingly broad and diverse. To peacemaking and
peacebuilding challenges, we have now added
countering the spread of weapons of mass destruction
and illicit flows of small arms and light weapons,
resolving other destabilizing cross-border problems
and fighting the illicit drug trade and organized crime.

We hope that the today's discussion will enable
us to move forward in implementing the 2005 World
Summit Outcome and step up the process of improving
multidimensional cooperation with regional
organizations by strengthening collective security
throughout the world on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Once again, I would like to thank you, Madam,
and the Greek delegation, for having prepared the draft
presidential statement that we will be adopting later.

