Mr. Desta (Eritrea): At the outset, I wish to thank
your delegation, Madam President, for convening this
important meeting. I also wish to express my
delegation's profound appreciation for being invited to
this debate on peace and security in Africa, which has
been organized by South Africa in its capacity as
President of the Security Council. My country holds
this issue dear. President Isaias Afwerki has expressed
his regret for not being able to attend this meeting due
to other earlier commitments.

In the interest of time, I will briefly highlight the
views of my Government on certain critical issues
facing Africa. As many speakers who have spoken
before me have highlighted the importance of
improving the institutional cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, consistent with
General Assembly resolution 61/296 of 17 September
2007, I shall limit my statement to a few elements.

The challenge is to build on existing cooperation
in a manner that tackles crises and conflicts on the
ground by means of real tangible commitments: first,
by addressing African priorities; secondly, by having a
common political and security assessment of a given
conflict situation; thirdly, by being able to clearly
define the role of each institution; fourthly, by
initiating joint operations on clearly defined objectives;
and, fifthly, by developing a comprehensive strategy to
resolve conflicts and other pertinent issues. All of that
requires strong political and financial commitments on
the part of both institutions to resolve many of ongoing
conflicts.

As the agenda of the Security Council
demonstrates, Africa is the region that suffers most
from intra-State and inter-State conflicts. Both the
United Nations and the African Union are engaged in
addressing many of those conflicts. Most of the
conflicts continue to cause loss of life and
immeasurable suffering to the people of our continent.
The progress made in some conflict situations is
laudable and promising. Yet, in others the response has
been slow, necessitating that efforts be accelerated in
order to end the suffering and frustration of the peoples
affected.

Eritrea, which has risen from the ashes of war
itself, is making an effort to contribute to peace and
stability in the Sudan and Chad. It remains committed
to regional peace and stability. In the same spirit and
with the same objective as in southern and eastern parts
of the Sudan, Eritrea has been working unreservedly in
partnership with the United Nations, the African Union
and neighbouring countries to bring all stakeholders to
the negotiating table, with a view to reaching and
concluding a peace agreement in Darfur.

It is important to assess every conflict situation
objectively, on its own merits. Regional peace and
security are maintained not by circumventing peace
agreements when their implementation is being
prevented, but by maintaining the integrity of those
agreements and by accepting and respecting the
authority of the bodies empowered by peace accords to
carry out their mandates. When a peace treaty is
breached and international law is violated, the Security
Council, as the United Nations body empowered to
maintain international peace and security, should
exercise its moral and legal obligation to bring the
parties into compliance, in the interests of peace and
security. The African Union must also add its voice and
moral authority to ensure that the rule of law is
respected.

I would not want to conclude my statement
without concurring with the views expressed by many
that the support given to the African Union should be
predictable and sustainable and that more time and
resources should be devoted to preventing conflicts in
our region.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam
