Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would first of
all like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/ 142), which recommends the
establishment of a United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. In accordance with the wishes expressed
by the Security Council, the report was prepared in
close collaboration with the African Union and I would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate my sincere
thanks to the African Union for its support and the
valuable advice with which it provided us throughout
the process. I would also like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the devotion and courageous efforts
of the African-led International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic (MISCA) and the French
forces, which, in carrying out their respective mandates
in difficult circumstances, have saved many lives.

As the report indicates, the situation on the ground
has changed dramatically in recent months. The attacks
of 5 December 2013 in Bangui and Bossangoa by the
anti-Balaka against the Seleka forces, as well as the
use of heavy weapons, have changed the dynamic of
the conflict and led to a deterioration of the security
situation and the triggering of a vicious cycle of
retaliation among civilians and clashes between armed
groups.

Although the situation in Bangui has somewhat
stabilized to some extent thanks to the tireless efforts of
MISCA, the Operation Sangaris and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, civilians continue to be killed every day by
other civilans and armed groups, in particular owing to
their religious affiliation. The Muslims peoples, as far
as they are concerned, are forced to flee the targeted
and deliberate violence against them. Unfortunately, all
that will have long-term social consequences.

MS. Amos and Mr. Guterres will present the chief
results of their recent visit to the Central African
Republic. They will describe in greater detail the
unacceptable suffering of the Central Africans and the
serious critical period of protection that the country is
at present undergoing. For my part, I will focus on the
recommendation of the Secretary-General with regard
to the deployment of a peacekeeping operation, whose
establishment will take approximately six months.
However, there remain urgent needs that require a
response today in order to put an end to the violence and
massive human rights Violations while the humanitarian
assistance continues. The proposal that the Secretary-
General presented to the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.2114) seeks to meet the urgent priorities while we
prepare the ground for a future peacekeeping operation.

(spoke in English)

The crisis in the Central African Republic began
long before the unconstitutional change of Government
in March 2013. It is rooted in the long-standing
socioeconomic, political, structural and governance
deficiencies, fragile social cohesion and deep-seated
feelings of marginalization among some communities,
in particular the populations in the northern part of
the country, which have felt discriminated against
by the central Government. Those conditions were
exacerbated by corruption, nepotism, abuse of power,
internal strife and the deteriorating capacity of the
national army. The State has virtually no capacity to
manage the massive array of threats that it is facing.
There is no national army and the remnants of the
police and gendarmerie lack the basic equipment and
the means to exercise their duties. Meanwhile, the State
administration is now largely absent throughout the
country, with the international community substituting,
or trying to substitute, for the State in delivering basic
services where possible.

The challenges that confront the Central African
Republic run deep and are not susceptible to any easy
solution. In spite of the progressive effectiveness of
MISCA and Operation Sangaris, the current deployment
of international security forces is not sufficient. It lacks
the civilian component to adequately protect civilians
under imminent threat and to tackle the root causes of
the conflict.

Addressing the crisis in the Central African
Republic requires a unified and integrated approach
through the deployment of a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation, the utmost priority of which
will be the protection of civilians. Of course, we are
fully aware that it will be a particularly challenging
environment for a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Yet, we believe that the United Nations is uniquely
positioned to deploy and to sustain a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation with the full range of capacities
that are required to address the deep-rooted nature of
the complex crisis unfolding in the Central African
Republic.

The Secretary-General's proposal envisages
the establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation that would aim at re-hatting as many MISCA
troops as possible. A strong MISCA will not only help
to address the immediate security Challenges faced by
the population but also will be essential to facilitate the
transition to a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
MISCA still lacks the critical capabilities to achieve
its full potential. Let me therefore join the Secretary-
General in calling on bilateral partners and Members
Sates to provide urgently to MISCA rapid and generous
financial and material support, including for the
payment of its personnel and for the reimbursement of
major military equipment.

The Secretary-General's proposal is based on a
fit-for-purpose approach that takes into account the
specificities of the context in the Central African
Republic. We are committed to being flexible and
to adopting a phased approach. We will review our
objectives and priorities on a regular basis and will
adjust our configuration and activities over time to
the particular conditions and needs of the country and
its people. In the early phase of its deployment, the
objectives ofthe United Nations peacekeeping operation
will focus on providing a secure environment. That, of
course, a sine qua non for progress in other areas. It
will support the transitional Government in its exercise
of basic State functions, as well as peace and mediation
efforts, the extension of the authority of the State, the
protection of basic human rights and the facilitation of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

That will require an initial surge of military
personnel and the corresponding military enablers.
Alongside the initial military surge, essential civilian
capacities will be deployed, phased in gradually as
the situation stabilizes and the necessary living and
working facilities are developed and more work can
be undertaken on civilian tasks. Police will also be
phased in and, as the security environment improves,
they should eventually replace the bulk of the initial
military surge capacity. While a large, initial military
deployment will be necessary to address the security
challenges, it is envisaged that United Nations military
forces would draw down progressively as quickly as
conditions will allow, allowing the United Nations
to focus as much of its efforts as possible on critical
civilian, State-building tasks.

Although the peacekeeping mission would be
tailored to the circumstances on the ground with
a military footprint expected to decrease once the
situation permits, let us be clear - there will be no
quick fix in the Central African Republic. Responding
to the crisis will require time; it will require resources.
The scale of the needs in the Central African Republic
is daunting, and progress in any one area will not be
sustainable without significant and simultaneous
engagement in others. Therefore, the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation should be part
of a broader, long-term engagement of the international
community. Success in that broader effort to help the
Government and people of the Central African Republic
rebuild a State will depend on the contributions and
commitments of many actors, most importantly the
Central Africans themselves.

(spoke in French)

We are greatly encouraged by the determination
that the new transitional Government has shown
in addressing the immediate challenges while the
preparations for lasting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic are being made. The
unwavering commitment of the Central Africans
themselves, as well as the continued commitment of
neighbouring countries, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the region, the African Union
and the international community will be essential to
finding a solution to this grave crisis.

As the Council knows, this is not the first Mission
of the United Nations in the Central African Republic.
Similar concerns were raised by Security Council
members when the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) was deployed
in 1998, in particular with regard to its financial
implications. However, MINURCA was withdrawn in
early 2000 because it could not address the root causes
of the crisis and or create the conditions for a lasting
peace. It is therefore essential that our commitment this
time be strong and proportional to the complexity of the
situation in order to put a definitive end to the vicious
cycle of instability into which the Central African
Republic regularly falls.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
establishment of a multidimensional peacekeeping
operation will generate substantial costs. However, in
the same breath I will say that delaying a sustained
response would be even more costly. The potential
negative impact for stability in the region and beyond,
including the risk ofthe country being split and creating
a breeding ground for extremist groups, should not be
ignored. We have a Window of opportunity now to take
action and build the foundations for a lasting peace
in the Central African Republic. We must, therefore,
assume our responsibilities and work together to
achieve that common goal.

