Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation regards it as encouraging that the
situation in Rwanda is returning to normal. Little by little,
the effects of the terrible tragedy experienced by the
country in 1994 are being overcome, as can be seen in the
advances achieved in the areas of production, health, public
services and education. But the Rwandan Government still
faces serious problems whose solution requires assistance
from the international community, such as the return of
more than a million and a half refugees, the achievement of
national reconciliation, the improvement of the judicial
system and of prison conditions, and an end to the
destabilizing activities of elements of the former Rwandan
Government.

We believe that much of the progress achieved thus
far is due to the support lent by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) to the
restoration of the country's basic infrastructure in the areas
of health, sanitation, demining and humanitarian assistance.
Moreover, UNAMIR's presence has given representatives
of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations providing humanitarian assistance to refugees
and displaced persons a sense of security and confidence,
which they need to carry out their work for the recovery of
Rwanda.

As UNAMIR's mandate comes to an end, we believe
that United Nations assistance will continue to be needed in
order to promote a climate of peace in Rwanda and in order
to undertake the tasks of rehabilitating and reconstructing
the country. We therefore support the initiative of the
Secretary-General, rightly reflected in operative paragraph
4 of the draft resolution now before the Council, to the
effect that following UNAMIR's withdrawal, there should
remain, with the agreement of the Government of Rwanda,
a United Nations political presence, through an office to
assist the Government in promoting national reconciliation,
strengthening the judicial system, facilitating the return of
refugees and rehabilitating the country's infrastructure.
The safe, voluntary repatriation of Rwandan refugees
and the achievement of genuine national reconciliation are
vital. Despite the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the countries of asylum to speed up the voluntary return
of refugees, their flow remains a slow trickle, because of
the continued intimidation in the refugee camps resulting
from the presence of armed elements of the former
Rwandese Government; because of the uncertainty over
security in Rwanda; and because of the belief that the
justice system is not yet functioning.

We therefore wish to emphasize how enormously
important it is for the restoration of peace and for the
process of national reconciliation that the Rwandan
Government should promote the climate of confidence
necessary to facilitate the return of refugees; that the
States of the region should act in accordance with the
recommendations of the Conferences on Assistance to
Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons, held in
Bujumbura and Addis Ababa; and that efforts should
continue to be made to hold a regional conference for
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region.

My delegation believes that the United Nations
should continue to play an active role in carrying out the
tasks still outstanding in Rwanda, not only in support of
the repatriation of refugees and their resettlement, but also
in support of justice, human rights and national
reconciliation, the creation of an institutional capacity in
the country and efforts to rehabilitate the infrastructure.
We also believe that it is essential that States and
organizations continue their assistance for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country through
the United Nations Trust Fund for Rwanda.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution now before the Council.

I wish to conclude by acknowledging all the efforts
made for peace in Rwanda by the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, the Commander of the UNAMIR
forces and all the civilian and military personnel of the
United Nations who have taken part in the Mission.

 

