Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this public debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject to
which Algeria attaches particular importance. I also
thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing, which was a pertinent and
well-illustrated account of the suffering of civilians in
the highest-profile situations of armed conflict.
However, my delegation regrets that the situation of
the Palestinian people under Israeli occupation was
passed over in silence.

The legal arsenal that constitutes international
humanitarian and human rights law, and now the
constant and continued interest of the United Nations
system in general and of the Security Council in
particular in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, are strong indications of an effective,
comprehensive and integrated effort to deal with this
extremely complex issue.

Since the publication of the Secretary-General's
first report to the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/l999/957), progress has
been made in strengthening the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and, in many cases, in
carrying out disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes. I should
like to note the indications in Mr. Egeland's
presentation that those efforts are continuing.

However, we must recognize that much remains
to be done. Recent events give rise to anxiety and
concern in many respects. Women, children and elderly
persons - to mention only those vulnerable groups of
society - continue to be subjected to the devastating
effects of armed conflict. The displacement of civilians
and refugees, serious attacks on human rights, the use
of sexual violence as a weapon of war, the recruitment
of child soldiers, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, the difficulty of delivering emergency
humanitarian aid and attacks against humanitarian
personnel are characteristic of many current conflicts,
particularly in Africa.

There is an increasingly urgent need for a
comprehensive, coherent and specific approach to the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
particular, we should like to emphasize the following
elements.

With regard to prevention, a broad prevention
strategy that would address the root causes of conflict
would ensure the sustained protection of civilians.
Such a strategy would be based on promoting
sustainable development, eliminating poverty and
promoting good governance, a culture of peace and
tolerance, the rule of law, respect for human rights and
national reconciliation.

Concerning universality and non-selectivity, the
protection of civilians must be based on the principles
of universality and non-selectivity, particularly in
conflict situations arising from foreign occupation. We
believe that the full implementation of international
humanitarian law is not a mere choice to be left up to
the occupying Power; it is an obligation that the
international community must impose.

As regards the international community's resolve
to combat impunity, we agree that there is a need for an
effective fight against every form of impunity with
respect to violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law that victimize civilians in armed
conflicts.

Concerning the protection of humanitarian
personnel, recent events have demonstrated the
vulnerability of humanitarian endeavours. We must do
more to ensure safety, access to vulnerable groups,
respect and dignity for humanitarian workers. At the
same time, appropriate measures must be taken against
humanitarian personnel who violate the principles
underlying humanitarian activities.

As far as coordination is concerned, more
effective coordination among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council remains paramount. We believe that the
proposal to establish a Peacebuilding Commission
would provide an appropriate framework for such
coordination in post-conflict situations if action by
those various organs is not locked into an arbitrary
sequential order. Likewise, it is important to encourage
regional approaches and strengthen coordination with
regional and subregional organizations.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
Secretary-General's next report will provide added
value to our efforts to protect civilians in situations of
armed conflict, by drawing important lessons from the
progress that is being made.
