Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Middle East, at the core of which is the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, retains the attention of the
Security Council, which today is devoting a public
debate to the topic. I would like to congratulate the
South African presidency for giving the Council, once
again, the opportunity to take up this issue, which is of
concern to the Council and to the delegation of Togo. I
would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing.

The peace process between Israel and Palestine
continues to experience difficulties. There has been
little progress on the ground. Unfortunately, acts of
violence continue to be perpetrated by both sides. The
lack of trust between the parties, above all the absence
of political will, and the pressure of national public
opinion are in part at the root of the stagnating
situation.

At a time when the Palestinian Authority is
carrying out efforts to garner international recognition
of Palestine with a view to the creation of a State of
that name, diplomacy has not yet produced the desired
results on the ground, even as the international
community continues to rest its hope for a lasting
peace based on the principle of land for peace.
Moreover, the announcement in the last quarter of 2011
of new settlements and the approval on 27 November
2011 of a plan for the construction of a hundred
housing units in Shilo in the West Bank are hardly
conducive to lasting peace in the region.

In the Gaza Strip, the situation continues to be
difficult due to the blockade, which, in the view of
Togo, should be lifted. The issue of refugees in
Palestinian camps also continues to be a source of great
concern and raises the issue of respect for human
rights.

That is why we hailed the praiseworthy work
undertaken by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
call upon the international community to continue to
provide it with substantial material and financial
support, as recently expressed in its appeal for funding.
On the other hand, rocket fire on Israel and the taking
of extremist positions, which lead to reprisals, must
end, so as to create conditions conducive to sustained
discussions between the two parties.

Against that grim background, we can welcome
some positive acts, such as the release of several
hundred Palestinian prisoners and of the Israeli soldier,
Shalit. Also, the decision to resume transferring the
customs and tax revenues to the Palestinian Authority,
which were frozen after the vote in UNESCO, and the
willingness demonstrated by the two parties to resume
direct negotiations, as called for by the Quartet in its
statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178), should
be welcomed.

On that last point, Togo would like to note once
again the remarkable work by the envoys of the
Quartet and its representative, Mr. Tony Blair, who, in
the framework of the three cycles of separate meetings,
prepared parties for direct negotiations. The recent
initiative of Jordan to host a meeting of representatives
of the Quartet and Israeli and Palestinian negotiators is
part of the efforts for the resumption of the
negotiations, which have been suspended since
September 2010. This is why dialogue must always be
encouraged, for we know that the progress obtained in
the region, albeit limited, was possible only thanks to
negotiations.

Togo reiterates its support to the Quartet and calls
on the two parties to overcome their differences and to
bear in mind the interests of their peoples and the
future of the region as they engage in direct
negotiations with the objective of reaching a definitive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Togo, which has good relations with Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, believes that there can be no
peace without negotiations carried out in good faith by
the two parties. My country's position has always been
for the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security within secure and internationally
recognized borders. I also wish to urge our friends in
Israel and Palestine to encourage and support the peace
process.

Along those lines, all acts inciting violence, from
either side, must end. Israel must also be recognized by
all Palestinian parties as a partner and interlocutor with
whom they must negotiate. The Quartet, which is the
facilitator of these negotiations, must also be the
guarantor of the application on the ground of the
outcome of the negotiations.

The Security Council should continue to seek a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Of course, it
is difficult to agree on this issue within the Council,
but the Council's responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security
requires that it bring sufficient pressure to bear on the
two sides to ensure that they negotiate in good faith so
as to come to a definitive solution to the conflict,
which has pitted these two sides against each other for
too long. It is undeniable that the settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in a just and sustainable
manner will have positive repercussions for peace and
security throughout the Middle East.

