Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank all our
briefers this morning for their insightful presentations.
Germany welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/492) on the ongoing implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). It is a key
contribution to monitoring compliance with resolution
2231 (2015), and we consider its current scope and
methodology fully appropriate. We also welcome the
update on the activities of the procurement channel and
remain fully committed to the procurement channel
process. It is important to recall that resolution 2231
(2015) endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA strengthens the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is an
important contribution to the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is an important asset to security in the
region and beyond.

This is a key moment for the JCPOA and for the
efforts of the international community to preserve it.
Along with our European partners, Germany remains
fully committed to the JCPOA and its implementation,
provided Iran stays in full compliance with its
JCPOA commitments. Germany deeply regrets the
unilateral decision of the United States to leave the
JCPOA, reimpose United Nations sanctions on Iran,
cease extending the waivers with regard to the trade
in oil with Iran and discontinue the full renewal of
waivers for nuclear non-proliferation projects. The
non-proliferation waivers are crucial to ensuring the
JCPOA's non-proliferation function and are key to our
shared security.

We are deeply concerned about Iran's
announcement that it will not commit to respecting the
limits of enriched-uranium and heavy-water reserves.
We urgently appeal to Iran to fully respect its nuclear-
related commitments under the JCPOA and to refrain
from any steps that would result in a breach of those
commitments. On that basis, Germany will continue to
work together with the remaining JCPOA participants
to ensure that Iran can receive economic benefits
from sanctions relief. In that context, the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges (INSTEX) is part of
European efforts to preserve and safeguard the J CPOA,
and as we heard this morning, INSTEX will soon be
operational. The full and effective implementation of
the provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015) in
all their aspects is also of key importance to regional
and international stability. We encourage all States to
continue taking appropriate steps to ensure that they
are respected and complied with.

Germany agrees with the Secretary-General
that issues not directly related to the nuclear deal
should be addressed without prejudice to preserving
the agreement. Those issues can be most effectively
addressed while the nuclear deal remains in place.
Regarding Iran's transfer of arms, including missile
technology, to non-State actors in the region, and
considering Iran's ongoing transfers and ballistic-
missile activities, the findings of the Secretary-General
are cause for deep and serious concern. Those activities
have a destabilizing effect in the region and also
negatively affect all European security interests.

Germany is concerned about the possibility of
Iran continuing to advance the scope and precision of
its ballistic-missile arsenal. We consider that Iran's
programme for developing ballistic missiles continues
to be inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), and we accordingly call on Iran
not to conduct any further ballistic-missile launches
or related activities inconsistent with resolution 2231
(2015), and to refrain from unacceptable rhetoric
accompanying those activities.

We note with concern the indications in the
Secretary- General's report of Iran's transfer of ballistic-
missile technology to the Houthis in Yemen and of
possible transfers to Palestinian factions in the Gaza
Strip. Such transfers would constitute violations of
resolution 2231 (2015) and transfers to the Houthis, in
particular, may also constitute a violation of resolution
2216 (2015). In that context, we also want to recall
that resolution 1540 (2004) forbids the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery
to any non-State actor. Furthermore, the transfer of
arms and missile technology to the Houthis endangers
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
in Yemen. Beyond that, the proliferation of missile
technology to increasing numbers of non-State actors
in the Middle East is a deeply worrying development.
If not stopped, it will have the effect of exacerbating
current and future armed conflicts in the region.

Germany therefore strongly urges Iran to refrain
from any transfers of ballistic missiles or missile
technology, as well as the transfer of any other arms or
related material from Iran, and to fully respect annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015). We have taken note of
the Secretary-General's suggestion in his report that
updated and more detailed entries would facilitate the
implementation of the annex B restrictive measures
of resolution 2231 (2015). Germany stands ready to
support efforts to provide factual updates and clarifying
specifications to the list of entries as needed.

Before concluding, I would like to say once again
that Germany remains fully committed to the JCPOA
and to the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
We call on all States, and Iran in particular, to make
greater efforts to build trust with its neighbours and
play a more constructive role in the region. All of us,
including the Council, must focus on de-escalation
and dialogue, and we call on all actors to remain level-
headed and work to prevent any actions that could lead
to a military escalation.

