Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for having come to this
meeting earlier and Mr. Lynn Pascoe for briefing the
Security Council on this very important subject.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Let me also commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting in the open format, which
allows affected parties and the relevant regional groups
to participate. My delegation has always held the view
that the Security Council should be more transparent
and that issues such as the debate on the Middle East
should be held in an open format so as to allow all
relevant role-players, including the general
membership of this Organization, the opportunity to
address the Council on this conflict, which has plagued
us for more than 60 years.

A month ago we heard briefings by the Personal
Representative to the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert
Serry, and by Mr. John Holmes, the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. Those briefings presented a bleak
outlook on the peace process between Palestine and
Israel, as well as on the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Sadly, that situation
has not changed. In fact, as we have just heard, the
situation has further deteriorated in the last month.
Innocent civilians on both sides continue to suffer the
consequences of the elusiveness of peace.

In spite of what we may have heard, the problem
in the Middle East is the occupation of Palestine. An
occupation that has gone on for 40 years is the
fundamental issue to be addressed, and until we
address the illegal occupation of Palestine, we will not
succeed in making progress in resolving this intractable
issue.

Clearly there is a disconnect between the quest
for a peaceful solution to the conflict in the Middle
East and the actual situation on the ground, including
what is being done by the international community to
address that situation. The optimism that we all felt
after the meeting in Annapolis and the Paris pledging
conference is unfortunately dissipating.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is deteriorating daily. In the West Bank, the
continued expansion of illegal settlements, military
posts, check points and the separation wall already
undermines the prospects for achieving a viable and
contiguous Palestinian State and is in clear violation of
United Nations resolutions and the Road Map. The
expansion of illegal settlements in Jerusalem, in
particular, predetermines a solution on the future of
Jerusalem, which should be the basis of a negotiated
solution.

Regarding the surge in the building of those
illegal settlements, we wish to recall the recent
statement of the Secretary-General, who, on 10 March
2008, expressed his concern over the approval by the
Government of Israel of a resumption of construction
of 750 housing units in the West Bank settlement of
Givat Zeev. The Secretary-General stated that any
settlement expansion is contrary to Israel's obligations
under the Road Map and, indeed, to international law.
He called on the Government of Israel to halt
settlement expansion and reiterated that the fulfilment
of Road Map obligations by both parties is an
important measure underpinning the political process
between them.

The military offensive by the Israeli Defense
Forces in Gaza and the total blockade of Gaza have
further exacerbated the humanitarian tragedy. This
Council's inability to condemn what is occurring in
Gaza or even to express concern at the situation is
indeed unfortunate and further creates the impression
that the Security Council is once again ignoring the
plight of innocent Palestinian civilians who live under
occupation.

Israeli measures make life unbearable for
Palestinian civilians, are an affront to human dignity
and are also a clear violation of international law. Even
United Nations personnel and the local diplomatic
community are subjected to these daily hardships,
humiliations and provocations.

The South African Government has consistently
condemned attacks on civilians, whether Palestinian or
Israeli. We have argued that the continuous rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel cannot be justified in the
name of the Palestinian cause. Indeed it is against the
interest of the Palestinian people and only results in
military retaliation by the Israeli Defense Force. We
condemn attacks such as those that occurred at the
seminary in Jerusalem, which resulted in the killing
and injury of innocent civilians.

South Africa believes that, for progress to be
made in the talks, the Palestinians need something
tangible to convince them that a negotiated peace can
lead to the establishment of a Palestinian State based
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Finally, my delegation continues to believe that
the peace process resuscitated at Annapolis presents a
meaningful attempt to find a lasting solution. The
parties and the international community cannot sit back
and allow the situation on the ground to continue
deteriorating, ending all hopes for a negotiated two-
State solution. The primary responsibility for peace and
security lies with the parties. In that regard, it is crucial
that their actions and pronouncements be calculated to
advance the quest for peace.

