Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Australia's assumption of the Security
Council for the month of November. Allow me also
to thank you for your choice of the very important
subject of today's debate: international cooperation on
combating terrorism and violent extremism.

Current events all too often remind us that terrorism
continues to bring sorrow to the world and to inflict
pain and suffering on all its people without distinction.
As members of the Council know, not a week goes by
without an act of terrorism occurring somewhere in the
world. Such ignominious acts blindly strike innocents
who have the bad luck to be in the wrong place at the
wrong time. It is in the interest of all countries to combat
this scourge at the global, regional and national levels.

Everyone agrees that the the essence of the terrorist
threat is its transnationality. Terrorism does not take
root in a given State or in a random locality, but rather
moves from place to place opportunistically. Judging
by the range oflocales where it has emerged since 2001,
we are witnessing both the displacement and the export
of the terrorist threat from the Middle East into Africa
and other regions. Nor can it be ignored that terrorism
is the result of interactions among political, security,
social and environmental factors, and that it is linked
to poverty, poor governance, weak institutions and
underdevelopment. Terrorism is particularly active in
fragile societies and in post-conflict countries, where
the absence of the rule of law and administrative
gaps allow such groups to develop and flourish with
impunity as they expand their influence on populations
without resources and no hope for the future, as is the
case with Al-Shabaab in Somalia.

Wherever it is present, terrorism annihilates all
hope, all vision of a future, all thought of programmes
of economic and social development. Criminal
organizations gain the upper hand as if they were the
authorities in charge of the areas under their control
and discourage foreign investment, thereby promoting
the isolation and eventually the economic collapse of
the affected States.

In this ever more connected world, in which
once great distances have shrunk to a mere pinpoint,
everything is visible, everything can be verified and
everything is experienced first-hand. As terrorism
becomes ever more global, there are obvious links
among drug traffickers in the Sahel, the European
mafia and Latin American groups, which now trade
experience and expertise. The new wave of terrorists
is like a spider's web that connects practically all
continents. The question on everyone's lips today is by
what means to put an end to this perpetually ramifying
scourge of our century and what available avenues to a
solution we should prioritize.

First of all, the brief period we have devoted
to combating terrorism has shown that military
intervention does not suffice to rid us of the scourge.
Military action may allow us to snuff out terrorist
bastions, but it does not make them disappear for good.
If we set fire to a terrorist bastion in place X, another
one will spring from its ashes in place Y, often with even
greater virulence and determination. Moreover, purely
military action that is not accompanied by civic action
can create instability at the heart of a State and fuel
its terrorist potential. To prevent the spread, resurgence
or return of terrorists, the conditions that allow them
to exist must therefore be alleviated. That is where the
key concept of the moment comes into play: a global
and holistic approach as articulated in resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014).

Members will surely agree with me that only
by ensuring the well-being of citizens, populations
and communities, above all the poorest and weakest,
will they become less receptive to the ideologies that
promote extremism and violence. Only the promise of
development and personal and community fulfilment
can compete with that sordid and death-dealing
alternative.

Secondly, the importance of development assistance
in the fight against terrorism should not be minimized.
Development aid would make it possible to prevent the
eruption of crisis hot spots, especially in our immediate
surroundings. Development aid would therefore seem
to be an obvious measure to put in place, and would
make it possible to detect and analyse the warning signs
of a crisis as soon as they appear.

Thirdly, it is essential to identify the typology of
terrorist groups in order to assess their weak points and
develop an adequate security and defence policy. Their
modes of operation do not correspond to the classic
approach to conflict with which we are familiar. Instead,
they try to blend into the population, using people and
protected property as shields without displaying any
identifying signs. Their aim is to create a permanent
state of insecurity and psychosis at the heart of regular
forces, thereby spreading a general sense of suspicion
and panic.

Finally, at the strategic level, we need to deepen our
understanding of terrorism's appeal in order to combat
it by promoting a culture of peace through dialogue,
education, awareness and community exchanges. The
importance of protecting human rights cannot be
stressed enough in the context of combating terrorism.
Instead of limiting ourselves to good intentions, we
must prove through our actions our respect for human
rights and the rule of law. We must also find ways to
mobilize the international community by shining a light
on the fate of the victims of terrorism and by providing
them with all the necessary assistance. It is in fact the
victims and their families who can best make the case
for the urgency of the fight to combat terrorism.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Burundi's
fierce determination and unflagging commitment to
work with other countries to combat this pernicious
threat to international peace and security, which
strikes at the very heart of our States. With that same
determination and commitment, Burundi has placed its
most experienced fighting troops at the disposal of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which is currently
under the command of a high-ranking Burundi officer,
in order to help restore a peace that has been lost now
for so many decades.
Finally, I would be remiss ifI did not express my
deep sympathy and solidarity with all the victims of
terrorism and their loved ones.

