Mr. De La Sabliere (France): My delegation
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
presidency of the European Union.
France condemns the attack perpetrated on
Saturday, 17 April, against the head of Hamas, Abdel
Aziz Rantisi, which caused his death. The practice of
extrajudicial executions is in violation of the
fundamental principles of the rule of law. Aside from
their illegal nature, targeted assassinations, the use of
disproportionate force against areas populated by
civilians, the demolition of houses and farmland and
the hindering of access to humanitarian aid all
jeopardize the efforts made in recent months to obtain a
ceasefire from Palestinian movements. Those practices
can lead only to a radicalization of attitude among the
Palestinian population and, further, among the peoples
of the Near and Middle East and undermine prospects
for resuming the political dialogue.

France recognizes Israel's inalienable right to
security and its right to defend itself against terrorist
attacks, which absolutely must be condemned. France
unconditionally condemns the terrorist attacks
committed against Israeli civilians by armed
Palestinian groups, in particular by the Hamas
brigades. However, the fight against terrorism
absolutely must be conducted in strict respect of the
law.

The security of Israel and its citizens requires
peace. Violence cannot be a solution. The President of
the French Republic recalled in Algiers on 15 April,

"Only a negotiated agreement based on the
principles of international law, opening the way
for the creation of a viable Palestinian State, can
enable the Israeli and Palestinian peoples to live
side by side in peace and security. Nothing lasting
can be accomplished without negotiation between
the parties. From the point of view of France,
nothing can pre-empt the results of the requisite
negotiations."

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs restated
publicly yesterday, Israel and the Palestinian Authority
must return to the negotiating table. Unilateralism is
not a solution. France reaffirms its conviction that only
ajust and negotiated settlement based on the principles
enshrined in Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), leading to the
creation side by side with Israel of an independent,
viable, peaceful and sovereign Palestinian State on the
basis of the borders of 1967, will provide Israel with
the security to which all Israelis have the right. In
addition, in order for that peace to be lasting, it must be
comprehensive in nature and include all the parties to
the conflict, namely Syria and Lebanon as well.
In that spirit, the withdrawal from Gaza
announced by the Israeli Prime Minister in Washington
is certainly an element that can be positive. Indeed,
withdrawal from the Palestinian territories is what the
international community has called for for years. But it
is necessary to work out the modalities of its
implementation through concerted action. As the
Council of Europe and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations have recalled, we hope that the
withdrawal truly constitutes a step towards the
realization of the Quartet's road map, endorsed by
Security Council resolution 1515 (2003), and that it is
part of the broader context of the creation of a viable
Palestinian State. All efforts must work towards
implementation of the road map, which is the peace
plan that has obtained the consensus of the
international community. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs stated yesterday that the withdrawal from Gaza
must not be considered as something that resolves
everything. Of course, France is ready, within the
framework I have just described, to help make that
withdrawal a success.

France is convinced that the international
community has the duty to act collectively, in
particular through the Quartet, to contribute to
achieving a settlement that is just and acceptable to the
two parties. The Security Council, which has enshrined
the fundamental principles for a peaceful settlement
and endorsed the road map, also bears a particular
responsibility. It must not remain silent. France
welcomes the efforts for peace made by the countries
of the region, in particular Egypt and Jordan. It expects
the upcoming Arab summit next month to make a
substantive contribution to relaunching the peace
efforts.

The stakes are all the higher as the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict must be settled in order for the
Middle East to recover its stability and undertake the
path of reforms and modernization.

