Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Lithuania for having convened this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
at the beginning of 2014, which will mark the fifteenth
anniversary of the Security Council's commitment in
the area of the protection of civilians since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999). I should like also to thank the
four briefers for their statements, which highlighted the
challenges that remain despite the progress that we have
made since 1999. Those challenges are clearly summed
up in the presidential statement we have just adopted
(S/PRST/2014/3), whose annex contains the updated
aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, to which I wish to draw everyone's attention.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

Madam President, your concept note (S/2014/74, annex) invites us to focus on the protection ofcivilians in
the framework of United Nations missions, particularly
peacekeeping missions. I would like in so doing to
highlight certain operations that we deem particularly
relevant in that regard.

I would like to welcome the decisive action taken
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the help of the Intervention Brigade established
within that Mission, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since the adoption of resolution 2098 (2013),
thanks to the Blue Helmets, the protection of civilians
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo against armed groups, primarily the Mouvement
du 23 mars, has been significantly strengthened. I
should like also to pay tribute to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which is currently
protecting tens of thousands of civilians who have fled
the violence and who are being sheltered in protection
areas for civilians set up within various UNMISS bases
throughout the country.

The example of UNMISS also shows just how
difficult it is for a peacekeeping mission to fully
exercise its mandate to protect civilians when it does
not have the required capacity, be it in terms of aerial
capacity or in terms of intelligence and surveillance,
which would enable it to strengthen early-warning
systems. In general, we believe that means such as
surveillance drones, which have been used for the first
time in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, could
have a positive impact in terms of preventing conflict
and protecting civilians in other areas of operation.

In Mali, during our recent visit as members of
the Security Council, we rightly encouraged the
full deployment, as soon as possible, of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). MINUSMA has a clear
mandate for the protection of civilians pursuant to
resolution 2100 (2013). The kidnapping on 8 February
of an International Committee of the Red Cross team
between Kidal and Gao shows just how precarious the
situation remains in the north of Mali. That act, which
we condemn in the most robust terms, also makes clear
the need to address the five core challenges addressed
in the report of the Secretary-General to improve the
protection of civilians. What is at stake here is ensuring
that the rules of international humanitarian law are
respected by non-State armed groups.

Peacekeeping operations are without a doubt the
best tool that the Security Council has available to it
to protect civilians in time of armed conflict. But what
happens when the United Nations has not yet deployed
such a mission?

I shall refer now to the cases of the Central
African Republic and Syria. Civilians are the main
victims of the massacres and violence that continue
to be committed in the Central African Republic. In
the light of that situation, the Security Council has
identified the fight against impunity as a way to ensure
the protection of civilians and to deter those involved
from carrying out such atrocities. In this context, we
welcome the establishment by the Secretary-General
of an international commission of inquiry that should
soon begin its work, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2127 (2013).

In that same resolution, the Security Council gave
a mandate to the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA)
to protect civilians, and it authorized French forces
from Operation Sangaris to support MISCA in the
implementation of that mandate. To strengthen
international support for MISCA, the European Union
has just decided to establish a time-bound military
operation, the heart of whose mandate will be the
protection of civilians in the area around Bangui.
The situation in the Central African Republic
challenges us all; we must come together in support of
that ravaged country and its people - all of its people. It
is there that the "Rights up front" action plan, launched
by the Secretary-General at the end of 2013, takes on its
full significance.

The Syrian conflict illustrates in probably the most
cruel way the impact of armed conflict on the civilian
population. While the talks in Geneva are making no
headway, it is difficult to envision the day when the
fighting will cease and where the conditions are met
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Syria. To protect civilians trapped in the
war, the Council has sought to appeal to the parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law.
That was the whole point of the presidential statement
adopted on 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), which
aimed in particular at improving humanitarian access
to populations affected by the Syrian crisis.

More than four months later, it is clear that that
statement has not been respected by the parties to the
conflict, primarily the Syrian authorities. For that
reason, Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg took the
initiative yesterday to present a draft resolution calling
on the parties to the Syrian conflict to fully implement
the provisions of the 2 October 2013 presidential
statement and stop their violations of international
humanitarian law, such as the use of siege and
starvation as weapons of war against civilians. While
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate,
while violations and abuses against civilians continue,
it is important that the Council take action.

As we mark the International Day against the Use of
Child Soldiers, I cannot conclude without emphasizing
once again the importance of the protection of children
in armed conflict. Children continue to be enlisted
for war and are the first victims in Syria, but also in
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and other crisis situations. We must do make
every effort to combat this scourge and to put an end to
it once and for all.

