Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Permanent Representative of Poland
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their briefings.

Today, I will address the subject of the debate
from three perspectives: political developments, the
humanitarian situation and justice.

Our meeting today is different. Three months ago,
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan was signed
and the National Pre-Transitional Committee held
its meetings. That gave us hope that peace will be
sustained and the Vicious cycle of the conflict in South
Sudan will be broken.

We welcome the meeting of the Special Envoy
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) with non-signatory parties to the agreement.
Those parties managed to join their forces in South
Sudan under State sovereignty and a unified command,
while they renamed the armed forces. All of that gives
us more hope that the mistakes of the past will not be
repeated, and that the country's citizens should play the
major role in protecting their country, while the United
Nations and regional forces play a complementary role
in protecting its citizens.

Despite the positive political developments, the
humanitarian situation remains a major source of
concern. There are still more than 4 million displaced
persons and refugees even after the signing of the peace
Agreement. Food insecurity remains high in one of
the country's most fertile regions, reminding us of the
importance of advancing the political solution while
simultaneously providing support to reconstruction,
development and the continued unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian assistance. In that connection, I welcome
yesterday's announcement of a cooperation framework
between the United Nations and South Sudan for the
next three years.

I would like to recall the Arab-African Summit
held five years ago in Kuwait at which Kuwaiti and
South Sudanese officials agreed to launch a new phase
of development cooperation. The eruption of the war
in December 2013 prevented the implementation of the
agreement, and we hope that the transitional period will
now provide an opportunity to renew that cooperation.

We firmly condemn crimes of sexual violence in
conflict, whether in Wau state or anywhere else. We
look forward to achieving justice for the survivors
from those heinous crimes and holding the perpetrators
accountable. We thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan for stressing his
country's commitment to holding the perpetrators
accountable, and we look forward to seeing the efforts
to end impunity continue, as was the case with the
perpetrators in the incident at the Terrain Hotel. The
courts play an important role in ensuring that citizens
feel that their country is stable, and that was the case
with the mobile court in Malakal, which recently
moved to Bentiu. We look forward to the launch of
the Hybrid Court. We also appreciate the central role
of Ms. Patten's Office, in cooperation with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
helping us fight Violations of human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and in ensuring justice
for all.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank our
colleagues in the Ethiopian delegation for their efforts
to help neighbouring countries, including South Sudan,
during Ethiopia's term on the Security Council. I also
thank our brothers in the Sudan for their prominent
role in helping to achieve peace for their brothers in
South Sudan, and the other States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for
their exemplary modelling of coexistence and good-
neighbourly relations this year.

Another issue I would like to address is that
today, 18 December, is International Arabic Language
Day. On this very day in 1973, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 3190 (XXVIII), by which Arabic
became an official language of the United Nations. I
would like to take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation and gratitude to all of the interpreters and
translators in the United Nations, particularly those
working in the Arabic language services. They have
made an enormous contribution to bringing the voice
of my country and every Arab country in this Chamber
to the rest of the world, and we would like to express
our deep appreciation and respect for them.

