Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix and the three Police Commissioners
for their briefings. We also listened attentively to the
statement delivered by the civil society representative
from the Central African Republic.

In the 71 years since their first deployment, police
peacekeepers have played an integral and active part in
United Nations peace missions. Deeply committed to
their missions around the world, police peacekeepers
have made outstanding contributions to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In total, 280 police
officers have made the ultimate sacrifice in the service
of United Nations peace missions, including eight
Chinese police officers in Haiti. I pay my highest tribute
to all of the fallen police officers and their families.

In the context of the increasingly complex and
challenging external environment and security
situation, it is imperative to bolster and improve United
Nations policing in peacekeeping missions. In 2018,
Secretary-General Guterres put forward his Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, and to date 152
States Members of the United Nations have signed the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, giving new impetus to the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
paving the way for improved United Nations policing in
peacekeeping missions. China supports the Secretary-
General's A4P initiative and stands ready to work with
other Member States to advance peacekeeping policing
and peacekeeping operations on the whole.

China would like to make the following
three proposals.

First, with regard to upholding the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations, policing in peace missions
must always be guided by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations, including
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate.
The Council must fully respect the sovereignty and
aspirations of the host country, heed its views and those
of police-contributing countries (PCCs), define clear
and explicit mandates tailored to the situation on the
ground and leverage the advantages of peacekeeping
police officers in maintaining the social order in the
host country and creating a secure environment for its
development. Long-term investments must be increased
in such areas as political dialogue and economic
development to ensure lasting peace. China will
facilitate the holding of the third United Nations Chiefs
of Police Summit, thereby making our contribution
to peacekeeping policing in a new era. In that regard,
China is working closely with the Department of
Peace Operations.

Secondly, bolstering capacity-building and
increasing efficiency in the discharge of duties and
enhancing the capacity-building of PCCs is the
utmost priority at the current stage. The international
community must continue to lend strong support to
ensure that peacekeepers receive adequate and targeted
training and possess the necessary equipment and
other resources. PCCs must strictly follow the selection
criteria for personnel and equipment, strengthen
management and continue to improve the efficiency,
credibility and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping policing. China is actively delivering on
the commitments made by President Xi Jinping at the
2015 Leaders Summit on United Nations Peacekeeping
by establishing the world's first-ever standby police
contingent for peacekeeping and training over 800
police officers from other countries.

Thirdly, better safety and security guarantees for
peacekeepers must be provided. Human life is priceless.
Peacekeeping police officers work at the forefront and
their safety and security have a bearing on the effect and
credibility of peacekeeping operations. The Council
must take stronger action on peacekeeping operations
and the safety and security of peacekeepers and speak
with one voice in that regard.

The Secretariat and the missions must give high
priority to preserving the safety and security of their
personnel, provide strong support and guarantee and
enhance the capabilities of peacekeeping operations in
the face of complex situations. Preventive measures,
as well as security and medical supplies, must be put
in place with a view to improving early warning and
response capabilities in dealing with emergencies.

China supports the idea of properly increasing
the ratio of women peacekeepers, but at the same time
we wish to emphasize that while efforts are made in
that regard, it is important to take targeted protection
measures, including careful predeployment security-
risk assessments, to ensure the safety and security of
women police peacekeepers.

Since 2000, in nine mission areas in Timor-
Leste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Afghanistan,
Liberia, Haiti, the Sudan, South Sudan and Cyprus,
China has dispatched a total ofover 2,600 peacekeepers
as part of our efforts to deliver on our commitments
to peacekeeping. As always, China will continue to
support United Nations peacekeeping efforts and
explore further opportunities to support peacekeeping
policing through the China-United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund, take concrete action to
deliver on China's commitments and contribute more to
peacekeeping policing.

