The Deputy Secretary-General: I want to begin
by thanking the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting during its Council presidency and for its
Government's active role on Somalia, most recently by
hosting the London Conference on 7 May this year.

The Secretary-General and l have long followed
developments closely. Somalia has held a special place
in my heart since I worked in the country in 1992 as the
first United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator. As
members know, those were very dark days. It is a source
of deep satisfaction that today we welcome the Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Somalia,
Mrs. Adan, who represents a Government committed
to leading the nation to peace, unity, development and a
life of dignity for all.

Somalia still faces many challenges. But we must
remember how far we have come, not least thanks to
the women and men of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as well as to the Somali National
Security Force and their allies. I pay tribute to their
commitment and courage in risking their lives to bring

peace to Somalia. They have made progress possible.
We must not allow any reversals of the hard-won gains.
This week, we passed a major milestone in the
engagement of the United Nations in Somalia with the
successful launch of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in Mogadishu. The
Secretary-General's new Special Representative,
Mr. Nicholas Kay, has already met the Speaker of
Parliament and the Prime Minister, pending President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud's return to the country.
UNSOM. will support political dialogue, peacebuilding
and the protection of human rights. However,
successfully meeting the major peacebuilding
challenges will depend primarily on the efforts of
the Government of Somalia. Foremost among those
challenges is the establishment of a well-functioning
federal structure. A parallel challenge are cooperative
relations between Somalia and its neighbours, based on
mutual and complementary interest.

Eight months since its formation, the Federal
Government of Somalia has established its political
programme and presented plans for stabilization
and peacebuilding. It has begun reaching out beyond
Mogadishu to realize its vision of a federated Somalia,
demonstrating commitment to dialogue with other
regional administrations. A process has been launched
to review the provisional Constitution ahead of the
elections planned for 2016. I commend the Government
for its efforts, which deserve full and continuing
international support.

Realizing a federal State in Somalia is a complex
and demanding task. We see the high stakes in the recent
rise in tensions in Kismayo following the declaration of
a regional State in early April. On 15 May, 500 delegates
to a conference in Kismayo selected a President of
what was called the "Jubaland State of Somalia". That
administration is regarded by the Federal Government
as illegal and unconstitutional. The process has also
been criticized for being insufficiently inclusive. Since
then, six other candidates have declared themselves
President of the new entity. While there have so far
been no reports of military confrontation so far, the
situation remains volatile.

The issues related to the unity and federalism of
Somalia can be resolved only through dialogue among
the Somalis themselves. That requires patience and
pragmatism on all sides. The United Nations stands
ready, if requested, to provide good offices in full
respect for the lead role of the Government of Somalia.
At the same time, Somalia needs the support of its
partners, neighbours and friends. The efforts being
made by the leaders of Somalia, Kenya and Ethiopia to
develop trust and cooperative relationships are essential
and must continue. There is agreement that a strong and
stable Somalia is in the interests of all. That recognition
should guide regional efforts to address outstanding
issues and potential sources of friction.

In that regard, I fully support the statement resulting
from the extraordinary summit of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) last month, which
recognized the lead role of the Federal Government
in addressing the situation in Kismayo. The summit
also recommended that the Government convene a
reconciliation conference with the support of IGAD
and the United Nations.

Meanwhile, let us recall that AMISOM. has a
critical role to play in ensuring security and the
freedom ofmovement for all those engaged in the peace
process. As in so many countries across the continent,
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) is vital to reaching our objectives
in Somalia. With the deployment of UNSOM, we will
work together on political strategy, peacebuilding
and stabilization, as well as the protection of human
rights. The new Mission's impact will also depend upon
effective security arrangements in close collaboration
with AMISOM.

I wish to call attention to the Secretary-General's
statement in his report (8/2013/326) that AMISOM. is
reaching its operational limit in terms of holding and
expanding areas under its control. In order to keep
the momentum of the past year, the Mission needs
additional resources for ground and air mobility,
including helicopters and armoured personnel carriers,
as well as the means to reconfigure its forces. I urge
Council members to give positive consideration to these
requests. In addition, we remain open to discussions
on long-term options for the security track, together
with the African Union and the Federal Government
of Somalia. In a follow-up to the Security Council's
request, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
jointly with the AU and in close consultation with
the Somali Government, will undertake an exercise
to review AMISOM's deployment and establish
benchmarks for the possible future deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation.

Over the long term, Somalia must assume its own
responsibilities through integrated, accountable and
effective security institutions. That will require a well-
funded and coordinated strategic approach. I welcome
the pledges of support of more than $300 million made
at the second London Conference and appeal to donors
to live up to their commitments. At the Conference,
I was impressed by the resolve of Somalia and its
neighbours to forge positive relationships in the region.
That is essential to addressing mutual interests and
build a more stable and prosperous region for all. We
discussed the scope for economic cooperation between
Somalia and its neighbours, as well as the need to create
an environment conducive to the safe and voluntary
return of refugees. I wish to underline the importance
of achieving coordinated and common positions of
States in the region in support of the processes led by
the Federal Government of Somalia, as exemplified
in IGAD's recent communique. I strongly encourage
all partners to continue their dialogue and to work
closely together in that spirit on efforts towards Somali
Statebuilding and peacebuilding.

We should accept that Somalia will require
sustained and generous international support to
continue on the path of progress. That means making a
clear commitment assisting to the Federal Government
in rapidly developing its plans and building its
capacities. We should all agree on a framework for
future coordination, building on the second London
Conference and on the side meeting on Somalia
at the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development. I welcome the launch of the "New Deal"
and look forward to the development of a new aid
compact, with Somalis in the centre, accompanied by
unified funding mechanisms.

In conclusion, as we enter a new era of United
Nations engagement in Somalia, I would like to
express my appreciation to the outgoing Special
Representative, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, for
his many contributions in helping to lay a foundation
for Somalia's path to lasting peace. I also congratulate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Kay on his new role. I look forward to his
engagement on the political process as well as the
other areas of UNSOM's mandate. I thank all those in
Somalia and at Headquarters who have worked hard to
ensure the deployment of UNSOM. on time.

We are committed to delivering on the Security
Council's vision for a dynamic new United Nations
presence in Somalia, grounded in respect for Somali
leadership and ownership. UNSOM. has already set up
its headquarters in Mogadishu and will establish its
presence across the country, notably in areas recovered
from Al-Shabaab as well as in Garowe and Hargeisa.
The Mission will support political dialogue and advise
the Government on peacebuilding and state-building,
including the coordination of international assistance.
UNSOM. will be an integrated Mission, offering "one
door to knock on" for Somalia's engagement with the
United Nations.

I appeal to the Council to support UNSOM. and
help it to fulfil its mandate, including by providing
the necessary resources to the Mission itself and to
Somalia. I call on all to come together in support of
the new Government in its efforts to bring peace and
stability to the people of Somalia. The Secretary-
General and I firmly believe that with the continuous
support and firm commitment of its partners, Somalia
can achieve its vision: a country in unity and at peace
with itself and its neighbours, living under the rule of
law and on the path to economic stability and decent
living conditions for all.

