Mr. Cunningham (United States): I want to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for his excellent
briefing and analysis and say that I agree with his
conclusions. As the Secretary-General's report
(S/2002/1126) and Mr. Guehenno's remarks indicate,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is moving forward on a range of
complicated political and administrative challenges.
We are heartened at the slow but steady progress on
programmes aimed at strengthening the rule of law and
improving the security situation.

While, unfortunately, there are still violent
incidents, such as the post-election murder, to which
Mr. Guehenno referred, the attack on Serb pensioners
in Fee and an ongoing problem with organized crime,
we are satisfied that UNMIK and KFOR are responding
to those difficulties in an appropriate way. We were
persuaded by the priorities that Lord Ashdown set out
several weeks ago during our discussion on Bosnia, in
which he presented the rule of law as an essential
precondition for the development of democracy.

We congratulate Special Representative Steiner
on UNMIK's success in conducting municipal elections
in Kosovo on 26 October. Mr. Guehenno did a
thorough job of outlining the results in the process of
those elections. Clearly, in and of themselves, they are
not sufficient for a truly representative and democratic
Government. Our reading of the results and the
dynamics of the municipal election process suggests
the need for Kosovo's leaders themselves to move
more aggressively on a number of fronts. They need to
do more to promote security and reconciliation. In
many municipalities, good governance will be possible
only if parties are willing to form coalitions across
party lines. We urge local leaders to move aggressively
on collaborative efforts that focus on results from
Government.

My delegation believes that we must move faster
and further in fostering responsive and responsible
Government in Kosovo, and I applaud Mr. Steiner's
efforts in that regard. We need to see more effort across
the political spectrum in raising the level of political
dialogue. Parties must stop talking past each other and
focus on solutions that will improve lives and help
attract the investment that is needed to ensure a
sustainable future for all the people of Kosovo.

In the most recent elections, Kosovo Serbs were
faced with a confusing array of messages from their
leaders. That was reflected in confusion about how to
proceed. In some municipalities, the participation rate
was upwards of 70 per cent. In others, such as northern
Mitrovica, there was nearly a complete boycott. That
leaves both UNMIK and the Council in a difficult
position on how to proceed, even if there is clarity
about what is required.

Two things that we think are required are that the
majority must take an active role in protecting the
rights of Serbs and other minorities and, secondly, that
Kosovar Serbs know that minorities must participate
fully in Kosovo's Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and at the local level. The international
community must do all it can to encourage both to take
those steps. But it is up to them to take those steps.

They must conclude on both sides that they need
to overcome the past, as hard and unpleasant as that
may be, in order to advance the interests of all
Kosovars. We are clearly not there yet. We do not envy
the Special Representative, given the challenge that he
faces. We congratulate him on the success that he has
had so far with his very ambitious and clear-headed
approach to measuring progress on key goals through
benchmarks, including his efforts on sustainable
returns and his attempt to improve the difficult
situation in northern Mitrovica.

I want to reiterate our support for a Council
mission to Kosovo, if that will prove helpful in
communicating the appropriate message to all
Kosovars and in establishing a way forward towards
the multi-ethnic democracy established as our goal in
resolution 1244 (1999).

