Mr. Strammen (Norway): We welcome this
opportunity to revisit the outcomes of the Security
Council summit held six months ago. The summit was
truly a remarkable occasion in the history of the
Council and was an event that contributed greatly to
the success of the Millennium Summit of the United
Nations.

The summit adopted resolution 1318 (2000),
which contained the declaration on ensuring an
effective role for the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa. The declaration represents an
ambitious long-term agenda. Although progress
towards the implementation of the agenda is already
evident, it would not be fair to undertake a full
assessment of its implementation after just a few
months. Rather, the focus should be on the need for
effective follow-up.

Turning to the questions raised in the very useful
explanatory note for this meeting, it must be stressed at
the outset that it will not be possible to address them in
the detail or as thoroughly as they deserve in a short
intervention. I would, however, like to make one
general remark before making specific comments on
some of the six issues. That general remark is that it is
noteworthy that each and every one of the six questions
raised points to the need for enhanced cooperation and
interaction between the different bodies, organs and
organizations of the United Nations. If there is,
therefore, one main conclusion to be drawn, it is that of
the imperative need for the different arms of the United
Nations to improve their coherence, cooperation and
communication in order to enhance the relevance of the
United Nations.

It is not the Security Council that will make a
decisive difference in a country sliding into conflict or
recovering from it. It is not the decisions of the
Economic and Social Council, or of the General
Assembly, that will ensure stable economic growth and
sustainable development in a particular developing
country. It is not the programmes of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) that will pull people
out of poverty, nor the projects of the United Nations
Children's Fund that will provide a better future for all
children. It is not the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs that can ensure that humanitarian
needs are met, or that can prevent new humanitarian
crises from occurring. Any real and lasting difference
for the people we are trying to assist will only come
about as a result of the combination of all these efforts
and as a result of the relevance, timeliness and
adequacy of the assistance of the United Nations
system as a whole.

The authority of the Security Council depends to
a great extent on its ability to demonstrate that it gives
equal priority to the maintenance of international peace
and security in every region of the world. If one asks
any member of the humanitarian community, they will
readily provide a number of examples of conflicts and
humanitarian crises that do not receive adequate
attention. In this context, it is of particular importance
to underline that the Secretariat must be provided with
improved capacity and resources to notify and act at an
early stage where a situation is deteriorating or may
result in conflict. In that way adequate assessment and
response from the international community can be
better ensured at an early stage, no matter where the
situation occurs.

One of the most encouraging results of the
Security Council's summit declaration and of the
General Assembly's Millennium Declaration is the
consensus that emerged on the need for comprehensive
peace-building that addresses conflict at all stages -
from prevention to settlement to post-conflict peace-
building. During the last few months, that consensus
has been further developed - inter alia, during the
taking of the UNDP Governing Council decision in
January this year on the role of UNDP in crisis and
post-conflict situations - as well as in the presidential
statement on peace-building adopted by the Council
during the Tunisian presidency in February. In addition
to the general remark I made earlier, it is clear that
putting that general consensus into operation represents
formidable challenges for all parts of the United
Nations system. But it is also a main challenge for
individual member countries to strengthen their efforts
to achieve consistency in their own policies and in their
participation in different United Nations bodies and
organizations.

Another element of that emerging consensus is
the need to address the root causes of conflict,
including their economic causes. Effective conflict
prevention and resolution makes this as necessary as it
is difficult. One tool to address the root causes of
conflict available to the Council is to adopt smarter
sanctions in order to create incentives for the parties
concerned to resolve a conflict. However, experience
has shown that it is increasingly difficult to agree on
the usefulness, formulation and implementation of
sanctions regimes in particular situations. The
discussions on sanctions against Liberia, which were
successfully completed this morning, represent one
recent case that easily comes to mind.

While we maintain that sanctions regimes are still
useful tools for the Security Council to fulfil its
mandate in particular situations, the controversies
involved in implementing them point to a need to
consider this issue in a broader context. What
additional tools and actions are available to the Council
to effectively address the root causes of conflict? What
consideration should determine which action or
combination of actions to pursue? To what extent does
this objective require a system-wide approach that goes
beyond the mandate of individual bodies and organs of
the United Nations? We believe these questions should
be given appropriate attention in the further follow-up
to the summit declaration.

Finally, even the United Nations is not an island.
To be effective and relevant the United Nations must
pursue and develop effective cooperation with other
actors, such as regional organizations, civil society and
the private sector. The very substantive results of the
meeting held between the United Nations and regional
organizations on 6 and 7 February are an example of
the benefits that can be achieved by closer cooperation
with regional organizations. We welcome the guiding
principles for cooperation in peace-building that
emanated from the meeting, and we encourage active
follow-up both from the United Nations and from
regional organizations on the many possible
cooperative activities identified during the meeting.

