Mr. J evremovic' (Serbia): Before I proceed to
make my statement, I would like to convey my respects
to the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Fausto Pocar,
and to the Tribunal's Prosecutor, Ms. Del Ponte. I take
this opportunity to say that, in the past, our cooperation
with the Prosecutor's Office and Ms. Del Ponte has had
its ups and downs, but we have never challenged her
personal integrity or her determination to see that those
indicted for the most serious violations of humanitarian
law be brought to justice. Those qualities have served
the victims and helped present and future generations
of our people to live in peace and security. I emphasize
once again my sincere appreciation and thanks.
Serbia is making continued efforts to strengthen
its cooperation with the ICTY. In doing so, it has been
guided by the following considerations.

The cooperation is carried out because it is
mandated by our international obligation. It gives
credence to Serbia's full respect for the international
standards related to the individual responsibility of
persons who have committed war crimes and other
violations of international humanitarian law, and to its
firm resolve to make a clean break with the legacy of
the Milosevic regime. It is proof of its genuine
acceptance of the values that underpin European
societies and provides substance to the country's
commitment to joining Euro-Atlantic integrations.
Most importantly, there can be no reconciliation in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia unless the ICTY
fulfils its mandate, to which Serbia is prepared to make
a full contribution.

Our cooperation is manifested in a number of
practical ramifications: the arrest and transfer of
indictees; the release of civilian and military
Government officials from the legal obligation to keep
official secrets; and the release of documents, all
within effective regional cooperation and with full
support for the ICTY's Completion Strategy.

In that regard, the Office of the ICTY Prosecutor
has submitted about 1,600 various requests. All have
been attended to in a timely and expeditious manner,
with replies to fewer than 2 to 3 per cent still pending,
as those sometimes take more than two months to
process. So far, the Government has released over 500
military, police and Government officials from the
restriction to keep State, official and military secrets.

The National ICTY Cooperation Council decided
to allow the ICTY Prosecutor's Office general access
to Serbian archives. As a result, the Prosecutor's Office
has been provided with thousands of documents,
including classified ones. At the same time, the speed
of the processing of the requested documents has
increased considerably, notwithstanding complex
administrative procedures in certain cases.

There is no doubt that all those who have
committed war crimes and been indicted by the ICTY
should be tried, and a number of notorious indictees
have indeed been apprehended and transferred to the
ICTY. Moreover, Serbia has taken many steps to
encourage the indictees' voluntary surrender as well.
Those measures have been effective and, by mid-2005,
14 indictees had surrendered voluntarily.

Most recently, ICTY indictee and former general
Zdravko Tolimir was arrested in a joint security
operation with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The number of
indictees transferred to The Hague has thus increased
to 38; 27 of those surrendered voluntarily, while 11
were arrested. Just two days ago, Vlastimir Djordjevic,
a former high-ranking police official, was arrested in a
joint operation of Montenegrin and Serbian authorities
and transferred to the detention unit at Scheveningen,
whereby the number of indictees transferred to The
Hague increased to 39. I firmly believe that the four
remaining individuals - fugitives Zupljanin, Karadzic,
Mladic and Hadzic - will be located and apprehended
in the near future.

The new Government has established a National
Security Council to coordinate national intelligence
agencies, which play the key role in locating and
apprehending ICTY indictees. The Council is chaired
by the President of the Republic. Also, the National
ICTY Cooperation Council has been strengthened and
its members were appointed this month and given
greater authority with respect to the processing of
ICTY requests.

Serbia supports the Completion Strategy of the
ICTY, defined in Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004). The basic precondition for the
success of the Strategy is, we believe, the capacity of
domestic courts to process the cases that have been
transferred by the ICTY in accordance with
international legal standards. To that end, a War Crimes
Council was established within the District Court of
Belgrade on 1 July 2003, as well as the War Crimes
Prosecutor's Office, specially authorized to deal with
those cases. The processing of several notorious cases
gave proof of the effectiveness of the new judicial
institutions.

As a result of cooperation, the War Crime
Prosecutor's Office has been ceded the Zvornik case by
the ICTY, and 9 suspects involved in the case have
been arrested and charged. The case of the Batajnica
mass graves is being investigated, while 12 persons,
suspected of the war crime of killing 70 civilians in the
village of Lovas in 1991, were arrested and arraigned
before the District Court in Belgrade last May.

The War Crimes District Court in Belgrade and
the Prosecutor's Office are properly equipped to try the
cases in accordance with legal standards. Proceeding
directly from that assessment, the ICTY transferred the
Kovacevic case to Serbia's judiciary. So far, Serbia has
requested the transfer of six cases with 12 indictees
under Rule 11 bis of the ICTY Rules of Procedure and
Evidence. To further cooperation, an agreement on
Serbia's Prosecutor's Office's access to the ICTY's
electronic database was signed in July 2006.

Within the context of the policy of cooperation
and the promotion of information exchange, which
includes high-level visits, the ICTY Prosecutor visited
Belgrade on 4 to 8 June 2007. The visit has been
mutually assessed as very positive.

The investigation and bringing to justice of those
who perpetrated the most heinous crimes in recent
history are common moral and political obligations of
all countries affected by the recent conflicts in the
region. Regional cooperation in that field among the
judicial institutions of those countries is therefore of
paramount importance. Meetings of the Prosecutors of
Serbia, Montenegro, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina within the so-called Palie process are held
on a regular basis in the context of the evolving
cooperation. The signing of memorandums of
understanding with the Prosecutors of Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the expected signing of a
similar memorandum with the Prosecutor of
Macedonia are welcome first steps in the right
direction.

Serbia welcomes the Agreement between the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the ICTY, enabling the OSCE missions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia to monitor the trials of war crimes in the
domestic courts of those countries. It also expresses its
gratitude to the OSCE, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Council of Europe and
other institutions and States that have rendered
assistance in harmonizing its domestic criminal
legislation with ICTY standards and in training war
crimes prosecutors and judges.

