Mr. Kassem: Let me first say that it is with great
pleasure and honour that I have been invited to address
members of this Council and the Ministers and
Ambassadors of Member States, whose presence today
signals the commitment of the Council to ending the
violent conflict that has ravaged the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for four years.

If you permit me, I would like to begin by
thanking last month's president of the Council,
Ambassador Belinga-Eboutou, for his assistance in
organizing the previous presentation in October of the
Panel of Expert's fifth report. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the current President of the
Council, Ambassador Wang Yingfan, for his assistance
in arranging today's meeting on the report and the
consultations that will follow. On behalf of the Panel, I
would also like to express our sincere thanks to all
Council members for the valuable support and
assistance they have provided us with during our
current mandate and the attention they have continued
to devote to the issue of the illegal exploitation and its
links to armed conflict.

I have closely listened to both the negative and
positive remarks made during this afternoon's meeting.
After careful consideration, I am convinced that the
answers to most of these remarks can be found in
sufficient detail in the Panel's report. I shall therefore
confine myself to commenting on only some of the
remarks, namely those by Rwanda, South Africa,
Zimbabwe, Syria, in particular with respect to the role
of companies. As for Uganda, the Panel is awaiting the
report of the Uganda Judicial Commission of Inquiry,
which is expected to be published after 15 November
this year. A detailed response to the Commission's
report will be prepared and presented to the Security
Council by the Panel.

Let me first begin with Rwanda. In its reaction to
the Panel of Expert's most recent report, the fifth since
2000, the Rwandan Government appears, in its
statement of 24 October and its letter dated 28 October
(S/2002/1207), to have either overlooked some
elements of the Panel's work or misconstrued some of
its findings. The Panel would like to emphasize the
continuity of its work over the course of the two years
of its mandate. Its reports should not be read or
interpreted in a piecemeal fashion. They should be
understood as an integrated body of investigative work,
which reflects the evolution of the situation on the
ground in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly the eastern part, where most armed
confrontations have taken place over the past two
years.

The Rwandan Government alleged that the Panel
has ignored the historical background of the conflict
and the economic relations in the region. In its
Addendum (S/2001/1072), dated 13 November 2001,
the Panel of Experts validated Rwanda's claims. The
security threats involving forces implicated in the 1994
genocide had contributed to the outbreak of the current
conflict. In the Addendum, the Panel also made
reference to traditional trading patterns that have linked
the economy of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo to those of Rwanda and other neighbouring
States in the Great Lakes region. These patterns,
however, have never included cross-border trade in
large volumes of coltan as has been the case since early
in this conflict.

The Panel's findings are indicative of the
changing nature of this conflict, including the role
played by the remnants of the original ex-Rwandan
Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe. The
economic, social and political forces that shaped and
are shaped by this conflict are dynamic, not static. The
day-to-day situation on the ground is volatile and has
been manipulated or misunderstood by many parties,
clouding the peace process.

The Panel's most recent investigations indicate
that the Rwandan Hutu armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo no longer represent
the security threat that they did four to five years ago.
This investigation also revealed, unsurprisingly, that
shared economic interests and survival needs can
encourage one-time enemies to collaborate. This would
not be the first war, nor is it likely to be the last, in
which this occurs.

The Panel has repeatedly underscored in its
reports the need for an effective solution to the
proliferation of armed groups, Congolese as well as
foreign, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
has also called for the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration (DDRRR) programme that can
respond to the complexities of the situation of the
armed groups and take into account the many
overlapping conflicts of which they are a part.

As for South Africa, the expert Panel is surprised,
really surprised, by the reaction of the South African
Government, which could be construed as that of a
Government that has directly implicated by the Panel
in the economic exploitation. The Panel did not imply
that the South African Government or any South
African official has been directly involved in this
conflict, linked to commercial activities. The Panel is
simply perplexed by the South African Government's
disappointment in the Panel's conclusions and
recommendations, which the Panel believes are
balanced, oriented towards promoting lasting peace and
consistent with the new goals of the New Partnership
for African Development.

Coming to Zimbabwe, there are several points
that need to be re-emphasized in terms of the Panel's
investigations and findings on the involvement of
Zimbabwean parties in the exploitation activities, in
collusion with others. As has been the case for other
foreign armies, one only needs to look at the areas
where the Zimbabwean troops have been deployed to
realize how their deployment has strategically
corresponded with the location of the concessions that
they benefit from. Areas of military influence have
closely overlapped areas of economic control.
Zimbabwe's support to the Burundian Forces for the
Defense of Democracy (FDD), which is described in
the Panel's Addendum November 2001, provides a
clear example of how this country actively continued to
take steps to prolong the conflict. Virtually all the
members of the network that has operated in the area
controlled by the Kinshasa Government, including the
Zimbabwean officials, have either had direct military
roles in the conflict or have strong links to military and
security services. Most of the foreign private
businessmen that have been brought into the joint
venture, primarily by the Zimbabwean parties, are
investors in or are associated with companies providing
military supplies and services.

According to testimony and documentation
guarded by the Panel, various Zimbabwean network
members and many of their corporate business partners
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are
implicated in the following: First, actively seeking
military procurement contracts and brokering sales of
military equipment and arms through high-level
contacts. Secondly, violating European Union sanctions
by facilitating the sale of military equipment from
European companies to the Zimbabwean Government.
Thirdly, negotiating clandestine arms purchases with
foreign arms manufacturers. Fourthly, smuggling of
commodities such as diamonds from other conflict
zones. Fifthly, forcibly displacing populations and or
seizing lands from areas where precious mineral
deposits are located.

Since the Government of Zimbabwe still
steadfastly maintains its position regarding the legality
of its contracts and concessions with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government, then it should be
the first to welcome a review of its economic and
financial activities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The re-examination of these agreements, with
the collaboration of third parties, in a transparent
manner, and in accordance with the resolution adopted
in the Inter-Congolese Dialogue Conference in South
Africa, would reconfirm their status. This would enable
both Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to engage, without any suspicion or obstacle, in
sound and sustainable commercial relations under fair
market terms, something that would unarguably be
beneficial to both the Congolese and the Zimbabwean
people.

As regards the letter of the Zimbabwean
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, dated
17 October 2002, and addressed to the Security
Council, which refers to a document mentioned in the
Panel's report, I can only offer the following
comments: the Panel deplores the language used by His
Excellency in his letter. Above all, with regard to the
Security Council, references such as "party to the
conspiracy against my country", are not worthy of
distinguished delegates or dignified Member States.
These excesses are regrettable and only distract from a
debate on the substantive issues. The subject of the
Permanent Representative's letter is a specific
document mentioned in the Panel's report.
Unfortunately for His Excellency, information
contained within this particular document has been
corroborated by independent sources and several other
documents obtained from additional sources; otherwise
the Panel would not have made reference to it in its
report.

Alluding to the integrity of the United Nations,
His Excellency questions why the Panel did not attempt
to verify the document with the Government or the
Permanent Mission of Zimbabwe. The Panel would
have sincerely welcomed an opportunity to exchange
views with the Zimbabwean Government. The Panel's
efforts since 3 April 2002 to engage the Zimbabwean
Government in a dialogue on how to control illicit
trade flows of commodities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and related issues have to date yielded no
results. On three occasions between April and July, the
Panel contacted the Zimbabwean Government,
including through its Permanent Mission to the United
Nations, requesting a response to its questions. The
Panel even offered the Zimbabwean Government the
option of meeting with members in Harare. It never,
ever, received a response.

The document referred to in the Ambassador's
letter was actually initially addressed to the Office of
the Spokesman for the Secretary-General, an unlikely
point for any Member State - or so-called covert
agent - to launch a campaign of "grotesque and
malicious interference" (S/2002/1l69) against another
Member State. He mentioned a certain person. He asks
who this "Mr. Taylor" is. Ms. Taylor is one of the
Political Officers who assist the Panel in its work. As a
Political Officer, she often serves as a contact point,
and is supposed to receive documents and
correspondence on a daily basis, which are to be
transmitted to the Panel and its Chairman. The Panel
has full confidence in her integrity.

The Panel is confident that it has produced a
detailed, rigorous and well documented report which
sheds light on many actors implicated in economic
exploitation, as well as in the violence and conflict that
the competition for economic control continues to
incite. The Panel based its findings on insider
information and documentary evidence. If the Council
so desires, samples of the evidence can be shown to its
members.

I will now turn to the role of companies. The
Panel's report indicates that certain companies have
dealings with the elite network that represents the
economic interests of those who have been the
occupying Powers, Rwanda and Uganda, the allies of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as
Zimbabwe, members of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo itself and members
of the foreign and Congolese armed groups. Those
parties to the conflict are involved in the business of
making war, and they are increasingly also in the
business of making vast amounts of money from war,
while sustaining armed conflict as long as possible.
The ability to move commodities and funds between
illicit sources and legitimate markets is crucial to the
vicious cycle of war and plunder. Legitimate
companies are important to the parties involved in this
conflict. That is the reason for the Panel's concern
about companies operating within the conflict areas in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

War economies in different areas of the world
have spawned hundreds of companies that would not
exist were it not for the business of war and corruption.
Some of them are facades for elite networks operating
in this and in other conflict zones. Others are simply
willing to assume the higher risks of operating in
conflict areas, where opportunities are plentiful due to
the lack of regulation that accompanies war and armed
conflict. Some of these companies operate illegally; but
many others, however, are technically not in violation
of the law, quite simply because laws are not enforced.
Yet the actions of these companies are often in
contravention of United Nations sanctions or other
efforts to promote security and peace.

So, companies need rules to tell them what they
cannot do. In other words, there is a need for such
rules. That is why the Panel, in its recommendations,
has stressed the role of Governments (para. 170).
Members may refer to that paragraph for the Panel's
view of that role.

(spoke in Arabic)

In response to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic, I wish he had met with the Panel of
Experts to check the false information he has gathered
with regard to the Panel, perhaps from certain biased
persons who were singled out. Let me stress that the
Panel of Experts did indeed meet a large number of
business people and representatives of companies
referred to in the report. We sent them more than 13
letters. Letters went, for instance, to Mr. Al-Shanfari,
Chief Executive of Oryx Natural Resources, whom we
met five times in Nairobi and New York, most recently
yesterday afternoon. We asked him, particularly in our
Nairobi meeting, to give us certain documents, and I
can say that the Panel of Experts has assembled enough
evidence, including compromising documentation, to
reaffirm what the report says.

(spoke in English)

I have an answer to a question that has been
asked many times: How can exploitation be halted after
the withdrawal of foreign troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo? I have been asked that many
times, and I have the answer. The answer is simple.
There are five elements that need to be tackled
simultaneously, without which exploitation will
continue unabated. Those five elements are the
following.

The first element is the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement (DDRRR) of foreign and Congolese armed
groups in an effective DDRRR programme. The second
element is the rebuilding and reform of the State
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That should begin with the establishment of an all-
inclusive transitional Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The third element is the
reviewing and revising of concessions and contracts
signed since 1997. The fourth element is the adherence
of business enterprises to the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Guidelines or to similar guidelines that outline
procedures for bringing violations of the guidelines to
the attention of home Governments. The countries of
origin of corporations have a special responsibility to
see that they are functioning legally and in
transparency, and thus recognize the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as the legitimate
authority. The final and fifth element is that a
monitoring body is therefore necessary to produce
regular reports to the Security Council on the
exploitation of resources: see paragraphs 186, 187 and
188 of the report.

I should like to end today's discussion on another
note. It is one of reconciliation, not of defiance; of
concord, not of disagreement. I humbly appeal to all
the parties to the conflict, and to all who are willing, to
consider the question that the people of the Great
Lakes region - the farmers, the herders, the teachers,
the students, the merchant women and shopkeepers, the
mothers and fathers - have repeatedly asked: what has
been gained in all these years of war? I appeal to all
who seek to build a foundation for a broad and lasting
settlement of this conflict to finally turn this
bloodstained page in the history of the Great Lakes
region. I appeal to them all to join hands and to enter
together what could be a genuinely new era, in which
peace-building will be the order of the day. The parties
to the conflict will face many challenges in building
that new era. But, with regional cooperation and
international support, the citizens of the entire region
could enjoy peace, security and economic
development, and an atmosphere of transparency,
legality and legitimacy can benefit all in the region.

Finally, I should like to conclude by expressing
my full confidence that the Council will take the
necessary decisions, in the light of the Panel's
recommendations, to convey the right message to all
the parties concerned - both those from the African
continent and those from outside it.

