Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the information he provided
and his assessment of the threat of corruption in
situations of conflict. We also thank Mr. Prendergast
for his briefing.

Yes, conflicts do provide scope for profit and
many people do indeed profit from them. We should
not forget, however, that many conflicts are provoked
by struggles, both concealed and open, over natural
resources. And this is about external and well as
internal players. Nowhere is that more evident than in
Africa, where the thought of its undeveloped natural
resources gives many no rest. We could term that the
reverse side of corruption.

As the Secretary-General rightly said today,
corruption is a feature of both rich and poor countries.
It also exists in the United States, which lectured us
about corruption today. It exists there in its traditional
forms, but it is frequently disguised through unique
institutions such as legalized lobbying. So if people
want to discuss the subject in the Security Council, it
would be more logical for them to start at home, and
specifically with lobbying, which envelops the highest
levels of power in the United States and is dictated by
the interests of numerous private military companies,
whose commercial interests are inextricably entwined
with those of the powerful defence lobby in the Capitol.
For the Council's information, the cause of the
conflict in Ukraine was not Yanukovych's corruption
but a coup d'e'tat that exchanged one corrupt regime for
another, which, unlike that of Yanukovych, has actually
waged war on its own people. There are members of the
Council who are well aware of the scale of the corruption
in Ukraine because those people are their protege's.
And it is that corruption, including in the military, that
is fuelling the conflict in south-eastern Ukraine.

The Russian delegation has consistently advocated
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations in uniting the international community's
efforts to prevent corruption and combat such scourges.
In our view, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption is a robust international legal framework for
developing international cooperation in this area. Russia
was one of the first countries to sign the Convention,
in December 2003, and to ratify it, in March 2006.
In 2015, the sixth session of the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention was held in Saint Petersburg.
We pay particular attention to the Mechanism for the
Review of Implementation of the Convention, which we
consider unique, open, transparent and unpoliticized,
and which functions as an intergovernmental process
based on respect for the principles of the equality
and sovereignty of States and of non-intervention in
domestic affairs.

We support strengthening the role of the United
Nations and of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) in providing expert assistance
to States in their efforts to effectively implement the
provisions of this critical Convention, and in UNODC's
efforts to ensure its universalization. Russia is a major
donor to UNODC's anti-corruption projects, including
a number of joint initiatives such as the annual
preparatory courses for contacts and Government
experts participating in the review of the Convention's
implementation. In 2017, Russia provided financial
support for the operations of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption Legal Library and the
Tools and Resources for Anti-Corruption Knowledge
web portal. In June in Vienna, on the eve of the World
Cup, together with UNODC and with support from
the BRICS countries, Brazil, Russia, India, China
and South Africa, we held an international conference
on preventing corruption in sports. As we know,
intergovernmental open-ended working groups have
been established in the framework of the Convention
to review measures on preventing corruption, ensuring
the restitution of assets and bringing together experts
on international cooperation. All these formats are
open, intergovernmental and technical in nature.

There are still gaps and inconsistencies in States'
legal norms with regard to the restitution of criminally
derived assets. In that connection, the Russian
Federation has consistently supported the development
of a corresponding multilateral international legal
mechanism under the auspices of the United Nations,
which would help to eliminate vague areas and would
help to strengthen the coordination of the relevant
bodies in supplying mutual legal assistance on
criminal matters and extraditions, and in countering
money-laundering.

As is blindingly clear, unpoliticized mechanisms
for anti-corruption have been functioning effectively
and are being developed at the United Nations. In
that connection, we do not support initiatives aimed
at enshrining the topic as some kind of so-called new
challenge to international peace and security and thus
making use ofthe forum and mechanisms ofthe Security
Council in that context. That can only undermine
the existing formats and would damage the practical
cooperation of the relevant State agencies based on
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
We believe that the distribution of labour that exists in
the United Nations enables us to productively tackle
the challenges in the area of anti-corruption activity,
and that changing it, especially to the detriment of the
authority of the United Nations, is counterproductive.
There are no objective reasons for it. For our part,
we will continue to assist the specialized bodies and
mechanisms of international cooperation in this
area and in adapting them to reflect the evolution of
existing threats.

