Mr. Ramirez Carreiio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the work
of the Security Council during the month of March.
You may count on the full cooperation of my delegation
in the pursuit of the objectives inherent to the Council's
work. We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan
Simonovie, and the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging, for their
briefings.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
optimistically notes that the prospects for a political
solution in Ukraine have continued to grow, especially
following the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) by
the Security Council in support of the decision agreed
by the representatives of Ukraine, Russia, France and
Germany on 12 February in Minsk. We underscore
the need for the agreements to receive the support of
the international community. We firmly hope that the
parties will respect the ceasefire so that the agreements
can be fully implemented.

We would like to express our concern regarding the
more than 6,000 deaths, 14,740 wounded and 1 million
internally displaced persons that have been reported,
as well as the fragile situation in which civilians find
themselves in the regions of Donetsk and Lugansk.
We therefore reiterate the need for the parties strictly
to observe what was agreed in Minsk on 12 February
regarding the protection of civilians and to support a
process addressing the humanitarian situation. We
reiterate our rejection of violence, ethnic and political
persecution, and any form of terrorist act, by whosoever
committed and for whatsoever motivation. We call on
the parties to refrain from actions that threaten the
aspirations for peace and stability of the populations
affected by the conflict.

Venezuela supports the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and welcomes the work being
carried out by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to support the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including the
withdrawal of heavy weaponry by the parties concerned,
which has already begun, as stated Mr. Ertugrul
Apakan, head of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine on 27 February.

Without a doubt, the human rights situation
throughout the region is cause for concern. And while
that is the focus of our discussion at this meeting,
I cannot fail to stress the importance of seeking a
political and diplomatic solution to the conflict. The
Security Council must therefore support the effective
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015) and the full
implementation ofthe Minsk agreements of 12 February
in an impartial and transparent manner and without
ulterior motives.

