Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I congratulate China on its
initiative in promoting this timely debate. I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his very informative briefing and for his report
(S/2012/376). I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Valerie Amos for her presentation. Our
appreciation also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights Ivan Simonovic and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for
their briefings.

Protecting civilians is one of the most important
ways through which the United Nations can give
specific shape to its ultimate objectives, as set out in
the Charter. Today's meeting demonstrates renewed
commitment in our efforts to advance the conceptual
framework and the tools for the protection of civilians
and to prevent the horrendous atrocities described in
the Secretary-General's report.

The plight of innocent civilians who remain victims
of the horrors of conflict demands that we reflect on
why effective implementation remains a challenge,
in spite of progress on the protection agenda. Brazil
believes that the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in 2009 (see S/2009/277) remain
critical and must be the primary focus of our attention.
We also believe the additional recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his 2012 report deserve the
careful attention of the Security Council.

In that context, we stress the importance of the
Council calling for respect for and adherence to
international humanitarian law in a consistent and
non-selective manner. The work of peacekeeping
operations and other protection actors in assisting
Governments to build the necessary capacity to perform
their primary responsibility to protect their citizens is
vital. It is also very important to express recognition for
the work of protection actors on the ground.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support, for example,
have developed a protection-of-civilians resource
and capability matrix to assist missions in applying
resources and capabilities to the implementation of
protection mandates. Furthermore, training modules
on the protection of civilians have been finalized.
In addition, there has also been commendable work
developed by other actors, such as humanitarian
organizations, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross and various non-governmental
organizations, which have played a long-established
and critical role in seeking to enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

In its presidential statement dated 22 November
2010 (S/PRST/2010/25), the Council, with the support of
Brazil, expressed its deep regret that civilians accounted
for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflict.
Long-term protection can be ensured only if we can
contribute to sustainable solutions to conflicts. Helping
States move along the path of political reconciliation
and development is, ultimately, the best contribution
on the part of the United Nations to the long-term
protection of civilians. In that sense, the Council should
strengthen the importance of that dimension when
drafting peacekeeping mandates.

Brazil believes that the protection of civilians can
best be achieved in the end if we prevent conflicts from
happening. That requires an emphasis on diplomacy
and cooperation that reduces the risks of armed conflict
and the human costs associated with it. That is why
Brazil, through the concept of responsibility while
protecting, has called on the international community
to demonstrate renewed commitment and strengthened
confidence in its capacity to make use of the tools set
forth in the United Nations Charter for the prevention of
conflicts and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

In that regard, let me conclude by commending the
Secretary-General for the initiative to designate 2012
as the Year of Prevention. Other relevant initiatives,
such as the Group of Friends of Mediation, can be seen
to fall into the same spirit of pursuing the protection of
civilians through diplomacy, dialogue, negotiation and
prevention. In line with the principles and purposes
of the San Francisco Charter, it can never be stressed
enough that the international community must be
rigorous in its efforts to value, pursue and exhaust
all peaceful means available for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. That will certainly be the best
expression of our commitment to the protection of
civilians.

