Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me in turn to convey our gratitude to Mr. Morris for his
extremely interesting statement, which I believe both
contained highly significant data and figures and
communicated a sense of the human experience.

We, too, attach the greatest of importance to the
question of the food crisis in Africa. As Mr. Morris
said, we hope to take advantage of our leadership of
the G8 in order to place this issue at the top of its
agenda.

With respect to Mr. Morris's briefing, I think we
were all struck by the magnitude of the crisis and by
everything he had to say regarding the interaction of
various factors that contribute to and further exacerbate
the crisis. Many questions raised by my colleagues here
addressed in one form or another the factors
contributing to the food crisis.

I was struck by the fact that Mr. Morris spoke a
great deal of Southern Africa. Southern Africa is
perhaps the region that combines the most worrisome
factors of the current food situation in Africa. Perhaps
that is because it is a region that is not prepared - or
is less prepared than others - for large-scale famines
and because it is there that the phenomenon of the
ravages of AIDS is most glaring, to the extent that
perhaps it is the region that most urgently causes us to
ask whether the current number of deaths will
compromise life in the future and the capacity of those
societies to recover for the future.

Mr. Morris said that he wanted to concentrate on
the humanitarian aspect of the question of food.
Therefore we should not ask him too much about the
overall strategy or related issues. However, all the
questions we have asked naturally touch somewhat on
the issue of whether, in these particularly terrible
situations, it is necessary to reconsider the international
community's overall strategy with respect to those
societies? It is a question that cannot be resolved with a
few minutes' discussion.

However, in that context, I would like to ask a
more specific question: on the basis of his experience,
does Mr. Morris consider, for example, in Southern
Africa - which it seemed to me was the most striking
and illustrative case - is all the necessary coordination
among the principal actors of the international
community actually in place, or is there a need further
to unite our energies to deal with this problem from the
various angles he himself has mentioned? I thank Mr.
Morris for his attention.

I might add that I, too, would be interested in a
later briefing by Mr. Morris on Iraq. But I, too, would
like him to give us some preliminary information this
afternoon, as he proposed earlier.

