Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note of the twenty-first report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), on the investigation of the situation in Darfur.
We thank Ms. Bensouda for her comments on the 2009
report ofthe African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur
(S/2009/599, annex I).

The military, political and humanitarian situations
in Darfur remain difficult. The root cause ofthe violence
and a rise in the number ofinternally displaced persons
is the refusal of the armed opposition to participate
in the Doha peace process or inter-tribal talks. We
welcome the Government of the Sudan's active efforts
to reconcile warring tribes. The escalation ofinter-tribal
clashes, driven by the competition for resources, is due
in large part to the economic difficulties facing Darfur
and the Sudan as a whole. That is why improving the
situation will depend to a great extent on the timely
implementation of the pledges made in 2013 in Doha
concerning the allocation of billions of aid dollars to
address the needs of the people of Darfur, the writing-
off of foreign debt and the lifting of sanctions levied
by the United States in circumvention of the Council.
The resulting humanitarian problem also requires the
normalization of the military and political situation in
the region.

We call for swift action on the part of the Darfur
rebels tojoin in the peace process, based on the Security
Council-approved Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
In that context, it is high time for the Security Council
to consider levying targeted sanctions against the
leaders of the so-called intractable Darfur rebels, who
unfortunately enjoy support from the outside.

The ongoing violence in Darfur has led to the
suffering of civilians and increased numbers of
internally displaced persons, which is of course a cause
for concern. We therefore call on the Court to objectively
and impartially assess the situation. The ability of the
ICC to impartially investigate the actions of all parties
to the conflict is ofkey importance to strengthening the
Court's credibility. We also call on the Court to act with
a view to striking a balance between serving justice and
achieving lasting peace and stability.

The talks are all of equal importance. The search
for solutions requires a comprehensive and balanced
approach. We take note of the Prosecutor's observations
regarding States' cooperation with the International
Criminal Court in the framework of the Darfur dossier.
The situation again demonstrates the importance of
States' support in ensuring the Court's successful
functioning.

Regarding the topic raised by the Prosecutor - the
Sudan's participation in the African Union (AU) Summit
in Johannesburg - we recall that, in addition to the
obligation to cooperate with the ICC, the Statute states
that parties to the Statute are bound by obligations
arising from international legal norms governing the
immunity of high-level officials, particularly Heads of
States, of States that, like the Sudan, are not party to
the Rome Statute. In that regard, we are sympathetic
to the concerns raised with increasing frequency about
a number of aspects of the Court's activities regarding
certain African States, as well as the African Union as
a whole.

Regarding the appeals made through so-called
follow-up actions on the part of the Council in the
referral of cases to the International Criminal Court,
our position has been expressed many times and is well
known. The case of the alleged massive sexual violence
in Thabit has been closed. As is well known, it began
through rumours launched by Radio Dabanga against
Khartoum that were consequently spread by certain
human rights activists, based on interviews that were
usually carried out by telephone.

We recommend that colleagues look into the
results of the Government of the Sudan's independent
and detailed investigation, which has convincingly
refuted those unbridled speculations. The Thabit affair
represents an information war. It was an attempt by
certain players to scale up pressure on the Sudan. It
is very unfortunate that some forces are attempting to
involve the Council, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the ICC in such a risky
business.

