My statement is in line with that made on behalf of the European Union. I would like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Commissioner for Social Affairs of the African Union, Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil, for their statements. This relevant open debate on pandemics and security comes at an exceptional time. We are trying to overcome a global pandemic with multidimensional effects - a crisis that overlaps with other political challenges and that puts pressure on efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda. Millions of people have been affected by the spread of the virus - 10.5 million people have been infected and 510,000 have died - but virtually the entire planet has experienced the impact of the pandemic, which has increased the risk of tension, conflict and division in recent months. It is therefore time for solidarity, coordinated action and effective multilateralism. The Security Council must play a key role in taking the decisions that each moment demands in order to lay the foundations for a better future, free of conflicts and threats to peace and security. The current pandemic, which is forcing us to talk about security, has reminded us, first, that we are intrinsically interconnected; secondly, that prevention is the most powerful tool available to the international community and multilateralism; and, thirdly, that international cooperation is absolutely imperative. In this regard, we must take note of the complexity of new emergencies and the need to build on the lessons learned in overcoming past challenges, such as the Ebola virus disease, not forgetting severe acute respiratory syndrome or Middle East respiratory syndrome. The multifaceted nature of health emergencies like pandemics and epidemics calls for coordinated action on the part of the United Nations family. The so-called threefold humanitarian-development-peace nexus must serve as both a reference and an objective for prevention, preparation and response decisions. Civil-military cooperation is another pillar that must be strengthened. To that end, United Nations peacekeeping missions must be equipped with the material and human resources, especially adequate protection officers, necessary to provide agile support to local communities in responding to health threats. Another lesson learned from this crisis is that women and girls are victims twice over and that no effort should be spared in prevention and protection measures or in the provision of health services, including for sexual and reproductive health. At the same time, and perhaps more importantly, women have emerged as excellent social interlocutors and communicators whose contributions improve all phases of humanitarian, development and peacekeeping responses efforts. Spain supports the Team Europe approach, which has mobilized €36 billion and strengthened partnerships for comprehensive COVID-19 response and recovery. We have contributed €125 million to the WHO Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator initiative, €50 million of which will go to the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization and €75 million to the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations. Those pledged contributions, together with other funds mobilized for the health response, amount to a contribution of around €187 million from Spain to this appeal. Spain strongly believes that access to vaccines, treatments and diagnostics must be swift, accessible in terms of cost and able to be distributed on a global scale. Finally, I would also like to highlight a series of priority actions to strengthen our institutions and societies in the face of health emergencies. Spain has addressed the COVID-19 health crisis through its universal health coverage system, established in 1986 - thanks to which, no one has been left behind during this crisis. The effective response to the pandemic shows the need to strengthen national public health systems as a whole in the short, medium and long terms, and, at the global level, to promote an integrated health system model based on continuity of care across various levels of health-service delivery. In the light of all of this, Spain intends to face future epidemiological outbreaks at the domestic level with enhanced primary care and strengthened public health through a COVID-19 preparation and response plan that will incorporate, among other things, strategic reserves of critical supplies, contingency planning to reactivate standby health resources, and a guide for control spikes, outbreaks and possible second wave. Moreover, at the international level, Spain will enhance and support global collaboration based on the guiding principles of multilateralism and solidarity.
