Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for their remarks. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Kubis, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and of Mr. Usackas, Special
Representative of the European Union for Afghanistan,
and I associate myself with the latter's statement.

With the end of the withdrawal of our combat
troops from Afghanistan, a new phase is beginning
in the relations between France and that country,
a different sort of relations based on strengthened
military and civilian cooperation. Since 2008, in Kapisa
and Surobi, the French army had the responsibility of
training the Afghan Security Forces and ensuring the
transition with the local authorities. That task has been
carried out successfully. French soldiers still present
in Afghanistan are focusing now on the withdrawal of
military equipment, on training and on the management
of the military hospital in Kabul and of the airport.
They are therefore in the service of the allied forces
and of the population. A treaty of friendship and
cooperation between our two countries has been signed
and ratified. Financial assistance to Afghanistan has
been distributed. Amounting to about €300 million, it
will help the country to move from a wartime economy
to a peacetime economy.

Afghanistan is on its way to regaining full exercise
ofits sovereignty at the end ofthe transition process. The
international community is committed to maintaining

its support during the transformation decade. In that
context, I would like to underscore three challenges
that Afghanistan must face.

First, with regard to the fight against drug
production and trafficking, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, in its latest report, paints a
worrisome picture of that situation and of the current
trends. I will not revisit the numbers or the devastating
effects of that scourge in Afghanistan and beyond its
borders. It is clearly a matter of concern for the Afghan
Government and the international community, which
are mobilized together in the framework of the Paris
Fact and the Istanbul Process. The impact ofthis issue on
the future of Afghanistan is clear. We therefore feel that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
could legitimately integrate it if not into the heart of
its current mandate, at least into its reflection on its
future in Afghanistan, in full respect for the remit of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and,
it goes without saying, in support of the efforts of the
Afghan Government.

Secondly, the presidential elections of 5 April 2014
and the legislative elections of2015 will be an important
landmark for the international community and its long-
term support for Afghanistan, as agreed in the Tokyo
Framework. We call on the Afghan authorities to
organize credible, inclusive, transparent and peaceful
elections by establishing a reliable electoral census, an
appropriate legislative framework and robust anti-fraud
measures, and by guaranteeing the independence
of the Independent Election Commission. We back
the supporting role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General's and the United Nations
Development Programme.

Thirdly, as to reconciliation, only a genuine and
inclusive inter-Afghan political process will ensure
the emergence of a stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
France supports the reconciliation efforts in that
country and is prepared to contribute to them, of course
in agreement with the Afghan authorities. In Chantilly
last December, we welcomed a dialogue session that
included different strata of Afghan society, organized
in full transparency with the Afghan Government and
in full respect for Security Council sanctions. Through
the adoption of resolution 1988 (2011) and 2082 (2012),
we also contributed to reorienting the sanctions regime
in order to make it more conducive to reconciliation.

I conclude by welcoming the adoption of resolution
2096 (2013). We thank Australia for its role as facilitator.
We also hope that what has not proved feasible this
year - agreeing on a shorter and clearer text and a
mandate focused on the realities on the ground and the
priorities of the Afghan Government - will do so in
the next. That should bolster the consistency of United
Nations activities on the ground.
