Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velasquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would also like to congratulate the
Government of Lithuania for organizing the current
debate, and we are thankful for the invitation to share
Peru's point of View on this topic. It is one to which
we attach great importance, because throughout its
history Peru has been committed to promoting and
strengthening the rule of law and to international peace
and security, international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

Peru agrees with the approach taken in this open
debate. In particular, we stress the need to exchange
points of View on the obvious link between the rule of
law and the maintenance of international peace and
security. We believe that the exchange of post-conflict
experiences, be they domestic or international, should
be used to the fullest and taken into account so as to
include aspects of the rule of law in the mandates for
peacekeeping operations. With respect to the Secretary-
General's report on measuring the effectiveness of the
support provided by the United Nations system for the
promotion ofthe rule oflaw in conflict and post-conflict
situations (S/2013/341), there is a need to identify
experts with specialized capabilities and knowledge
who could participate in and also advise peacekeeping
operations, as well as special political missions and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Peru, for example, has been able to overcome
situations of internal conflict and violence. Today we
live in peace domestically and internationally, and we
are enjoying a prosperity new in our republican history.
That is largely due to our commitment to the rule of law
and to the capabilities that we have developed.

Peru is a country that has strengthened its
democracy and its institutions, with an independent
judicial system that respects and promotes human
rights. We comply with our commitments, defend
international law and invest in regional integration
and conflict prevention. Hence, we have contributed to
maintaining international, regional and national peace
and security while advancing progress for our people.

Internationally, the mutual trust that Peru has built
with its neighbours is based largely on its observance of
international law and the promotion of trust.

Just three weeks ago the International Court of
Justice issued a judgement establishing the maritime
boundary between Peru and Chile. We are pleased to
note that both Governments have been carrying out
the judgement in a good-neighbourly spirit. With the
peaceful settlement of the dispute, both countries have
renewed their willingness to work together for the
integration and progress of our peoples.

Another example of neighbourly integration based
on the rule of law can be seen in the development on
the border that Peru and Ecuador have been promoting
since 1998. In that context, the coordinated work of the
Peruvian and Ecuadorian armies for the humanitarian
demining of the common border should be pointed out.
The capacities generated have contributed to the recent
establishment of a bi-national demining unit that both
countries will make available to the United Nations.

Internally, our experience in fighting terrorism
shows how violent situations can fortunately be
overcome, thanks to the rule of law and the democratic
and humanitarian values that that implies. Along
those lines, Peru also points out the need to strengthen
international cooperation to tackle the global drug
problem and transnational organized crime, which
undermine sustainable development and the rule of law.

I will conclude by stressing that the rule of law
nationally and internationally is fundamental for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Through the rule of law countries not only manage to
overcome their conflicts but also gain the stability and
social cohesion that sustainable development requires.

In reaffirming Peru's commitment to the rule of
law, we point out the need for peacekeeping operations
to contribute to promoting and strengthening the
rule of law in order to overcome conflict and post-
conflict situations and to produce the conditions that
are conducive to sustainable development. In this spirit
we reiterate our willingness to continue contributing
to these operations, providing our experience and the
capabilities we have developed in this area.

