The Secretary-General: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Smai'l Chergui for his presence here today. I attach
the highest importance to close ties with the African
Union (AU). We at the United Nations will continue to
work hand-in-hand with the African Union to promote
development and lasting peace across the continent.

The crisis that continues to unfold in the Central
African Republic poses a test for the entire international
community. The situation in the country has been on
the agenda of the Security Council for many years now,
but today's emergency is of another, more disturbing,
magnitude. It is a calamity with a strong claim on
the conscience of humankind. Over the past year we
have seen, in quick succession, the violent overthrow
of the Government, the collapse of State institutions
and a descent into lawlessness and sectarian brutality.
Over 2.5 million people - more than half the
population - need immediate humanitarian assistance.

The new acting Head of State, Ms. Catherine
Samba-Panza, is committed to building State authority,
and I commend her valiant efforts. But with no budget,
hardly any resources and faced with the country's
pervasive poverty, her abilities are sharply constrained.
The path towards the restoration of State authority will
be a long one.

Innocent civilians are being killed in large
numbers. Those victims are not so-called "collateral
damage" from fighting between rebel groups. They are
being killed purposefully, targeted for their religious
beliefs and for their community affiliation - for who
they are. Muslims in particular are being targeted, but
the ex-Se'le'ka continue to attack Christians as well.

Almost 1 million people have been displaced, with
many homes burned to the ground with the purpose of
preventing their return. Whole populations are being
moved. A creeping de facto partition of the country is
setting in, with Muslims in one part and Christians in
the other. That separation is sowing the seeds of conflict
and instability for years, maybe generations, to come.

The African Union and France have deployed
troops to the Central African Republic to help stem the
violence. We owe those leaders and soldiers our gratitude
for saving so many lives and providing protection where
they can. We owe the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) and
Operation Sangaris our solidarity and assistance.

However, given the scale and geographic breadth of
the violence, the security requirements far exceed the
capabilities of the number of international troops now
deployed. In places where there are no international
forces, the choice for far too many civilians is to flee
or be killed.

The human family must not shy away from what
is happening today in the Central African Republic,
or from our responsibilities - both the Council's and
mine - under the Charter of the United Nations. Events
in the Central African Republic have implications
across the region and summon us to defend universal
values. This complex security, humanitarian, human
rights and political crisis demands a comprehensive and
integrated response.

The United Nations is working with the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), the European Union and the World
Bank to address the country's diverse challenges. But
those efforts will prove fruitless unless we do more to
end the atrocity crimes, the destruction of communities
and the mass displacement of populations.

The Security Council has asked for my
recommendations for a future United Nations
peacekeeping operation. I will soon report to the
Council on the outlines of a mission with a robust
mandate to protect civilians and promote stability.
But the deployment of a peacekeeping operation, if
authorized, will take months; the people of the Central
African Republic do not have months to wait. The
international community must act decisively now to
prevent any further worsening of the situation and
to respond to the dire needs of the country's people.
In that spirit, today I propose a six-point initiative to
address the greatest risks being faced by the people of
the Central African Republic.

First, and most important, I call for the rapid
reinforcement of the African Union and French troops
now on the ground, with additional deployments of at
least 3,000 more troops and police. That new personnel,
including formed police units, should deploy as soon
as possible, in the coming days and weeks, and have
the necessary mobility, including air mobility, to be
able to operate wherever required. AU Commission
President Zuma has informed me that she will propose
an expansion of MISCA to the AU Peace and Security
Council. I welcome her initiative and urge members of
the Peace and Security Council to endorse it. President
Hollande of France has announced that Operation
Sangaris will be reinforced by some 25 per cent, to a
total of2,000. In addition, the European Union is poised
to increase its planned deployment from 500 to 1,000,
with an initial operating capacity on the ground in
early March. I am grateful for those commitments. But
more are needed, quickly, and the broader international
community must share the burden.

Secondly, I propose that all international forces
in the Central African Republic be brought under a
coordinated command and that the mission of those
forces be focused on the most urgent priorities, that is,
containing the violence, protecting civilians, preventing
further displacements, creating a secure environment
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and laying
the groundwork for the handover to a United Nations
peacekeeping force as soon as possible.

Thirdly, I propose that the African troops that join
that force be provided with logistic and financial support,
including rations, water and fuel and reimbursement
for their major non-lethal military equipment. The
estimated cost of that package, consisting of the
bare essentials, would be $38 million for a six-month
bridging period.

Fourthly, I call for rapid, tangible support to the
Government of the Central African Republic to help it
establish a minimum capacity to function. That support
should include the financial assistance necessary
to get police back on the streets, judges back in the
courtrooms and prison guards back on the job. I am
pleased to announce that today Denmark confirmed
a contribution of $2 million to that initiative. I intend
to see those resources put to use quickly. Norway has
also confirmed today that it will make a donation to the
effort.
Fifthly, I call for the acceleration of a political and
reconciliation process to prevent a further fraying ofthe
communal bonds and to lay the groundwork for an end
to the conflict. Community and religious leaders will
have an especially important role to play in promoting
tolerance, peaceful coexistence and non-violence.
A political process will also require the dynamic
engagement of ECCAS, the AU and the international
community. I would like to pay particular tribute to the
tireless efforts of the ECCAS Chief Mediator, President
Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo.

The United Nations is reinforcing the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic's analytical and operational capabilities so
that we can help the national authorities to put the
transition back on track, expand State authority and
establish credible institutions throughout the country.

Accountability and justice measures must be key
elements of any peace and reconciliation process.
More immediately, such measures will contribute to
the prevention of ongoing human rights violations.
I am pleased to announce that the Chairperson of
the commission of inquiry mandated by the Security
Council, along with an advance team, will arrive in the
Central African Republic to take up their important
work.

Sixthly and finally, I appeal for urgent funding for
humanitarian aid, which is currently insufficient to
address the crisis. Only 15 per cent of the resources
needed for this year have been received, despite generous
pledges made at last month's funding conference
in Brussels.My Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Valerie Amos, is in the Central African Republic.
She has expressed shock at what she saw in Bossangoa
today, and noted that tensions between communities are
high and that people fear for their lives. She stressed the
need for more troops on the ground to provide security
and protection across the country.

Over the past few days, my senior colleagues and

I have reached out to dozens of Member States to seek
their support for my proposals. I have been encouraged
by the positive response. Some are considering sending
additional troops and police; others have pledged to
provide budget support for the Government. Those
commitments will bring tangible dividends in the
coming days.

The United Nations, for its part, thanks to generous
support from Canada and others, has allocated
$5 million from the MISCA trust fund to provide
essential communications equipment to African troops,
and those items are being delivered in Bangui as I
speak.

The six-point initiative I have just put forward aims
to support and complement the hard work now being
carried out by a range of actors. It is designed to achieve
the most pressing objectives, namely, stabilizing the
security situation and saving lives that would otherwise
be lost to senseless sectarian hatred. The proposals
call for contributions from many quarters. They also
compel us to avoid a piecemeal approach in which some
proposals receive more support than others. To succeed,
the proposals must be embraced and implemented as an
integrated whole.

We know what is happening in the Central African
Republic. We know why it is different from previous
outbreaks of violence. We know why it matters to all of
us and what we must do.

Knowledge is not all we have. Through collective
action, as envisaged by the Charter of the United
Nations, we have the power to stop the killing and
save the Central African Republic from its current
nightmare.

I urge the Council to support my proposal, and I
urge Member States to take the action necessary to
implement it. Let us show the people of the Central
African Republic that the United Nations stands with
them and that the support they so urgently need is on
its way. This is our shared responsibility. The people of
the Central African Republic have asked for our help.
I urge the Council to join me and respond to their call.

