The Secretary-General: I thank the Bolivian
presidency for convening this debate.

The exploitation of natural resources, or
competition over them, can and does lead to violent
conflict. Preventing, managing and resolving such
conflicts is one of the major and growing challenges of
our time. United Nations studies show that more than
40 per cent of internal armed conflicts over the past
60 years have been linked to natural resources. With
the increasing impacts of climate change evident in all
regions, the risks are only going to grow.

Other global trends, such as a growing population,
increasing consumption and environmental
degradation, are also placing significant and potentially
unsustainable pressures on the availability of many
natural resources. These include oil, gas, minerals,
water and land. The unfair distribution of natural
resources, and corruption and mismanagement, can and
do lead to conflict, especially in countries with weaker
institutions. These pressures can also exacerbate
existing ethnic or religious divides within societies and
across borders.

Since 1990, 75 per cent of civil wars in Africa
have been partially funded by revenues from natural
resources. The illegal extraction of minerals, timber,
charcoal and wildlife has fuelled Violence in a number
of regions. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
it has generated almost a billion dollars in revenue for
rebels and criminal groups. Likewise, in the Central
African Republic the illicit exploitation of minerals by
numerous armed groups and militias has contributed to
sustaining and prolonging the conflict.

More needs to be done to regulate the provenance,
sale and trade of minerals through cooperative
arrangements involving civil society, Governments
and regional and international organizations. A
positive example is the Kimberley Process, which
succeeded in reducing the trade in conflict diamonds.
Through certified extraction, production and fair trade
practices, and with a focus on aiding local communities,
lawlessness can be countered and tangible benefits
brought to conflict-affected populations.

It is also worth emphasizing that shared natural
resources have traditionally also been a catalyst for
cooperation among States, communities and people.
Mutual benefits generally act as an incentive for
sustained peaceful dialogue, which in turn can generate
cooperation and understanding in other areas. For
example, benefit-sharing on water resources has a
long history among the riparian States of the Senegal
River basin. In South America, Lake Titicaca, the
largest freshwater lake on the continent, has long been
a source of cooperation between Bolivia and Peru. And,
from my own experience, the Albufeira Convention,
agreed during my time as Prime Minister of Portugal,
continues to promote good relations and cooperation on
water management between Portugal and Spain.

In Central Asia, progress is being achieved in the
area of transboundary water management through
ongoing consultations among Central Asian States,
supported by the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy. In Iraq, the United Nations
Assistance Mission is working to reinforce peace and
stability through the development of a land-disputes
project to promote confidence-building among
communities and increase inclusivity. In the Lake
Chad basin, cooperation on water has also played a
critical role in bringing countries together to address
the broader challenges to the region.
In short, the United Nations recognizes the potential
for the shared management of natural resources as a
means for preventing conflict and enhancing regional
cooperation for peace and sustainable development. To
that end, we have taken note of Member States' call
for a greater focus on these issues, including recently
through the adoption of Security Council resolutions
on Lake Chad, Somalia and Darfur, as well as a
presidential statement on West Africa and the Sahel
(S/PRST/2018/16). In response, we are taking a number
of actions.

First, the Organization is seeking to strengthen
our capacity to address the growing threat of
climate-related security risks. This includes a newjoint
initiative involving the Department of Political Affairs,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme.

Secondly, we intend to maximize opportunities
to use mediation over natural resources as a tool for
conflict prevention, in cooperation with Member
States, regional partners and international financial
institutions. For example, the High-level Panel on
Water, which I convened together with the President
of the World Bank Group, has helped galvanize action
around hydro-diplomacy.

Thirdly, we will further strengthen our partnership
with regional and subregional organizations to work
on ways to increase attention to building the capacities
of national and local actors to prevent and respond to
conflicts with natural resource dimensions. As part of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
I welcome the ongoing collaboration between our
respective organizations to support the Panel of the
Wise in its efforts to improve the prevention, mediation
and resolution of conflicts over natural resources
in Africa.

Fourthly, we are seeking to strengthen the
capacity of women's networks and organizations to
effectively engage in dialogue and mediation processes
around natural resources and the environment,
including in the context of climate change. That
initiative - co-led by the UN-Women, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Peacebuilding
Support Office - has already supported indigenous
and Afro-Colombian women in Colombia in processes
related to natural-resource use, ownership, governance
and benefit-sharing.
Fifthly, we also recognize that issues relating
to land remain a critical factor. Following an initial
scoping study in 2016 conducted by UN-Habitat, I have
recently finalized a guidance note to ensure greater
strategic convergence across the United Nations system
to help address issues of land and conflict.

Once again, let me thank the Bolivian presidency for
today's timely debate. There is a lot of work to be done
on this critical issue, and if we address it effectively,
we will go a long way towards creating a safe and
sustainable world for everyone, now and in future.

