Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.

Before beginning, I would like to add my voice to
all those who have today paid tribute to the memory
of the victims of the bombing of the Canal Hotel in
Baghdad in 2003, which killed 22 United Nations staff
members, including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq, Sergio Vieira de Mello. My
thoughts are also with all our other United Nations
colleagues who have perished while carrying out their
mission. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his team for the very moving ceremony that they
held this morning.

I wish also to thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General, Ms. Amos, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Pillay, and the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Spoerri, for their
statements. We note that Argentina has chosen this
important topic for an open debate in view of the
upcoming report by the Secretary-General.

The European Union (EU) is firmly committed
to promoting the implementation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
worldwide. Respect for those laws is crucial to ensuring
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and to
providing help to victims in the most efficient manner.
The frequent failure of parties to armed conflicts to
comply with their obligations is of profound concern
to the EU.

The EU has adopted guidelines on promoting
respect for international humanitarian law, setting out
the EU view on the scope of international humanitarian
law and listing the tasks the EU must undertake to
improve its implementation. The EU monitors situations
where international humanitarian law is applicable and
recommends actions to promote compliance. The EU
makes full use of all the tools at its disposal, including
political dialogue and processes and public statements
to that effect.

At the 31st International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent, held in 2011, member States
undertook substantial commitments concerning
international humanitarian law. We would note that
one such commitment was a promise by all member
States to consider ratifying all the core international
humanitarian law instruments to which they were not
yet party by the next conference, in 2015. Work to
implement those commitments is under way.

Significant steps have been taken to implement the
new guidelines, in terms of all member States ratifying
core international humanitarian law instruments and
their accession to the Rome Statute of the International

Criminal Court (ICC). The EU encourages those
member States that have not yet ratified Additional
Protocols 1, II and III to the Geneva Conventions to do
so. We also call on all States to accept and recognize
the competence of the International Humanitarian Fact-
Finding Commission.

Arms control and the fight against the indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of weapons constitute an
important pillar of international humanitarian law. The
Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 67/234 B), which was
adopted by the General Assembly, will be a significant
contribution to the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. All EU member States have already signed
the Treaty, and ratifications are under way. We believe
that, by ensuring that conventional arms are traded
in a responsible way, the Arms Trade Treaty can
reduce gender-based violence and improve the lives
of hundreds of thousands of men, women and children
around the world. The EU encourages all States
Members of the United Nations to sign the Treaty
and will actively support its early entry into force and
proper implementation.

The European Union is also satisfied with the
significant progress made in the fight against the
suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel mines
and cluster munitions. Considering the tremendous
humanitarian and development challenges still posed
by such weapons, it is clear that much more remains to
be done.

We continue to be very preoccupied by the
humanitarian impact of the use of such weapons in
densely populated areas. We take note of the view
expressed by the International Committee of the Red
Cross recalling that the use of explosive weapons with a
wide-impact area must be avoided in densely populated
areas.

Unfortunately, it is often women and children who
suffer the most in armed conflict. In particular, the
use of rape and sexual violence as a method of warfare
is one of the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law. While some positive steps have been
taken at both the national and international levels in
holding perpetrators to account, more efforts to address
this issue must be pursued.

Despite all these initiatives, it is clear that
international humanitarian law is violated all too
frequently. For this reason, the EU is closely following
the initiative by Switzerland and the ICRC on the
possibility of establishing a mechanism to improve
compliance with international humanitarian law and
welcomes the initiative to study the feasibility of such
amechanism.

Strengthening accountability when violations
occur is a crucial element in encouraging the parties
to armed conflict to comply with their international
obligations. National Governments have the primary
responsibility to provide accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law.
Where they fail to take the necessary steps in that
regard, the ICC is a court of last resort. The Security
Council has an important role to play, given that it has
a global mandate to make referrals to the Court. The
EU is a firm supporter of the ICC and believes it plays
an essential role in promoting respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.

We must remember that, when mass atrocities
occur, both the State in question and the international
community are responsible for ensuring that all peoples
are protected against such actions. The principle of the
responsibility to protect makes clear that Governments
have an obligation to protect their own populations,
while the international community has an obligation
to assist Governments in doing so and to react when
Governments fail in their obligation to protect their
civilians.

Humanitarian activities face a number of challenges
today that are contributing to the shrinking of the
humanitarian space andjeopardizing the core principles
of humanity, neutrality, independence and impartiality
that underpin humanitarian work. Swift, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access is a precondition
for undertaking proper assessments of humanitarian
needs, for the implementation and monitoring of relief
operations and for ensuring appropriate follow-up.

However, humanitarian access remains the most
significant challenge for humanitarian organizations,
often owing to political considerations, administrative
and physical impediments and restrictions or security-
related concerns. In that context, the EU urges all parties
to conflicts to grant humanitarian organizations rapid,
safe and unimpeded access to the affected population
and notes that any arbitrary denial of access constitutes
a violation of international humanitarian law.

Better implementation of existing laws is needed
to respond to the challenges, in particular the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
Furthermore, more information and training on
international humanitarian law needs to be provided.
Finally, innovative ways to induce all parties to armed
conflicts to comply with international humanitarian
laws are needed.

In that regard, the EU has been funding and
supporting the following activities: international
humanitarian law training programmes that reach out to
a broad audience, in particular non-State armed groups,
which usually have little information on any laws;
the ICRC's international humanitarian law training
and dissemination for military and security forces
and armed non-State actors in key conflict-affected
countries, as well as activities aimed at increasing the
capacities of humanitarian workers in advocating for
international humanitarian law. It is noteworthy that
international humanitarian law, human rights, gender
equality and child protection are at the core of training
programmes that the EU's crisis management missions
provide, for example, to security forces in Mali and
Somalia.

Let me conclude by refering to the very worrying
situations in many countries with regard to the
protection of civilians and to the special attention
needed by vulnerable groups, such as children and
persons with disabilities. The EU is alarmed by the
rapid deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
Syria and demands that all parties, in particular the
Syrian authorities, ensure immediate, regular, safe and
unfettered access for aid organizations to those in need
on all sides of the conflict. All those responsible for
atrocities and human rights violations and abuses must
be held accountable.

In Mali, the EU welcomes the deployment of
human rights monitors and urges the Government to
firmly commit to the fight against impunity and to hold
all those who violate human rights and international
humanitarian law accountable for their actions.

With regard to Somalia, the EU expresses concern
at the ongoing humanitarian crisis and its impact on the
people of the country, and underlines the importance
of providing life-saving assistance to vulnerable
populations.

In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the recent fighting underscores the need for
urgent action aimed at providing safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to affected populations and making
all parties responsible for human rights violations
accountable.

Such conflicts demonstrate how much more work
is needed to improve compliance with international
humanitarian law, to ensure that affected populations
have access to humanitarian assistance and to strengthen
accountability for serious violations.

