Mr. Lopes Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): After a period of serious troubles resulting
from the resumed fighting among the warring parties in
Liberia, we can see - or at least we hope we can see -
a period of relative, but important, peace and stability that
has brought a partial return of normalcy to Monrovia. We
welcome this turn of events. It represents the fruits of the

 
tireless efforts of the Economic Community of West Africa
(ECOWAS), which has deployed the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) in the city of Monrovia and surrounding
areas, where they have carried out a seal and search
operation to recover the weapons abandoned by the factions
during their retreat.

Guinea-Bissau welcomes the decision extending the
Abuja Agreement until 15 June 1997 and establishing a
specific plan for its implementation, providing the means to
verify the faction leaders' compliance with the Agreement,
and stipulating measures that could be taken against
factions for non-compliance with the provisions of the
Agreement.

These unprecedented coercive measures adopted by
ECOWAS are proof of the determination and the cohesion
of the West African Community. They have been decisive
in the decision by the Liberian factions to end hostilities,
disengage their forces and to surrender their weapons. We
welcome the designation of Ms. Ruth Perry as Chairperson
of the Council of State and wish her every success in
carrying out her mission, which is no doubt a difficult one,
but one that enjoys the support of the international
community. It has every chance for success, provided that
the commitments entered into by the factions and the
schedule and modalities for the holding of free elections are
respected.

In View of this progress and the improvement in the
security situation in Liberia, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal in paragraph 23 of his report
(S/1996/684) to deploy immediately an additional 24
military observers to the country, with a view to
consolidating the presence of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). That presence would
facilitate more frequent patrolling and future disarmament
operations.

Guinea-Bissau, as a country of the subregion and a
member of ECOWAS, has always expressed its frustration
over the limited means available to ECOMOG. We
therefore once again call on the international community to
provide it with the necessary assistance to fully carry out its
responsibilities.

In this connection, I wish to highlight the contribution
of the United States, whose delegation deserves the credit
for proposing to the other members of the Security Council
a draft resolution that has been able to take into account
and bring together all views. This has ultimately enabled us
to reach the consensus that we welcome today.

I also wish to welcome the contributions of other
countries, which, in our View, are of crucial importance.
We thank them warmly, and we encourage other States to
make their own contributions to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Liberia.

Nevertheless, it is clear that the international
community will not be in a position to continue to
support the peace process in Liberia if the Liberian
factions do not show beyond doubt that they are
determined to settle all their differences through peaceful
means and to achieve national reconciliation, in
accordance with the Abuja Agreement of 17 August 1996.

In this context, we demand once again that the
Liberian factions strictly respect all their commitments
under the Abuja Agreement and the personnel statutes of
ECOMOG, UNOMIL and other international
organizations and agencies. Looting, thievery and other
acts of banditry must cease immediately and all stolen
objects must be returned. We must also demand that the
Liberian faction leaders respect and protect the children
whom they use as cannon fodder, an odious and abhorrent
practice that we shall always condemn.

In conclusion, we subscribe to the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend the mandate of
UNOMIL for a period of three months. My delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before the
Security Council today.

