Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Pursuant to
paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2140 (2014), I have the
honour to report to the Security Council on the work of
the Committee since my last briefing on 11 December
2014 (see S/PV.7336). This is my third report to the
Council.

The adoption of resolution 2204 (2015), on the
24 February 2015, renewed until 26 February 2016
the assets freeze and travel ban measures imposed by
paragraphs 11 and 15 of resolution 2140 (2014). The
mandate of the Panel of Experts was also extended by
the same resolution until 25 March 2016. On 14 April
2015, with the adoption of resolution 2216 (2015),
the Security Council added Abdul Malik al-Houthi,
the leader of the Houthi Ansar Allah Movement, and
Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh, the son of former President
Ali Abdullah Saleh, to the sanctions list established
and maintained by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). The
entry for Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh was updated with
relevant bioidentifier information gathered by the Panel
of Experts on 16 September 2015. By resolution 2216
(2015), a targeted arms embargo was imposed aimed at
preventing the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer
of arms and related materiel of all types to designated
individuals, or for their benefit, or those acting on their
behalf, or at their direction, in Yemen.

The designation criteria for listing were also
expanded by resolution 2216 (2015) to include
violations of the arms embargo and obstructing the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Yemen, or
access to, or distribution of, humanitarian assistance
in Yemen. Resolution 2216 (2015) broadened the
mandate of the Panel of Experts to include monitoring
the implementation of the arms embargo, and the
Secretary-General was requested to increase the size
of the Panel from four to five experts. Resolution
2204 (2015) called on all Member States to report to
the Committee, within 90 days of the adoption of the
resolution, on the steps they had taken with a view to
implementing effectively the measures imposed by
paragraphs 11 and 15 ofresolution 2140 (2014). To date,
20 implementation reports from Member States have
been received, and they are available on the Committee's
website. Resolution 2216 (2015) requires Member States
to submit an initial report to the Committee when it
undertakes an inspection pursuant to the provisions of
the targeted arms embargo, provided an explanation
on the grounds for inspections and the results of such
inspections is given, and if prohibited items for supply,
sale or transfer are found, further required such Member
states to submit to the Committee, within 30 days, a
subsequent report containing relevant details and
information not contained in the initial report. To date
the Committee has received only one initial written
report and no subsequent reports. I call on all Member
States that have not done so to submit the required
reports without delay.

On 29 July 2015, the Committee amended its
guidelines to reflect the provisions contained in
resolutions 2204 (2015) and 2216 (2015). The guidelines
are available on the Committee's website.

In its work, the Committee continues to be assisted
by its Panel of Experts. On 2 April, the Secretary-
General appointed new members of the Panel following
the extension of its mandate, pursuant to resolution
2204 (2015). A new arms expert was appointed on
18 June 2015. On 17 August, in view of the resignation
of the regional expert, Mr. Ahmed Himmiche was
appointed to serve as the regional expert of the Panel
and assumed the functions of the coordinator of the
Panel as of 31 August.

During the reporting period, the Committee met five
times in informal consultations to hear presentations by
the Panel of Experts on its final report (S/2015/125),
a mid-term update and an update on financial and
international humanitarian law aspects of its mandate.
The Committee also met for a briefing by Mr. Amer
Daoudi,Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Yemen Crisis, and joined informal consultations with
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
for a briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. Allow me now to go into some
detail on the discussions held in the Committee.

On 2 February, the Committee discussed the
final report to the Panel of Experts and subsequently
agreed on the appropriate course of action regarding its
recommendations. On 17 August, the Committee met to
discuss the mid-term update ofthe Panel of Experts. On
25 August, Mr. Daoudi briefed the Committee on the
United Nations verification and inspection mechanism.
Its purpose would be to ensure compliance with the
provisions of resolution 2216 (2015) with regard to
the targeted arms embargo and to help ensure access
of commercial cargo to Yemen, which is essential
for restoring the country's economy. Members of the
Committee expressed their support for the Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator's efforts and welcomed the
imminent start-up of the mechanism.

On 18 September, Ms. Zerrougui briefed members
of the Committee and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. She expressed deep concern over
the escalating conflict in Yemen and its detrimental
impact on the protection of children. Members of
the Committee and of the Working Group strongly
condemned ongoing violations and abuses against
children in Yemen, and expressed deep concern over
the impact of the deteriorating humanitarian situation
on children. They also called for an end to all violations
and abuses against children and agreed that the issue
of the protection of children should be given continued
attention.

Most recently, on 9 October, the Panel of Experts
shared information with the Committee on international
humanitarian law and finance aspects of its mandate.
The members of the Panel noted that a continued
investigations on the implementation of assets freeze, as
well as on the attempt by some designated individuals
to circumvent the effects of the targeted sanctions. They
also underlined the need to take all the necessary steps
to insure that the Panel had the ability to investigate all
violations of international humanitarian law, including
through access and travel to all parts of Yemen.

Members of the Committee reaffirmed their
readiness to facilitate the implementation of the Panel's
work and urged Member States to freeze assets of the
designated individuals or entities, or by individuals or
entities acting on their behalf, or at their direction, or
by entities owned or controlled by them. The members
of the Committee also stressed the need for all sides
to comply with international humanitarian law,
including to take all feasible precautions to minimize
harm to civilians and Civilian objects, and to end the
recruitment and use ofchildren in violation ofapplicable
international law, and urgently work for the United
Nations and humanitarian aid organizations to bring
assistance to those in need throughout the country.

Before I conclude, I would like to draw attention
to the efforts that have been undertaken to promote
transparency in relation to the work of the Committee.
An open briefing of the 2140 Committee was convened
on 1 September 2015 to provide all States Members of
the United Nations with an overview of the sanctions
regime and the mandate of the Committee, and to
provide an opportunity to ask questions. At that
meeting, the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
briefed Member States on the mandate and activities
of the Panel. Furthermore, the Committee engaged in
dialogue with representatives of Yemen and the State
members of the Cooperation Council of the Arab States
of the Gulf. The Committee has also regularly issued
press releases after significant discussions or decisions.
I am also happy to note that all my reports to the Council
have been presented in public meetings.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of the full implementation by Member
States of all sanctions measures imposed by resolutions
2140 (2015), 2204 (2015) and 2216 (2015), as well as
of meeting their relevant reporting obligations. I would
also like to encourage further cooperation with the
Panel of Experts, including my providing it with the
information and by facilitating its visits to Member
States.

