Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency,
Sir, and welcome the Secretary-General to this
important meeting. I would also like to congratulate the
Spanish presidency on their fine stewardship last
month.

On behalf of my delegation, I note with great
satisfaction the unanimous passage of this resolution,
which will provide for an increase in capacity
appropriate to the current needs of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), as well as to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I wish to thank other Council missions for their
contributions to making passage of this resolution
possible. I particularly want to single out the French
Mission for its leadership of this common effort and
the United Kingdom Mission for their constructive
support.

As we act to strengthen MONUC's capacity, we
must also call upon the Congolese parties to fulfil their
responsibilities to the Congolese people and to do
much more to play their part in a successful political
process.

We are at a delicate time in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, yet one of increased hope.
Within the past eight days, in addition to the passage of
this important resolution, we have seen the signing of
both the Memorandum of Intent on Regional Security
in the Great Lakes of Africa and the Joint Verification
Mechanism. For the promise of peace to be fulfilled, it
is incumbent upon all parties to stick to their
commitments under those agreements.

In conclusion, I would like to make one point of
clarification about the resolution we have just passed.
As my Council colleagues know, it is the policy of the
United States Government to ensure that members of
the armed forces of the United States of America
participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations are protected from criminal prosecution or
other assertion of jurisdiction by the International
Criminal Court (ICC), including through the possible
inclusion of express provisions providing such
protection.

In this instance, United States personnel are not
participating in the operation and the United States has
an Article 98 agreement with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that would prohibit it from surrendering
United States personnel to the ICC should they
participate in the future.

The United States supports this resolution with
the understanding that the resolution does not direct
MONUC to cooperate with the ICC and, fully
consistent with the statement that the United States
made upon adoption of General Assembly resolution
58/318, any expenses resulting from the provision of
cooperation or support to the ICC would need to be on
a reimbursable basis.

Again I would like to thank you, Sir, and to thank
the Council.

