Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to thank the Nigerian presidency
for convening this briefing and for distributing the
concept note (S/2015/614, annex). Security sector
reform is a topic of vital importance. We would also
like to thank Mr. Dmitry Titov, Assistant Secretary-
General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Assistant Administrator
of the Crisis Response Unit of the United Nations
Development Programme.

Guaranteeing security is a basic function of the
State. In post-conflict situations, security institutions,
such as military and police forces, may be the most
Visible representatives of the State in the eyes of the
general public. As a result, when those institutions are
effective, responsible and professional they can have a
decisive and positive effect on the population's trust in
Government institutions.

The transition from weak or weakened security
institutions to viable and robust ones has become
a major part of United Nations efforts in post-
conflict reconstruction. Indeed, 10 multidimensional
peacekeeping operations now have mandates that
include support for such reforms. In that regard, we
acknowledge the work of the Security Sector Reform
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and of the Peacebuilding Commission.

The restoration of Government authority and
control in all sectors in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
stability. That is why it is essential to establish effective
and accountable security structures that respect the
law, are sustainable and meet national priorities and
the needs of the population. Such structures are crucial
in order avoid a relapse into conflict. In that regard,
it is vital to recognize the links between security
sector reform and broader reform processes, including
national reconciliation and political dialogue. As clearly
pointed out in the concept note, the process of security
sector reform is as political as it is technical. Such a
reform process must take place within the framework
ofa strong sense of national ownership. The State must
appropriate the process of reconciliation, inclusion and
the strengthening of military and national forces with
the aim of avoiding a relapse into conflict. Governments
themselves must determine the priorities for conducting
such reforms and coordinating their implementation;
they must also take responsibility for the results. Under
no circumstances should the essential vision of the
reform process be imposed on the recipient State

Peace agreements often overlook the need to
reform the deployment of military and police forces
in States in post-conflict situations. While the need to
demobilize, disarm and demilitarize former combatants
is generally addressed, the equally critical need to
create, reconstitute and train the military and police
forces of countries emerging from conflict is not always
taken up with the same dedication. The absence of
security sector reform can become fundamental when
the time comes to promote lasting peace and to avoid
the relapse of a country emerging from civil war. We
would like to stress that the political component cannot
be uncoupled from the success of future reconciliation
and reconstruction efforts in societies that have been
battered by war, as we can see from the experience of
Angola.

Avoiding a relapse into conflict requires a set of
security institutions that are capable of tackling the
re-emergence of insurgent groups loyal to one or the
other warring party. To the degree that the military and
police institutions that emerge from a peace agreement
are incapable of preserving the authority of the State
and guaranteeing the security of the population, the
possibility of a relapse into conflict will remain latent.
In addition, we must bear in mind that any effort to
achieve a lasting peace that fails to integrate former
combatants in the security apparatus and political and
economic institutions of the State by making them part
of the solution leaves open the possibility that they will
take up arms again.

Finally, the Council needs to undertake a broader,
deeper discussion of the experience of security sector
reform situations in countries affected by foreign
military invasions and interventions that bring about
the collapse of all State institutions. The traumatic and
terrible experiences in Iraq and Libya should prompt
a profound analysis. The collapse of State institutions
in those countries as a result of foreign military
intervention, as well as the social fragmentation
produced by a strategy of occupying and dominating
the population, including through sexual and sectarian
violence as a means to punish and terrorize sectors
of the population accused of supporting one group or
another or the former regimes, beyond the terrible social
and humanitarian effects of war itself, created fertile
ground for the emergence of the terrible phenomenon
of terrorism and extremism such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other violent groups that
today pose the greatest threat to peace and security in
the entire region of the Middle East and North Africa.
The illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
along with political and economic support for non-State
actors in the region, have become the main stimulus for
the emergence of terrorist groups. The weak security
forces of those brother countries, along with their
lack of unity and poor training, prevent them from
restoring national authority and ensuring the safety of
their civilian populations, which are the Victims of the
atrocities perpetrated by those criminal groups. That
is the terrible and disastrous reality that the Council
must discuss and learn from so that it is never repeated
again.

