Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
begin by thanking Sweden for organizing today's open
debate and the Secretary-General for his annual report
(S/2018/465). Slovenia aligns itself with the statements
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and
the representative of Argentina on the Safe Schools
Declaration. Moreover, I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

Today's debate marks 20 years since the first
Security Council open debate on the subject of children
and armed conflict, in June 1998 (see S/PV.3896), and
some progress can be observed since the issue was put
on the United Nations agenda. Despite the progress
achieved, the findings documented in the Secretary-
General's latest report are concerning: an increase in
grave violations committed against children, use of
landmines and cluster munitions, the deployment of
children as human shields and suicide bombers, the
cross-border nature of the violations, continuous attacks
on schools and hospitals, and denial of humanitarian
access - all of this is deeply concerning and must be
urgently addressed.

Slovenia welcomes the continued engagement
with different regional actors and believes that
specific provisions for the protection of children
should continue to be included in all relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as political
and peacebuilding missions, including by means of
the deployment of child-protection advisers. Slovenia
remains committed to lessening the burden of
children affected by armed conflicts. In 2018, we have
supported, inter alia, projects for Syrian refugees in
Jordan aiming to empower Syrian children and their
mothers with social rehabilitation for children through
schooling and psychosocial workshops focused on
developing life skills. Mine-risk education programmes
for Syrian refugee children in the northern Jordanian
provinces were implemented by the Slovenian-based
International Trust Fund Enhancing Human Security
to raise awareness about landmines and explosive
remnants of war and promoting safety precautions with
a view to minimizing the number of victims when the
displaced return home.

We have heard about the importance of integrating
the protection, rights and well-being of children in
peace processes. In this context, empowering children
to become actors for peace is of utmost importance.
We note the release of over 10,000 children in 2017.
It is essential not only that children be returned to
their communities, but also that their overall well-
being be comprehensively addressed, giving them a
future without fear of re-recruitment or threat of grave
violations against them.

For the last 15 years, Slovenia has supported the
project entitled Our Rights, which is a human rights and
children's rights education project promoting a culture
of peace, non-discrimination and tolerance anchored in
respect for human rights. Since its beginning, more than
190,000 children in 26 countries in Europe, Asia, the
Middle East, Latin America and Africa were included.
In 2017, Slovenia launched a school- and peer-mediation
project in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where teachers and
students are trained to practice mediation techniques
in schools, which are becoming vocal promoters of
dialogue, tolerance, reconciliation, human rights and
the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

Monitoring and accurate and timely reporting
are crucial for ensuring that perpetrators are
held accountable. The Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism is therefore a key mechanism of the United
Nations children-protection mandate. We believe that
the Security Council should impose further targeted
measures on persistent perpetrators of grave violations.
Slovenia is convinced that the work of the International
Criminal Court and other international criminal
tribunals adds to breaking the culture of impunity.

As it is cross-cutting, the issue ofchildren and armed
conflict needs a comprehensive approach, including
through such initiatives as the Paris Principles, the Oslo
Safe School Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Slovenia would like to call on Member States that have
not yet done so yet, to join these initiatives, as they
foster the implementation of the framework set up by
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

In conclusion, it is our duty and responsibility to do
our utmost to prevent children from suffering, regardless
of whether a situation is on the Security Council's
agenda or not. The adoption today of the new resolution
2427 (2018) is an important step in this direction, which
is why Sloveniajoined in co-sponsoring the draft.

