Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for his presence here today and for his
statement. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for his very comprehensive and informative
briefing. And I would like to take this opportunity to
express Japan's gratitude to all the men and women of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) who have demonstrated their deep
commitment to this very difficult mission.

At the outset, I would like to join my colleagues
and previous speakers to express my sincere
condolences for the demise of Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, Chair of Afghanistan's High Peace Council.
Japan expresses its firm condemnation of such
atrocious acts of terrorism.

As we have seen from various instances, the
security situation in Afghanistan continues to be
challenging. There have been targeted assassinations of
high-ranking officials and suicide attacks, as described
in the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/590). Security remains a priority that we have
to tackle.

It is significant that the process of transferring
security responsibility officially started in July. As I
have stated on previous occasions, it is indispensable
to peace and security in Afghanistan that a smooth
transition be conducted during the drawdown of United
States and other international forces, including by
strengthening the capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces. During this period, Japan continues to
play its part towards achieving these goals through
assistance to the Afghan National Police.

The transition and sustainable security are
interlinked with the political process. The loss of
Mr. Rabbani further underscores the importance of
continuing on the road of reconciliation and
reintegration that he spearheaded. In light of this
tragedy, it is important that all Afghanistan's leaders
stand together in solidarity and demonstrate their
resolve to work in support of peace, reconciliation and
national unity. Now is the time for international
partners to contribute to the advancement of the
political process. Japan is determined to continue
making our contribution to achieving irreversible
progress in the Afghan-led reintegration programme.

The working group on reintegration of the
International Contact Group met here last week,
chaired by Ambassador Tanin and co-chaired by the
United Kingdom and Japan. The group reaffirmed its
commitment to the Afghan Government's programmes
to reintegrate all those insurgents who are verifiably
willing to renounce violence and terrorism and respect
the Afghan Constitution, noting the need to provide
support to their families in order to facilitate this.

To ensure long-term stability in Afghanistan, we
have to accelerate regional cooperation among its
neighbours. Japan will play an active role in
strengthening regional economic cooperation to pave
the way for integrating Afghanistan into the regional
and global economy.

We appreciate the initiative of Germany,
Afghanistan and the United States to co-chair the
ministerial meeting on the New Silk Road last week.
Japan supports the basic concept of the New Silk Road.
Japan attaches importance to the following three points
for advancing regional economic cooperation: first is to
place emphasis on the southern route, which connects
Afghanistan with the Indian Ocean; second is to
promote the development of transport infrastructure,
contributing to the growth of agriculture, which
absorbs approximately 80 per cent of Afghanistan's
labour population; and third is assistance to border
control and customs procedures.

Japan believes that there is a firm commitment on
the part the international community to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We expect to see further
progress at the Istanbul Conference in November and
the Bonn Conference in December. On the Afghan side,
the country needs to strengthen its capacity for
achieving real Afghan ownership and leadership.

Let me conclude by referring to the address by
the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Yoshihiko Noda, at
the General Assembly, in which he said:
"In order to prevent Afghanistan from once again
becoming a breeding ground for terrorism, we
will continue to confront the problem with strong
resolve."(A/66/PV.I9)

We would like to express our sincere appreciation
for the dedication of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, and once again
reiterate our commitment to supporting the dedication
and tireless efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

