Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I thank you, Sir, and the
Council for permission to participate in this open
debate today.

Viet Nam has always held that the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, as well as their means of
delivery, constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. In our first report, submitted in October 2004,
on implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), we
committed to continuing to take effective measures to
control and prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery and to
refrain from providing any form of support to non-
State actors that attempt to develop, acquire,
manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use them.
Above all, the report reaffirmed that the State of Viet
Nam does not have and does not intend to manufacture,
acquire, possess, develop, transport, transfer or use any
of those weapons. In discussing today the issue of
cooperation in implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), we are guided by that fundamental policy and
commitment.

While attaching great importance to the role of
the 1540 Committee and commending the work it has
done so far - especially its efforts to develop a
database to provide information on laws, regulations
and other measures related to States' implementation of
the resolution, as well as to act as a clearing house on
assistance to States in need - we also share the view
that cooperation at different levels is necessary to
ensure implementation of the resolution. My delegation
believes that the outreach activities of the Committee
have achieved initial concrete results, proved by the
successes of recent seminars and workshops, including
the seminar for Asia and the Pacific held at Beijing in
July 2006 and the workshop of the Regional Forum of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
held at San Francisco last week, in which Viet Nam
participated.

Those events have been useful in helping
Member States understand better not only the
important role of the United Nations in global efforts to
eliminate the threat posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, but also the important role that regional
organizations, including ones such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum, can play in securing implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by way of increasing
awareness of the obligations and requirements of the

resolution, thus facilitating cooperation and
coordination on implementation at the regional and
global levels. It has been widely recognized that, in
many States, the difficulties in implementing the
resolution relate not only to the limited knowledge of
the issue, but also to the lack of inter-agency
coordination and of the resources and means for
specific implementation measures.

A close look would reveal that such difficulties
are interrelated. Very often, the lack of coordination
results from the lack of knowledge and the lack of
knowledge itself results from the lack of the resources
and means necessary for the dissemination in local
languages of relevant information and regulations.
Identifying the need of States for assistance has been
an important element of such regional and subregional
activities. In the view of my delegation, that should
also be an important element in cooperation between
the Security Council and international organizations in
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

As organizations established for the purpose of
assuring the implementation of, and adherence to,
treaty obligations, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons have unique and major roles in
preventing the proliferation of nuclear and chemical
weapons, in line with the very purpose of resolution
1540 (2004). We support cooperation between those
organizations, as well as their cooperation with the
Security Council, in the implementation of that
resolution. In the same vein, we support cooperation
between the Council and the World Customs
Organization. In that connection, we wish to echo the
widely held view that the implementation of export
controls should not be used as a tool to prevent the
legitimate development of civilian nuclear, chemical or
biological industries that serve peaceful purposes.

We welcome the continuous and close
cooperation between the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Committee
established in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999).
By sharing their resources, experience and expertise,
the 1540 Committee and those organs will certainly
better facilitate the effective implementation of the
resolution.
There exists an organic relationship between non-
proliferation and disarmament. The role and capacity
of United Nations disarmament mechanisms should be
strengthened. Cooperation between the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
United Nations disarmament mechanisms, especially
the United Nations Department for Disarmament
Affairs, should be further enhanced.

Viet Nam is a party to all major international
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties, including
the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty on the South-
East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone. We have always
adhered strictly to our obligations under those treaties.
We will continue dialogue and cooperation with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) on the implementation of the resolution.

Finally, before I conclude, let me reaffirm our
position that, while cooperation among relevant
organizations and cooperation between the Security
Council and those organizations in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is necessary, such
cooperation must be based on respect for the Charter of
the United Nations and national independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Duplication and
overlapping of work must be avoided. The
implementation of the resolution remains
fundamentally a national responsibility.

