Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, it is my
honour to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October, andhow honoured we are to see France
presiding over the deliberations of the Council today.
I would also like to thank you sincerely for taking the
initiative to organize this meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to assure you of
our support and cooperation throughout your mandate.

I would be remiss ifI did not once again express
my gratitude to the Council, on behalf of the Congolese
Government and people, for its remarkable continued
efforts to help my country restore much-needed stability
and harness the energy it needs for its development.
I would also like to welcome and express my esteem
for Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
commitment and personal involvement in the quest for
peaceful solutions to the situation in my country.

Before I proceed, on behalf of the Government
of my country, I would like to strongly condemn the
attacks on peacekeepers perpetrated by the Allied
Democratic Forces in North Kivu, which resulted in
the death of two Tanzanian Blue Helmets and injured
18 others. My country offers its deepest condolences to
the United Nations and the Government of Tanzania, as
well as to the victims' families.

My delegation takes note of the reports of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2017/825) and on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/2017/824), issued on 29 September and
2 October respectively, and we thank Mr. Maman Samba
Sidikou, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who has just presented them. While we appreciate the
reports' content, we believe it is important to clarify a
number of points that deserve the Council's attention.
In that regard, I would like to say a few words about
the political situation in my country, with particular
emphasis on the implementation of the Comprehensive
and Inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December 2016
and the electoral process, as well as on the security
situation and the strategic dialogue.

With regard to the implementation of the
Agreement, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report of 15 August 2017 (S/2017/712), following the
establishment of a Government of National Unity,
the Conseil national de suivi de l'accord was created.
It is functioning and is headed by a member of the
Rassemblement opposition. I will come back to that in
a moment.
With regard to the electoral process, as the Council
knows, the process of updating the electoral register
has entered its final phase with the enrolment of voters
in Kasai and Kasai Central provinces, as well as in the
territories of Luilu and Kamiji in Lomami province,
all of which have been in turmoil in the wake of the
deplorable events involving the Kamuina Nsapu militia.
Of 45 million expected voters, 42 million have already
been registered. As we can see, my country is well and
truly on the road to holding elections. The question
that everyone on the Council has asked today is about
the electoral calendar. In answer to that, I can say that
the Conseil national de suivi de 1'accord, together with
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
the Government, has begun evaluating the electoral
process, and that the calendar will be published as soon
as that is done. The Council is no doubt aware, however,
that the Commission published draft calendars on two
previous occasions, in 2014 and 2015, which were not
only systematically rejected by the opposition but
also did not receive the expected support from the
international community. As a result, the elections have
been postponed until now.

Moreover, for logistical, financial, security and
legal reasons, the President of the Independent National
Electoral Commission announced several months ago
that the three elections planned for December could not
take place at that time. That announcement continues
to give rise to differing views on the legitimacy of
my country's institutions thereafter. It seems hardly
necessary to affirm in that regard that the institutions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, like those of
other States around the world, derive their legitimacy
from the Constitution. The Comprehensive and
Inclusive Political Agreement, signed at Kinshasa's
Interdiocesan Centre and based specifically on our
desire to organize peaceful, credible and transparent
elections, also commits the signatories to respect for
the Constitution. Paragraph 2.1 of chapter 2 of the
Agreement states that

"[t]he parties commit to respecting the
Constitution of 18 February 2006, as amended in
2011, and the laws of the Republic, and to organize
presidential, legislative, national and provincial
elections, as well as local elections, in conformity
with the Constitution."

As for the possibility of postponing the elections,
paragraph 4.2 of chapter 4 of the Agreement states that
"[t]he parties agree to organize elections
in a single presidential, legal, national and
provincial sequence in December 2017 at the
latest. Nevertheless, the Conseil national de suivi
de l'accord, the Government and the Independent
National Electoral Commission can unanimously
evaluate the timeline required for the finalization
of election dates."

A second evaluation meeting is planned for 12 to
14 October 2017 in order to make that decision. To
conclude this point, it is important to underscore
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is firmly
committed to the irreversibility of organizing the
elections, as President Joseph Kabila Kabange stated
from the rostrum of the General Assembly Hall (see A/72/PV.19). But we must ensure that they are strong
elections that will be conducive to a peaceful transition
of power and can avoid the unfortunate turmoil that
marked the previous elections, in 2006 and 2011.

On the security front, both reports mention the
activities of armed groups in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in certain
States of the Great Lakes region. With regard to my
country specifically, our armed forces are continuing
their fight to eradicate such groups in collaboration with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Given those negative forces' unconventional operating
methods, my country is of the view that MONUSCO
should aim at maximum effectiveness by providing
the Intervention Brigade with the means that can
enable it to fulfil the tasks assigned to it under
resolution 2348 (2017).

As regards the former combatants of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23), in my statement to the Council in
August (see S/PV.8026), I brought members up to date
on the political and military activities of those ex-rebels
in the neighbouring countries where they had found
refuge, a situation that has also been brought to the
attention of the authorities of those countries. For that
reason, my Government has appealed to the Council to
put pressure on the countries involved to comply with
their commitments under the Addis Ababa agreement,
and that we should also consider imposing sanctions
on the former M-23's leaders. The disappearance
of more than 900 M-23 members cantoned in the
Bihanga military camp is very worrying. According
to information from various sources, including the
tripartite meeting of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan
in Kinshasa from 2 to 4 September, they will be joining
various armed groups operating in the Central African
Republic, Burundi and South Sudan as well as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council will
agree that this development could harm peace and
stability in the entire region.

With regard to these issues, President Kabange and
his Ugandan counterpart, President Yoweri Museveni,
decided at their most recent meeting to coordinate
their efforts to eradicate negative forces in the region
and to launch joint operations shortly. The report also
mentions the possibility of Uganda's granting refugee
status to these former rebels, a possibility that my
country will verify through the appropriate channels
before discussing it with the Ugandan Government.
If the persons concerned meet the requirements of the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, the
decision of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees will be final.

In my various statements I have always brought
up the issue of the 340 combatants of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda who are still
waiting to be repatriated in transit sites in Kanyabayonga
in North Kivu, Walungu in South Kivu and Kisangani
in Tshopo. I once again reiterate my Government's call
to the international community to repatriate them to
their countries of origin or, failing that, to a third-party
country outside the Great Lakes region.

Concerning the combatants of the Sudan People's
Liberation Army quartered in Munigi, Dungu and Goma
in North Kivu, my Government appreciates the efforts
made in that regard by MONUSCO in collaboration with
the Governments of South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those efforts have resulted in
the repatriation of eight of them and the relocation of 58
others to Ethiopia, Kenya and Sudan. My Government
hopes that those efforts will continue until all those still
in the transit sites are either repatriated or relocated to
third-party countries.

To bring this chapter to a close, I should briefly
mention that calm returned yesterday to the provinces of
Kasai and Kasai Central, which suffered terrorist attacks
by the Kamuina Nsapu militia. Investigations have been
opened to shed light on the exact circumstances of the
crimes committed, establish accountability for them
and identify their perpetrators with a view to punishing
them. The local population, which had sought refuge in

neighbouring provinces and in Angola, is beginning to
return. In order to restore their confidence and promote
peaceful coexistence, the President of the Republic, at
the end of his visit to the provinces concerned with the
purpose of reassuring the people, initiated and presided
over a forum on peace, reconciliation and development,
involving all the stakeholders in those provinces.

As I emphasized to the Council two months ago, the
major remaining challenge in that part of the country
is a humanitarian one. Caring for the internally and
externally displaced persons who are returning demands
that we mobilize all our partners for urgent assistance.

With regard to the strategic dialogue - beyond the
first phase, which was held in March 2016 - resolution
2348 (2017) provides for the dialogue between the
Government and MONUSCO to continue. In that
regard, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo believes that the withdrawal of the United
Nations forces should be carried out gradually in three
phases. The first should be carried out in areas where
MONUSCO's presence is no longer necessary, the
second in areas where the concentration of forces is
greater than the threat, and the third in the areas where
threats persist or new challenges are emerging. With
regard to the composition of MONUSCO'S contingents,
we believe that the Intervention Brigade should be
the last force to leave the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, given the nature of its actions
and its origin.

This morning I have heard concern and even
uncertainty from members ofthe Council regarding the
implementation of the Agreement and the organization
of the elections. I will try to put that into perspective.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is no worse than in other countries in similar
circumstances. With regard, first, to the comments about
the disproportionate use of force, there is absolutely no
deliberate policy for using disproportionate force. Ifsuch
cases occur, it is individuals who are responsible, and
those individuals would be punished and condemned.
With regard to freedom of expression and the freedom
to demonstrate, I would like to remind the Council that
we are bound by the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, which cannot be broken - its
freedoms are absolute, but their interpretation can be
relative. Restrictions do exist, but such restrictions are
necessary in all democratic societies. In our country,
an instance of people inciting to insurrection through
a demonstration clearly does not fall within the context

ofthe democratic exercise ofthe freedom of expression.
Public order requires and takes precedence over the
exercise of that freedom.
That is why I would like to assure the Council of
the determination of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to see the Agreement of
31 December implemented, which it is doing, despite
all the concerns I have heard today.

As far as the organization of elections is concerned,
the main condition for getting that done is determining
who the electors are. And as I said earlier, the voter
registration process will be finalized in around 30 days.
After that, and as the Independent National Electoral
Commission has promised, the electoral calendar will
be published, and we will know when the elections are
to take place. I wanted to put the concerns that I have
just heard into perspective.

In its quest to achieve peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my Government
appreciates the support that it has received from
international and regional organizations, including
the African Union, the International Organization of
la Francophonie, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, the Southern African
Development Community and many others. This is
an opportunity for my country to pay tribute and
express our gratitude to them, as well as to the troop-
contributing countries. I would like to reiterate the
gratitude of my Government to all members of the
Council for their commitment to the cause of peace in
my country.

