Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The theme of
reconciliation is of great relevance to Germany. That
is also because of our past. Mr. Ozerdem mentioned a
small part of our past by talking about the relationship
there is today between Coventry and Dresden. But
it is not only due to our past but also because we
deeply believe that reconciliation is a very important
element in the conflict cycle. In Germany, we have just
published a strategy to support dealing with the past
and reconciliation, in particular transitional justice.

I wish to echo what the Secretary-General said at
the very beginning of his briefing with regard to the
fact that reconciliation is an important mechanism for
prevention. Reconciliation is a crucial step for countries
entering the post-conflict phase. Only successful
and inclusive reconciliation can ensure peace in the
long term.

Again, to quote the Secretary-General, but also you,
Lord Ahmad, there is no reconciliation without justice,
no justice without truth. It is absolutely crucial that we
fight impunity in our efforts towards reconciliation.
Holding those who are individually responsible for
atrocities and human rights Violations accountable
under criminal law is a key prerequisite for sustaining
peace. As the Secretary-General has said, we have to
break the cycle of impunity. That is why, during the
high-level week of the General Assembly, Germany
called on partners to work together in an alliance against
impunity with a view to giving renewed impetus to the
international criminal justice system. It is also why we
support the international mechanisms to assist in the
investigation and prosecution of crimes, such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria, the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar and the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh (UNITAD).

We have had this discussion before with regard to
Syria. Germany firmly believes that the crimes and
atrocities committed on all sides during the Syrian
conflict must be investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. That is the only way to achieve
reconciliation. For that reason, German prosecutors will
continue to investigate possible war crimes committed in
Syria and we will continue to support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. I take
advantage of this occasion to again appeal to everyone
to support the budget for the Mechanism in the Fifth
Committee. We also welcome the work of UNITAD in
Iraq and the extension of its important mandate. We
support UNITAD financially and through a secondment
and look forward to extending the productive exchange
between UNITAD and our prosecutors.

From our perspective, certain elements are
important for reconciliation to be successful. Based
on all the statements, I think we all agree that we first
need local solutions tailored to specific contexts. Such
solutions were referred to as tailor-made processes by
Mr. Ozerdem and as idiosyncratic approaches by our
colleague Mr. Alotaibi. Mr. Ozerdem also referred
to a concrete example that I like very much, namely,
the Mostar Bridge, which was reconstructed. It is
fantastic to see, but the local communities still have
not really reconciled. Therefore, civil society and local
organizations must be included. The local population
must be in the driver's seat in terms of designing and
implementing reconciliation approaches. Germany
has tried to do that in concrete cases. For instance, we
support an inclusive transitionaljustice process in Mali.

National sovereignty is discussed over and over
in the Council. Yes, national sovereignty should be
respected but, as mentioned by our colleague from
China, within the limits imposed by the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. National ownership can be guaranteed only by
including everyone, especially marginalized groups
and civil society, and by promoting and protecting the
human rights of all.

The inclusion of women is a theme that ran through
almost all the interventions. Germany believes that
it is crucial for a gender perspective to be reflected
throughout the whole reconciliation process. Women's
leadership and participation are necessary for the
success of transitional justice. We say that all the time,
but we have to implement it. It cannot be as in the talks
on Afghanistan, where one side is represented by men
only. We have to have women, and I think we should
all commit to not entering into any negotiations where
one side is represented by men only. We have a rule at
the German mission whereby no panel can go ahead
without a woman present. I think that should apply to
negotiations as well.

With regard to national solutions, reconciliation on
the local level must be embedded in a broader national
discourse. Policies for social reconciliation need to
include long-term nationwide solutions. Ms. Elman
gave the example of her own country and how important
it is that everyone have certainty, that there be trust
in Government institutions and that there be good
governance and no corruption.

We provide concrete support for efforts we
believe are successful. I listened carefully to what
Mr. Van Shalkwyk said about South Africa. The
Security Council travelled to Colombia, where very
good solutions were found in the form of special
courts for peace, a truth commission and units for
the search for missing persons, which we support. We
also support the Joint United Nations Development
Programme-Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Programme on Building National Capacities for
Conflict Prevention through peace and development
advisers, who have proven very adept at supporting
reconciliation processes.

As for our support for the United Nations tool box, we
want to sharpen the Security Council's focus on conflict
prevention. We think that we should look more often at
emerging conflicts and believe that reconciliation and
mediation capacities must be included more often in
mission mandates. We also believe that, as mentioned
by Ms. Elman, the Peacebuilding Commission plays a
crucial role in conflict situations and prevention efforts.
It also provides a platform for cooperation, exchange
and sharing lessons learned. Therefore, the Commission
should be used more frequently in the Council.

My last point is that Germany is proud to be the
largest donor to the Peacebuilding Fund and invites
others to join forces and to do even more.

