Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me thank all the
briefers for their valuable insights.

Year after year, members of the Security Council
attest to the grim reality of a seemingly perpetual
deadlock in the Middle East peace process. The
composition of the Council changes, but the messages
and signals heard around the table remain basically the
same, amid little change in the overall situation. The
reasons for this state of affairs are well known, so there
is no need to turn to the name-and-shame game again.
The recipe for breaking the stalemate is also known.
Each side knows what exact steps are expected ofthem.

Yet again, we have to signal our strong concern
about the continuous recurrence of violence. The
terrorist attack that was thwarted on 16 June near the
Damascus Gate in Jerusalem is a clear reminder of the
very dangerous situation that we are currently facing.
We condemn all manifestations of terrorism and praise
the professionalism of the police forces that did not
allow civilians to be hurt.

Time and again, the international community hears
declarations of goodwill and readiness to explore peace
options. However, what is missing is the follow-up to
those declarations in the form of concrete actions. All
available venues and opportunities must be exhaustively
explored and attempted with a view to achieving greater
security for Israel and Arab States.

We continue to believe that the Middle East peace
process can and will be successful. The principle of a
two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine coexisting
in peace and security, remains valid despite well-
known difficulties in overcoming the deadlock, where
it happens to be at the moment.

We are certainly quite far from that goal. The
parties have a long road ahead before they find a way
to resolve the conflict. However, the good news is that
for the last two months we have seen a number of high-
profile visits to Israel and the Arab world. We hope
that the groundwork that has been laid recently will
provide the necessary impetus to restart the negotiation
process. The key is for the parties to correctly interpret
that message and seize the opportunity. One thing to
avoid, however, is setting conditions and waiting for
the other side to make unilateral concessions. Moves to
reinvigorate the political track will have to be reciprocal.

In that context, we welcome the meeting held
between top Palestinian and Israeli officials, during
which the two sides agreed on a number of measures
to improve the economic situation in the Palestinian
territories, to enable more Palestinian development
in Area C, to adjust Israeli enforcement policies and
to expand the working hours of the Israeli-controlled
Allenby Bridge border crossing between Jordan and
the West Bank. Such steps benefit both parties, as they
improve the atmosphere to facilitate the renewal of
negotiations. We highly appreciate the renewed efforts
of the United States to bring them together.

While we applaud those measures, we must not
overlook the importance of focusing on a political
solution. Otherwise, if the sides continue to dig in their
entrenched positions, we will witness the repetition of
the past five decades. It is hardly anybody's wish to
see, in 50 years, in the Chamber, a repeat of today's
meeting, albeit with different participants. To avoid
such a scenario, we reiterate that the way forward lies
in elaborating a workable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement built on the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Madrid terms ofreference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
of 2002, the Quartet road map and the agreements
previously reached between the parties.

