I feel greatly honoured for this opportunity to address the Security Council at today's Ministerial debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace and security sector governance and reform. The theme of today's debate is topical for the African Union, given the increasing recognition among our member States and other States around the world of the centrality of security sector governance and reform in building sustainable peace agreements. Effective security sector reform (SSR) contributes to the realization of the aspiration of a peaceful and secure Africa in which all guns will be silent and in which human rights, democracy and gender equality are guaranteed, in accordance with the continent's Agenda 2063. The African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by the Year 2020 also acknowledges that the failure to transform African defence and security forces into professional and disciplined national security institutions that are subject to civilian oversight and control has often led to the eruption of or relapse into conflicts, thereby perpetuating cycles of violence and disrupting stabilization and peacebuilding efforts. Since the adoption of its security sector reform policy framework in 2013, the African Union (AU) has continued to deploy efforts to assist member States upon request in addressing the challenges of security sector governance and reform. Indeed, the AU Peace and Security Council has been seized of the matter. We note that SSR is essential both in peacetime and in conflict and post- conflict situations, within the context of the continental structural conflict- prevention framework. This is because of its contribution to consolidating peace and preventing relapse into conflict. As part of our efforts to highlight the contribution of SSR in conflict prevention and crisis management, in 2019, the AU Commission held a high-level retreat that brought together our High Representatives and Special Envoys and Representatives to exchange views on mediation and security sector reform as conflict-prevention and conflict-resolution tools. The reform of national security institutions constitutes a major pillar of the African Union Policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development. It is observed that a deficit in security governance constitutes a major root cause of most political and armed conflicts in Africa. This explains the inclusion of SSR provisions in the texts of most peace agreements and political settlements across the African continent. The AU Policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development gives priority to the establishment or re-establishment and strengthening of the capacity of security institutions, including defence, police and correctional services through designing and implementing relevant policies. The recent establishment of the African Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development is aimed at providing technical support in SSR and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) to member States and Regional Economic Communities (RECs), in close collaboration with the AU Commission. We expect that the United Nations and its partners will work closely with the Centre to strengthen its capacities in this regard. The AU is supporting member States to develop and strengthen inclusive national policies, strategies and plans and to undertake dialogue aimed at building professional and accountable security institutions. Madagascar is one of the countries we are supporting. Indeed, Madagascar has demonstrated a high degree of political will by providing the requisite political leadership and committing funding, meagre though it may be, in support of national priorities. This gesture calls for the full support of the international community, namely, our two organizations and international partners. The AU is also supporting Somalia, the Gambia, Mali, the Central African Republic, Guinea Bissau and Ethiopia in implementing SSR, in accordance with their needs. In all these endeavours, national ownership is fundamental. I need to stress here the important role of women and youth in security governance and sustaining peace. We are supporting member States, through our policy framework, to address cultural barriers and related stereotypes that perpetrate the underrepresentation of women in national defence and security forces. We have developed an operational guidance note on gender and security sector reform, whose dissemination we launched to member States and regional economic communities in 2019. On the other hand, and as the United Nations and international partners continue to deploy efforts aimed at supporting measures to stabilize member States on the continent that are faced with political instability, it is critical that such support aim at deploying the available funds to address concrete national priorities rather than on administrative overheads. This is a concern that member States have raised to the AU in various forums. The AU is grateful for the efforts of international partners to provide concrete support for security agencies in member States, for instance the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. Such support has had positive impact in quest for peace and stability on the continent. However, the need for predictable and sustainable funding for such security support remains a concern. The same applies to AU peace support operations. The AU will continue to engage with United Nations on this issue. We also note that the absence of mechanisms for ensuring that DDR is conducted as part of peace agreements and stabilization efforts in the member States where SSR is being carried out. This may result in relapses into violence since some individuals slip through the cracks in peace processes. This is an area that the African Union is focusing its attention on, and it is one in which we will welcome enhanced cooperation from the United Nations and the international community. As part of the efforts to enhance coordination in SSR on the African continent, the AU Commission established an SSR forum and a steering committee where the AU, RECs, the United Nations and international partners can jointly identify priorities, align their approaches and provide guidance to member States on the means to enhance and streamline security sector governance in all aspects of conflict prevention and resolution. We continue to encourage active participation in these means, especially because member States implementing SSR are invited to submit briefs and share experiences. Since SSR is linked to a change of mentality, which is often a gradual process, it is necessary for all stakeholders to provide long-term support for programmes with flexible logical frameworks that that can be adapted to emerging security threats, depending on the specific context of the situation. This will limit the possibility of international partners withdrawing support, which we have witnessed in some cases on the continent and which can contribute to worsening the situation. As Council members are all aware, the coronavirus pandemic has taken its toll in virtually all spheres of society. SSR activities have not been spared. We will continue to adapt interventions to this unprecedented reality in order to meet the expectations of member States. As I conclude, I wish to underline once again that the AU is mindful that the governance of the security sector is a sine qua non for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. However, SSR is politically complex, long term and often costly. It therefore requires full engagement by State and non-State stakeholders, with strong national ownership guided by high-level political leadership. The AU is committed to providing enhanced support to the efforts of member States and regional economic communities in the coming years and has developed the AU Three-Year Strategy for SSR 2021-2023. The United Nations and its partners were instrumental in developing this strategy, and we look forward to enhanced partnership cooperation and coordination in its implementation. I cannot conclude without reiterating my gratitude to Foreign Minister Naledi Pandor for having invited the AU Commission to speak on this important theme. We remain thankful for the constructive cooperation we have enjoyed with the Security Council. As Council members are aware, on 6 December 2020, the AU will be holding an extraordinary summit on silencing the guns. The outcome of the summit will contribute to the efforts aimed at addressing root causes to conflicts and to accelerating the Silencing the Guns initiative on the continent. We count on the outcomes of this debate to support the efforts of our member States in security sector governance and reform.
