Mr. Jensen (Denmark): The many discussions in
New York and around the world this week about the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist organizations have served to remind us
once again that the threat from terrorism and violent
extremism is acute and real.

Violent extremism and terrorism are a threat not
only to the innocent civilians of Abuja, Mosul or
Aleppo. Relative to our country's size, a very large
number of foreign fighters from my country have left to
join forces with extremist groups in the Syrian theatre.
To Denmark, as to many other European countries, the
phenomenon of foreign fighters is not an abstract one;
it constitutes a serious security concern.

The challenges we are facing include providing
assistance to concerned parents in an effort to prevent
young people from travelling to war zones, but also to
counter the threat from those who went and are coming
back. Some of these young men and women will come
back battle-hardened, strongly indoctrinated and with
newly forged ties with extremist groups - groups with
the clearly defined goal of harming our societies and
our citizens as much as they can.

If the international community is to counter this
threat effectively, we need to be guided by our respect
for the rule of law, and we need to apply a firm and
truly holistic and integrated approach building on three
pillars.

First, we all have a responsibility to protect the
suffering civilian population in the region against the
ongoing atrocities committed by ISIL. In order to do
this effectively, we must be ready to apply immediate
measures, including military operations.

Secondly, a broader preventive strategy is needed
to reduce vulnerabilities to radicalization and to stem
the flow of recruits and financial means to extremist
groups.
Finally, this threat is, as we well know, transnational
in character, hence our response also needs to build on
strengthened international cooperation, coordination
and the sharing of lessons learned.

Denmark wholeheartedly supports resolution 2178
(2014), just adopted, which we, too, co-sponsored. We
warmly thank President Obama and Secretary Kerry for
their leadership on this resolution and for spearheading
an international coalition against ISIL and for an
inclusive Iraqi Government.

So far Denmark has provided immediate support to
the international response in the military area, with 130
transport aircraft; significant humanitarian assistance
to mitigate the extraordinary humanitarian crisis
caused by the brutal acts of ISIL; and firm diplomatic
support for the formation of the international coalition
against ISIL.

My Government only last Friday launched a new
Danish national action plan to prevent violent extremism.
It contains a wide range of initiatives to be implemented
over the coming years. This builds on four interlinked
responses to the threat: strengthening the capacities of
local authorities to deal with radicalization; mitigating
online radicalization and recruitment; intensifying
international cooperation, including capacity-building
assistance; and, lastly, working to mobilize civil society.

However, as none of us can solve this problem on
our own, it is imperative to link national initiatives and
expertise with internal efforts. We consider the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, established by the United
States and Turkey three years ago, an obvious platform
for building alliances across regions and continents to
further the implementation of the resolution.

Violent extremism has an impact on the security of
us all, in Copenhagen, in Baghdad and in New York,
but it also hampers development and economic growth
globally. It is therefore very important for us that the
global framework for countering the threat be firmly
anchored in the United Nations and that all Members
of the United Nations family engage actively in the
effort to build resilience and counter violent extremism
wherever we meet it.

