The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Francois Delattre, Permanent
Representative of France, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of March. I am sure I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing our
deep appreciation to Ambassador Delattre and his team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security

International humanitarian law

The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Ms. Naz Modirzadeh, Professor of
Practice, Harvard Law School.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

This is the first meeting that Germany is presiding
over under our twin presidencies with France. We have
agreed on an ambitious programme of work and are
grateful for Council members' support.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank Jean-Yves Le Drian for his
kind cooperation in the preparation of today's meeting.
Our twin programmes send a strong message about
the unique cooperation between our two countries. As
always, it is a pleasure.

(spoke in English)
Before giving the floor to our briefers, I would like
to make a few short remarks. Today we have chosen
a solution-oriented approach that does not focus on
a situation in a specific country. The multitude of
complex and fragmented conflicts around the world
calls for a discussion about what we as States Members
of the United Nations can do to counter violence
against humanitarian personnel, civilians and medical
missions. When we provide humanitarian assistance, it
should be demand-driven and based on humanitarian
principles, and safeguarding the humanitarian space
must be a guiding concern.

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.


