Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Mr. Pahad for his briefing, and the
representative of Nigeria for the comments he made on
behalf of the African Union (AU).

The Pretoria Agreement and President Mbeki's
personal role in securing that Agreement are a very
significant achievement that truly deserves all the
congratulations of the Council. We now encourage, and
expect, all the parties concerned to move forward
urgently to the implementation of what has been
agreed. If I may, I shall tackle the subjects by their
relevant headings.

In terms of the reinforcement of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the three
areas where Ivorian leaders have asked for assistance
in the area of security have been set out very clearly:
protecting the Forces nouvelles, police recruitment and
the disarmament of the militia. I think that what we
now need is a considered recommendation by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the factoring in of the previous elements. Previously,
the rationale the 1,200 reinforcements was the
deteriorating security situation. How do we now adjust
our expectations given the Pretoria Agreement? As set
out, how will the main tasks of the reinforcements
influence the numbers and nature of the deployment?
Indeed, how do we factor in the priorities of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and the holding of the elections? It would be good to
know as much as possible, as soon as possible, about
the timetable for that necessary additional deployment
and about the division of roles between the two forces
present in Cote d'Ivoire.

On DDR, the naming of a date for its
commencement - 15 May - is very welcome. DDR
is a key factor in peacebuilding anywhere, but
especially in Cote d'Ivoire. It is also crucial to the
implementation of the Pretoria Agreement, which is a
prerequisite for the holding of free and fair elections. A
worked-up plan drawing upon the expertise and
experience of South Africa, but going beyond that,
including time lines and objectives, is very necessary.
Then, of course, the key thing is implementation.

As far as the elections are concerned, I am sure
we all support the holding of free and fair elections as
soon as is practically possible. The steps taken within
the Pretoria Agreement are very crucial, again, to that
goal. As President Mbeki has recommended, all the
candidates should be allowed to stand for president and
any necessary legal adjustments made to permit that to
happen. Benchmarks set by the United Nations to
measure progress towards elections will be important.
Again, we would look to the Secretariat to advise on
the establishment of the impartial structure to assist the
Ivorians during the entire electoral period. That is what
they are looking for. How can we do that in the terms
that they need and exploiting all the expertise the
United Nations can bring to bear?

I have argued on previous occasions that we
should move forward on sanctions. I think, in the light
of the Pretoria Agreement, that is not a priority, but the
dimension of sanctions has been important in getting
the parties to where we are today. I do not think there
should be any doubt that the Council expects now to
see progress, but we have had enough blockages on
moving forward in Cote d'Ivoire, and so the
implementation of the Pretoria Agreement, Linas-
Marcoussis and what lies behind it is actually crucial.

Peacekeeping needs to be set in the context of a
comprehensive peace-building strategy, tackling all the
necessary aspects of policy. Within that, we need an
evolving strategy for the peacekeeping operation to be
gradually replaced by policing and by the Ivorians
carrying it out themselves. The Pretoria Agreement
offers the opportunity to develop that comprehensive
strategy based on targets for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and the elections. It
is very important that that should ultimately give us an
exit strategy for UNOCI. An exit strategy has always
been crucial to any military deployment.

In conclusion, I very much agree with what the
French Ambassador said. It is incumbent upon us now
to support President Mbeki's efforts and the agreement
reached by the Ivorian parties. The other side of that
coin, of course, is to look to the Ivorian parties
themselves to assume their responsibilities and to meet
the obligations they have taken on. We look forward
very much to working on the draft Security Council
resolution so that can be adopted as soon as possible,
and I join with my French colleague in wishing every
success to Pierre Schori in his endeavours.

