The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March 2009, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Yukio Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan,
for his service as President of the Security Council for
the month of February 2009. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing our
deepest appreciation to Ambassador Takasu and his
team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the assassinations of the President
of Guinea-Bissau, Joao Bernardo Vieira, and the
Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, Tagme Na
Waie, on 1 and 2 March 2009. It expresses its
deep sympathy and condolences to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau.
"The Security Council calls on the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to bring to justice
those responsible for these violent acts. It calls
upon the Government, the political leaders, the
Armed Forces and the people of Guinea-Bissau to
remain calm, exercise restraint, maintain stability
and constitutional order and respect the rule of
law and the democratic process. It also urges all
parties to resolve their disputes through political
and peaceful means within the framework of its
democratic institutions and opposes any attempt
to change the Government through unconstitutional
means.

"The Security Council welcomes in this
regard the statements condemning the incidents
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, the European Union and
other members of the international community,
and calls on all to assist in preserving the
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau and to
continue to support peacebuilding efforts in the
country.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to support the efforts of the
Government and people of Guinea-Bissau to
consolidate democratic institutions, peace and
stability in that country.

"The Security Council shall remain seized
of the developments in Guinea-Bissau."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 19.711.
09-25350

