The President: In accordance with the decisions taken
at the 3797th meeting, I invite the Minister for Foreign
affairs of Nigeria and the representative of Sierra Leone to
take seats at the Council table; I invite the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea, the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana and the
representative of Zimbabwe to take the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Chief Ikimi (Nigeria)
and Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone) took seats at the
Council table; Mr. Essy (Cote d 'Ivoire), Mr. Camara
(Guinea), Mr. Gbeho (Ghana) and Mr. Mapuranga
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement of its
President of 27 May 1997 (S/PRST/l997/29)
following the military coup d 'e'tat in Sierra Leone on
25 May 1997. It remains deeply concerned about the
continuing crisis in Sierra Leone and its negative
humanitarian consequences on the civilian population
including refugees and internally displaced persons
and in particular, the atrocities committed against
Sierra Leone's citizens, foreign nationals and
personnel of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group. It
reiterates its view that the attempt to overthrow the
democratically elected Government of President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah is unacceptable and calls again
for the immediate and unconditional restoration of
constitutional order in the country.

"The Security Council is concerned about the
grave crisis in Sierra Leone which endangers the
peace, security and stability of the whole region and,
in particular, about its possible negative impact on
the ongoing peace process in neighbouring Liberia.
"The Security Council strongly supports the
decision of the Thirty-third Summit of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) held in
Harare, Zimbabwe, from 2 to 4 June 1997 which
appealed to the ECOWAS leaders and the
international community to help the people of Sierra
Leone to restore the constitutional order in that
country and which underlined the imperative need to
implement the Abidjan Agreement which continues
to serve as a viable framework for peace, stability
and reconciliation in Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council welcomes the
participation of the Foreign Ministers of ECOWAS
members of the Committee of Four in its 3797th
meeting of 11 July 1997.

"The Security Council welcomes the mediation
efforts initiated by ECOWAS and expresses its full
support for the objectives of these efforts as set out
in the final communique (S/ 1997/499), issued at the
meeting of the Foreign Ministers of ECOWAS, held
in Conakry, Guinea, on 26 June 1997.

"The Security Council calls upon those who
have seized power to cooperate fully with these
efforts so that the constitutional order in Sierra
Leone will be restored immediately.

"The Security Council will continue to follow
closely the progress of efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of the crisis and stands ready to consider
appropriate measures if constitutional order in Sierra
Leone is not restored without delay.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

