Let me first thank the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell, for his briefing. The European Union (EU) and the United Nations share the same conviction that cooperation among nations is the only possible way to meet common challenges. Over almost 70 years of shared history, this conviction has been translated into a multitude of concrete forms of cooperation and action. With the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the world today is facing an unprecedented challenge. The European Union has already demonstrated its solidarity with the rest of the world in its mobilization against the virus. France advocated strongly that sub-Saharan Africa should be viewed as a priority region in the European response. More than ever, we are convinced of our common obligation to, and interest in, coordinating our actions under the leadership of the United Nations. In this regard, the European Union has given clear support to the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive ceasefire. Accordingly, France once again calls on all Security Council members to live up to their responsibilities and adopt a resolution establishing a cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause for all the situations on the Council's agenda. Furthermore, the EU initiative of establishing a humanitarian air bridge contributes to the United Nations efforts aimed at ensuring humanitarian access to the most vulnerable countries, and it includes a strong focus on Africa. I want to stress very clearly that European Union sanctions do not impede the fight against the pandemic, as they include humanitarian derogations that allow for aid delivery. In many crises, the European Union and the United Nations have demonstrated the complementarity of their tools. Collectively, the EU is the leading financial contributor to the United Nations. It is also the world's leading donor of humanitarian aid, while acting in close coordination with the United Nations. EU member States are supporting peacekeeping operations in the context of the pandemic. In the Sahel, the sharing of responsibilities between the EU, which trains the local armies and local police, and the United Nations, which has a key role in the peace process and protection of civilians, is a good one. The EU and the United Nations also provide support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. In addition, EU member States have provided more than 1,000 peacekeepers to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Moreover, with regard to many other African crises, the trilateral cooperation among the EU, the United Nations and the African Union is now a key instrument for the prevention and resolution of conflicts and for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I also wish to highlight the role that the EU is playing in the development and implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with respect to Iran, which represents a key achievement of multilateral diplomacy. In that regard, I would also like to echo the regret expressed by Mr. Borrell about the decision of the United States not to renew the waivers for key JCPOA-related nuclear projects. The JCPOA serves the non-proliferation interests of everyone and remains the best way to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of Iranian nuclear activities. This is why we and the remaining participants in the JCPOA will continue to work towards its preservation and full implementation. In Syria, the EU is supporting the Syrian people through humanitarian aid and stands ready to contribute to the funding of the reconstruction when a credible political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) is firmly under way. With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the EU has voiced its strong attachment to the internationally agreed parameters of the two-State solution based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. Annexation of parts of the West Bank by the Israeli authorities would be a violation of international law; it would also not be without consequences for the relationship between the EU and its member States and Israel. With a view to resolving the conflict in Libya, the European Union has decided to deploy the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI , which will notably monitor the violations of the arms embargo on the high seas and therefore be the main contributor to the implementation of resolution 2292 (2016). In the Western Balkans, the European Union is playing a leading role in facilitating dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo and is deriving benefits from the stabilization groundwork carried out by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. The European Union and the United Nations are also joining forces to provide responses to global challenges. In the area of climate change, the EU and the United Nations are working together to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement and will continue to raise their ambitions ahead of the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. With regard to biodiversity, the EU is one of the most ambitious players in the field, calling for support of the United Nations in the preservation of marine wildlife and resources. With regard to health, the EU is strongly committed to supporting a global and effective response to the COVID-19 crisis and other potential crises to come. Within the framework of the World Health Organization, the EU will push for a renovated and more efficient multilateral health system. The synergies between the EU and the United Nations in promoting and protecting universal human rights and fundamental freedoms are essential. The EU fully supports the action of the Secretary-General and all relevant United Nations agencies in this regard. The EU and its member States will continue to promote the highest standards when it comes to human rights across the United Nations system, including in the Security Council. When it comes to gender equality and women's rights, we will continue to support the Secretary-General's call to "push back against the pushback". The EU and the United Nations share common values and promote the same agenda for all the foregoing highly critical global challenges. It is in our mutual interest that we cooperate more closely for the benefit of the entire international community. In this regard, France supports greater interaction between the EU and the United Nations and a stronger presence of the EU within the United Nations system. The members of the European Union are not only the largest contributors to the United Nations budget and firm supporters of the modernization efforts that have been initiated, but together with the EU, EU member States are working concretely in conjunction with the Organization in all areas of crisis to facilitate political dialogue, maintain and build peace, and assist civilian populations. In this way, we are contributing to building a strong and living multilateralism, which is the only way to establish a stable and secure international order.
