Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing. We
can see that his personal participation in the meeting
on Syria in Astana enabled him to make it a substantive
one. We appreciated his call for active diplomacy, which
Russia has advocated for from the very beginning.
We continue to make significant efforts to facilitate a
political settlement in Syria despite the undermining
effects ofthe aggressive action by the United States, the
United Kingdom and France in April against a number
of civilian structures in Syria. I discerned no sympathy
about what happened there in the statement by my United
States colleague, despite the fact that it was a blatant
breach of international law and did absolutely nothing
to advance any kind of a settlement. Furthermore, her
statement had an odd, confrontational tone that I felt
certainly did not correspond to the message that Mr. De
Mistura wanted to convey to all of us today, which is
that it will be important for diplomacy to function if
the peace that the Syrians have awaited for so long is to
finally be established on the ground.

Unlike some Security Council member States,
which prefer taking unilateral measures to finding
ways to solve problems, Russia is focusing on steps
to genuinely improve the situation on the ground and
advance the prospects for a political settlement. As
Mr. De Mistura already noted, the ninth meeting of the
participants in the Astana process concluded yesterday
in the capital of Kazakhstan, and the guarantors adopted
a joint statement. We are grateful to the leadership of
Kazakhstan for its steadfast support. The meeting in
Astana considered concrete measures for resolving
a number of political and humanitarian issues and
analysed the situation in the de-escalation zones, which
play a key role in maintaining the ceasefire regime,
reducing the level of violence and generally stabilizing
the situation in Syria. The importance was noted
of increasing efforts to help all Syrians and restore
normal civilian life and, to that end, of providing fast,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access and essential
humanitarian and medical assistance, and creating the
conditions needed to enable the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes, as well as people's freedom of movement.

A second meeting was held ofthe working group on
the liberation of detainees and hostages to discuss the
handover of the bodies of the dead and the search for
missing persons, with the participation of experts from
the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. The importance of continuing
joint efforts with the aim of building trust among
the conflicting parties in Syria was emphasized. The
Syrian Government declared its willingness to engage
with the working group and decided to appoint a special
representative on issues related to its work.

In line with the provisions ofresolution 2254 (2015),
the meeting affirmed its determination to continuing to
promote a political settlement by helping to implement
the recommendations of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress held in Sochi. The consultations with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the Syrian
parties will continue, with a View to establishing
the conditions conducive to starting the work of a
constitutional committee in Geneva as soon as possible,
whose parameters will have to be agreed on by the
Syrians themselves. We will get nowhere without their
consensus, so there is no point in proposing artificial
frameworks for the process, especially ifthey are based
on provisional plans of some kind. Thanks to the Astana
process, we have succeeded in generating momentum
for a political process based on intra-Syrian talks
under the auspices of the United Nations, although, as
we have noted, the triple alliance's aggression against
the Syrian Arab Republic has significantly limited the
room for manoeuvre in that regard.

Concerted efforts by the guarantor countries are
bringing us steadily closer to eliminating the presence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Jabhat
Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups altogether. The
recent situation in Syria has continued to be difficult.
The guarantor countries' efforts are certainly not being
helped by provocative initiatives from external actors,
which merely strengthen radical sentiments among
groups opposing the legitimate Government and fuel
their reluctance to work for negotiated solutions.

In Damascus, the operation to liberate the southern
regions and suburbs of the capital from ISIL-affiliated
groups continues, but Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham
are now fully under the Syrian authorities' control
and civilian life there is returning. Russian specialists
are helping the Syrian authorities to restore civilian
infrastructure. Mines are being cleared, socially
significant facilities are being rebuilt and electricity
and water services are being restored. In eastern
Ghouta, some 65,000 residents previously evacuated
from the area have returned to their homes. However,
in some other regions where the Syrian Government
lacks access, the situation has continued to deteriorate.
That is especially true of the Rukban and Al-Tuwaihina
refugee camps, as well as the former ISIL capital,
Raqqa, where the humanitarian situation is disastrous.
Measures must be taken to rectify it without delay. The
solution is simple - restore Damascus's sovereignty
over those territories as soon as possible.

Government forces and Palestinian volunteers,
with aerial and artillery support, have continued to
combat fierce resistance from terrorist detachments in
the Palestinian refugee camp in Yarmouk. The militias
wounded several dozen civilians in mortar strikes on
residential areas in the north-east area of the camp. In
the past week, the territory held by the illegal armed
groups in Yarmouk has been significantly reduced.

The Syrian army's assault on ISIL positions
in Deir ez-Zor province has also been ramped up.
ISIL's adherents have incurred considerable losses in
manpower and equipment and have been driven out of
an area of about 1,500 square kilometres. A large-scale
operation to eliminate ISIL is being conducted in the
eastern part of Syria with the aim of completely defeating
the terrorists based in hard-to-reach desert areas, who
have been increasing their attacks on Government
forces in the Euphrates region and Homs province.

We will continue the difficult work of restoring
peace in Syria. Frankly, we are disturbed by some
international and regional actors" disrespectful attitude
to the issue of Syrian sovereignty, of which we have
recently seen alarming manifestations. It is important
to understand that this will not help to normalize
the situation in Syria or the region as a whole. It
fuels the conflict and reduces the prospects for a
political settlement. For example, how can we be sure
that reckless and illegal actions similar to those that
occurred a month ago will not be repeated on some
other trumped-up pretext? The reckless conduct of a
number of international and regional players who claim
to have common sense has considerably slowed progress
regarding a settlement of the situation in Syria. If they
cannot or will not help us with that, they should at least
not interfere.

In conclusion, I would like to touch briefly on the
remarks by my American colleague. Basically, more
than half of her statement was about Iran, not Syria,
and Syria is the item on our agenda today, after all. I
would also like to ask the Americans some questions
we have about that. Before they blame Russia or Iran,
I would like to ask what the reason is for the presence
of United States forces in Syria and what their real
objective is. The territories under their control have
become grey areas where extremists of various stripes
and real terrorists roam freely. In particular, what is
going on with the several hundred ISIL followers who
are being held by forces loyal to the United States
under United States oversight in the region beyond the
Euphrates? They are not being investigated, and nor are
they being returned to their countries of origin. We are
worried that ISIL will re-emerge in those areas when
the United States withdraws from them, which it must
do sooner or later.

In conclusion, I would like to once again assure
the Council of Russia's willingness to support any
diplomatic efforts that can bring an end to the miseries of
the Syrian people and peace to that long-suffering land.

