Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate and for the
leading role Japan is playing in Afghanistan.

First of all, I wish to extend our deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Spain on the recent loss of 17 Spanish soldiers while
on a mission of peace.

Our sincere thanks go to Mr. Arnault for his
thorough presentation on the situation in Afghanistan. I
wish to commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its hard work,
dedication and invaluable contribution towards helping
the people of Afghanistan during these difficult and
critical times.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union. In addition,
I would like to make the following remarks.

The parliamentary and provincial elections due to
take place in Afghanistan on 18 September mark an
important threshold in the country's long and difficult
journey to a stable, peaceful and democratic future and
the completion of the Bonn process. We are all very
much aware of the many serious problems the country
continues to face. Nevertheless, it is heartening to see
the progress made in recent years, and we are
encouraged by recent positive developments and the
overall timely preparations for the upcoming elections.

After the elections, a new process will begin. The
key responsibility will lie with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan, who will determine in which
ways the international community can provide
assistance so that their aspirations to peace, security,
stability, democracy and economic development can be
fully attained.

There is no doubt that, among all the serious
problems, security has proven to be the most difficult.
The recent escalation in violence poses serious threats,
and not only to the forthcoming elections. The murders
of, and attacks against, international humanitarian
personnel and those working for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan are particularly deplorable. The commitment
and engagement of the Afghan Government in that
regard are crucial.

The progress made in establishing and training
the Afghan National Army and police officers is a
hopeful development. The same is true with regard to
the positive results in the implementation of the
demobilization and disarmament components of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. We hope that the extension of the
programme to members of illegal armed groups will be
equally effective. The international community stands
firm in its commitment to create conditions of stability
and security in the country, and it condemns all acts of
violence and terrorism, which undermine the efforts of
the Afghan people for a better future.

Counter-narcotics activities are another important
area in which the concerted efforts of the Afghan
Government and the international community are
needed to tackle the problem. The narcotics industry
and its accompanying corruption are clearly one of the
biggest threats in building an effective and democratic
Afghanistan, and deeply affect the country's long-term
prospects for peace, stability and development. Opium
poppy cultivation is one of the largest sources of illegal
income. It serves to support criminal and factional
agendas that aim to undermine the central Government.
The Government of Afghanistan has demonstrated the
necessary commitment, and has undertaken serious
measures in order to deal with this issue, but there has
thus far been no tangible progress. That is worrisome.
If the current situation regarding illegal drug
cultivation and trafficking continues, political progress,
economic growth and social development will not be
achieved and consolidated.

Afghanistan has made enormous progress in
recent years. Many challenges remain to be overcome.
Although some of those problems, and their
complexity, may seem daunting, we believe that the
Afghan people have the courage and determination to
overcome them. Continued international engagement
and support are crucial in that respect. We value the
commitment and the contributions of the United
Nations and individual countries, as well as those of
non-governmental organizations, civil society and
humanitarian organizations, to assist Afghanistan and
its people. The completion of the Bonn process must be
a clear benchmark.

We welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
initiate a process that will concretely define the future
role of the United Nations in Afghanistan. We look
forward to receiving his proposals, as we believe that
the United Nations has a significant role to play in the
country's continuing progress towards the better future
it truly deserves.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement to be adopted by the Council on the situation
in Afghanistan.

