The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Delattre for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

At the outset, I join the Permanent Representative
of France in thanking all those who contributed to the
organization of the mission and to all colleagues who
participated in the visit.

(spoke in English)
On the humanitarian situation, the Council remains
attentive to the situation of the civilian population in
the country. Everything must be done to protect them.
After having heard all the different interlocutors,
the Security Council remains concerned about the
security and humanitarian situations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, given the ceaseless violence in
some parts of the country, in particular Ituri, North and
South Kivu, and the Kasai's, which includes disputes
over natural resources, clashes among armed groups
and between communities, and inter-ethnic violence.

The Security Council condemned all acts to
exacerbate tensions and incite violence, and all acts
of sexual exploitation and sexual violence. We called
on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to investigate all such allegations, including
those reported to involve the possible participation of
the national police or the armed forces, and urged the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to hold accountable any actor responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law or violations and
abuses of human rights, as applicable, in particular
those that may amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

The Security Council further condemned the
persistence of such violence and the impact of armed
groups in various parts of the country, as they are
primarily responsible for the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. That is why the Security
Council encouraged the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to take further action, in accordance with
national and international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as applicable, and with the support of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with its mandate
to end the threat posed by armed groups, especially the
Allied Democratic Forces.

As a result of this deplorable humanitarian crisis,
the budget for the humanitarian response plan has
doubled. In that regard, the Security Council welcomed
the cooperation of the international community and
other international partners in raising funds to meet
humanitarian needs in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We called on them to pursue such efforts,
in continued cooperation with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in strict respect
for its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
and we further called on all parties to the conflict to
ensure unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance.

(spoke in Spanish)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Edjang Mangue.

