Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself
with the statement soon to be made on behalf of the
European Union. I would, however, like to make a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.

First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for both his comprehensive briefing on the current
situation in Afghanistan and for his tireless efforts.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Saikal for his
valuable remarks.

It was often said that 2015 would be a critical year
for Afghanistan - a year for the implementation of
reforms in order to contribute to peace, stability and
a brighter future for the Afghan people. As the year
draws to a close, we should take this opportunity to
reflect on the progress that has been made and on the
challenges for the years ahead.

The Afghan Government has taken important steps
in pursuing the reform agenda of the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. Such
reforms are necessary in order to achieve the long-term
objectives of a self-reliant and prosperous Afghanistan,
where women and men, girls and boys, can fully enjoy
their human rights. To achieve that, Afghanistan will
need continued international support, and to that end,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will play an important role. I would like to highlight
three issues.

First, 2015 has seen an alarming increase in
violence throughout Afghanistan, resulting in a
significant number of civilian casualties. The attack on
Kunduz and the tragic events that followed, including
the bombing of the Medecins Sans Frontieres hospital
and the recent attacks on Kandahar airport and on the
Spanish Embassy compound in Kabul, are discouraging
examples. The deteriorating security situation has
a devastating impact on the civilian population, not
least on women and children. Attacks on the civilian
population are of grave concern. International
humanitarian law must be respected at all times and
by all parties, and we welcome investigations that
contribute to that end.

Secondly, a peace process remains the only viable
option for a prosperous and stable Afghanistan. We
would like to commend the Afghan Government for
reaching out to all parties in the region. The Heart
of Asia Process is crucial in strengthening regional
cooperation, connectivity and confidence-building,
with the aim ofa prosperous Afghanistan and increased
regional security. We welcome the latest Islamabad
declaration, in particular its wording on regional
security cooperation. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Pakistan for hosting the ministerial
meeting, and we welcome the constructive dialogue
with Afghanistan during President Ashraf Ghani's visit
to Islamabad. We hope that the agreement to restart
peace talks will yield positive results soon and that
women will be an integral part of the process.

Thirdly, the increasing number of refugees and
migrants leaving Afghanistan - and, not least, the
regrettable outflow of young people, who are much
needed to rebuild the country - is a matter of serious
common concern. It is important to restore hope for a
better future for the Afghan people. Peace, stability and
improved living conditions will contribute to that aim.
The Afghan jobs-for-peace initiative has the potential
to contribute to that in a short- and medium-term
perspective.

During President Ghani's recent visit to Stockholm,
Sweden confirmed its support to Afghanistan through
the signing of a bilateral agreement on development
cooperation. Our support to Afghanistan remains
substantial and long-term, with the aim of contributing
approximately $1.2 billion during the transformation
decade. Those efforts will specifically target increasing
respect for the human rights of women, as well as the
representation of women in every area of society and
their access to resources. That is a prerequisite for
sustainable development and stability in Afghanistan.
Sweden will continue its contribution to developing
the Afghan security and defence forces through its
participation in the Resolute Support Mission during
2016.

As this critical year draws to an end, several
challenges remain, with important milestones ahead,
such as the Warsaw summit and the Brussels ministerial
conference. The Afghan National Unity Government,
although faced with many difficulties, has remained
united. That is a reason for hope. It is important that
the United Nations, the international community and
regional partners continue to stand by the Afghan
people and the National Unity Government in their
struggle for peace, stability and a vision for a brighter
future.

