Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
debate today. It comes at a time when the United
Nations is facing multiple challenges in its
peacekeeping operations all over the world.

My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his participation in and
contribution to this debate.

Malaysia joins other delegations in condemning
the terrorist attack on the United Nations office in
Abuja, Nigeria, this morning, and wishes to offer our
condolences to the families of the victims.

Malaysia's involvement in United Nations
peacekeeping operations began as early as 1960, only
three years after we became independent, with our
participation in the United Nations Operation in the
Congo. To date, Malaysia has participated in 24 United
Nations peacekeeping operations around the world, and
in NATO-led operations. That record clearly reflects
Malaysia's firm commitment to and belief in the
central role of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security, and its conviction that
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
indispensable instrument that has contributed
immensely to the resolution of many armed conflicts,
both within and among States.

It is for those reasons that Malaysia currently has
a total of 1,151 military and police personnel serving in
various capacities in seven peacekeeping missions. We
also recognize the significant on-the-job experience
gained by Malaysian Armed Forces personnel through
their participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The opportunity to operate in an
international environment with forces from other
Member States, exposed to different doctrines and
geographic terrain, provides valuable lessons for
Malaysia's troops. That international exposure has
contributed to enhancing the professionalism of
Malaysian Armed Forces personnel.

In that connection, my delegation fully supports
the various initiatives of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support aimed at further improving the quality,
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations and the well-being of United Nations
peacekeepers and staff members. Nevertheless, there is
still room for improvement, including by enhancing
transparency in the work of these two important
Departments.

In light of the many challenges confronting
United Nations peacekeeping operations, we see the
importance of being clear on the mandate concerning
the protection of civilians in regions affected by armed
conflict. That mandate is necessary in order to prevent
the unnecessary loss of innocent lives. But the
international community must be reminded that the
principal responsibility to protect civilians still lies
with national Governments. More importantly, United
Nations peacekeepers mandated to protect civilians in
regions affected by armed conflict must be guided by
the principle of impartiality in discharging their duties.

In that regard, Malaysia is concerned about the
gaps in implementing mandates for the protection of
civilians - a concern that has recently been echoed by
some force commanders. Malaysia therefore reiterates
that the Security Council should ensure that mandates
on the protection of civilians must be clear and precise,
and that missions must also be provided with the
required key enablers in order to implement the
mandated tasks effectively and efficiently.

My delegation is also aware that there are
resource gaps in peacekeeping missions. I urge that the
funds represented by an annual budget of $8 billion be
utilized in a more efficient and transparent manner, and
that countries with the ability to contribute more not
shy away from providing more resources. While the
Secretariat has launched the global field support
strategy in order to address these issues, my delegation
appeals to those countries that have the means to
continue to contribute generously to the much-needed
key enablers in order to allow peacekeepers to conduct
their work successfully.

By the same token, we also wish to express our
concern about the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers globally, given the rising
numbers of casualties in recent months. We are also
concerned about delays in the evacuation of wounded
peacekeepers, as witnessed recently. Such delays can
lead to the loss of precious lives. My delegation
therefore urges the relevant authorities to facilitate
quick and uninterrupted medical evacuation and access
to medical care for wounded peacekeepers, who have
made sacrifices to bring peace and stability to the
world.

Malaysia is encouraged by the important role that
peacekeeping missions play in the process of
peacebuilding. Time and again, peacekeepers are
referred to as "early peacebuilders". In that regard,
Malaysia will continue to uphold its commitment to the
attainment of global peace and stability, which will
enable countries to focus their resources on the pursuit
of economic and social development for the well-being
of their peoples.

With that in mind, all of our personnel deployed
in any United Nations peacekeeping mission will
always try to reach out to win the hearts and minds of
the local populace through quick-impact projects. At
the national level, Malaysia has always provided
assistance to countries in need through Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme initiatives, with the
aim of contributing to nation-building in affected
countries. In addition, Malaysia has always encouraged
its business community to invest in developing
countries, helping to provide more jobs and wealth
creation, particularly in countries affected by conflict.

In order to ensure that our peacekeepers are well
trained and ready to perform the duties required of
them, the Malaysian Government established its own
Peacekeeping Training Centre in 1996. The Centre not
only provides training for Malaysians but is also open
to foreign participants. In January 2010, it hosted the
eleventh United Nations Senior Mission Leaders
course, in which 24 participants from 20 countries,
representing military, police and civilian institutions,
attended a 14-day course. We will continue to upgrade
the Centre's facilities, as well as the quality of the
training provided, based on United Nations best
practices and the experience that we have gained over
the past 51 years in United Nations peacekeeping
missions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Malaysia's
firm and continuing support for peacekeeping activities
under the umbrella of the United Nations, and that the
United Nations can continue to count on Malaysia's
direct contribution in this important area in future.

