Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Colleagues are well aware of the fact that the
Russian delegation is not a fan of the monthly wrap-up
sessions. There is too much reiteration of well-known
positions and too many attempts to glorify approaches
that are not objective ones.

For example, today a number of statements
contained a one-sided interpretation of certain issues
relating to the situation in Syria. In November, some
members of the Council, at the earlier experts stage,
blocked work on a proposed presidential statement by
the Russian delegation on the danger ofthe potential use
by terrorists of chemical weapons in Syria and in Iraq. If
Damascus is always going to be blamed for everything,
that means giving a free hand to the terrorists; this is
something that we should be quite clear about.

Coming back to the question of the format of
today's meeting, there is a saying in the theatre that if
there are more actors on the stage than members in the
audience, then it is time to change the repertoire. We
propose having just one wrap-up session per year.

The Council had a heavy agenda in November, but
thanks to the good work of the Australian delegation,
we were able to get through this period without serious
disruption. We would like to wish the delegation of
Chad the very best as it prepares to take over leadership
of the Council in December.

There was strong focus on the Middle East and
North Africa. The situation there is extremely volatile,
and it will be possible to stabilize it only if there is a
political and diplomatic settlement of regional crises,
alongside a consistent struggle, in the framework of
full respect for international law, against terrorism and
extremism, be it with respect to the Syrian conflict, the
situation in Iraq or Libya.

We note the Council's timely work on counter-
terrorism. We have to put an end to radicalization,
which fuels terrorism. We must stop terrorists from
using the media, including the Internet, to try to make
their activities appear attractive. We must cut off their
oxygen. We must cut off funding, including from the
illegal trade In Iraqi and Syrian oil. It is vital to work
systematically on this particular issue. The president
statement of 19 November (S/PRST/2104/23) offers
some good guidance in that respect. We must further
develop that approach and give it real, practical content.

On 20 November, we held an important meeting
on United Nations policing. The work of the police
is becoming extremely diverse and complex, but we
should not forget that it is States that bear primary
responsibility for the maintenance of law and order
in their peacekeeping contingents. The main purpose
of police contingents is to assist the national law-and-
order forces during the post-conflict reconstruction
period.

We believe that the issue of Ebola is a very important

one, but we believe also that, without infringing on the
prerogatives of other United Nations organs, it should
be taken up primarily in the General Assembly and
the specialized agencies. We have to try to be clear in
defining the responsibilities of the Council, the General
Assembly and other agencies of the United Nations
system with respect to the tasks set out in the Charter.

We were obliged to abstain in the voting on
resolution 2183 (2014) as a matter of principle. We
deem it unacceptable that Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be urged to join the European Union and NATO
through a decision of the Security Council on the basis
of Chapter VII of the Charter. In future, responsibility
for what happens in that country should be handed over
to the Bosnians themselves, in strict compliance with
the Dayton Peace Agreement and in view of the closing
of the Office of the High Representative.

During yesterday's meeting on sanctions, we
heard many crucial arguments, such as the exclusive
prerogative of the Council to impose sanctions and not
to allow unilateral restrictions on them, and that it is
counterproductive to set up additional bureaucratic
structures, be it at the State, inter-State or Secretariat
level. After all, sanctions fall exclusively within
the competence of the States Members of the United
Nations.

This past month, the Council took up the issue
of the settlement of the internal conflict in Ukraine.
Unfortunately, the meeting held on 12 November
(see S/PV.7311) was used by those that proposed it
for another round of propaganda rather than for a
constructive quest for a way to resolve the crisis on the
basis ofthe Minsk agreements. The situation in Donetsk
and Luhansk remains tense. Thugs are still firing at
buildings and infrastructure, and there are dozens of
civilian casualties every day. The ceasefire regime
is not being fully respected. Instead of withdrawing
heavy weaponry, Ukrainian troops are, on the contrary,
moving ever closer to the lines of demarcation. For
example, on 22 November two Uragan rocket launchers
were brought into the Debaltsevo region. We cannot
remain silent about this kind of event. That is no doubt
why the Kyiv authorities are becoming increasingly
irritated by the Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Ukrainian troops
are regularly interfering with their observers, and this
is absolutely inadmissible.

Instead of establishing dialogue with the south-
east, as was agreed in April in Geneva, Ukrainian
authorities are breaking off communications with the
people there. They have halted budget expenditures,
including benefits and pensions, so those who are most
defenceless in the population are now being deprived of
the very basics of life just as winter approaches. Those
living in Donbas have no medical care or common
services. Schools are closed. There are no cultural
events. There is a virtual blockade against them.
This threatens to become a full-scale humanitarian
catastrophe.

The situation was made worse by Kyiv's statement
that it does not feel obliged to respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms because it is involved in
anti-terrorist operations. Yesterday, Donbas issued
a statement to the international community and the
Council regarding the situation, and they said outright
that Kyiv has declared war, not on the rebels, but on the
civilian population: women, old people and children.
Those who encourage the Kyiv authorities to carry out
such acts will bear a very heavy responsibility.

