Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to
express our gratitude to the French presidency for the
opportunity to discuss in the Security Council the
important issue of the protection of civilians during
armed conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. John Holmes,
for his very comprehensive briefing.

Croatia associates itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later by the
representative of the Czech Republic.

In the light of the forthcoming sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions, which lie at the core of international
humanitarian law, this debate comes at a timely
juncture. Yet, 60 years on, civilians continue to account
for the majority of victims of actions by parties to
armed conflicts and are often deliberately targeted and
subjected to appalling human rights violations in
contemporary conflicts worldwide.

In this regard, Croatia shares the deep concern for
the suffering of civilians in many areas around the
world, from the conflict areas of the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the current
situation in and around Gaza to the ongoing
humanitarian crises in Myanmar and Zimbabwe. In the
case of Gaza, we continue to appeal to all parties to
exercise maximum restraint in avoiding civilian
casualties and to put the interests of civilian
populations first, especially by guaranteeing
unhindered access to humanitarian assistance and
supplies and full respect of resolution 1860 (2009).

Situations of particular concern are those that
continue to be characterized by indiscriminate violence
and attacks against women and children. The increased
use of sexual and gender-based violence in armed
conflict, including as a tactic of war, demand more
effective implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). The struggle against impunity is an
integral element of the protection of civilians, and we
must ensure that the policy of zero tolerance towards
sexual violence and abuse becomes a reality in all
aspects of the Council's work. This calls for robust
efforts on the part of United Nations country-specific
mandates to overturn the pervading sense of impunity
in countries like Cote d'Ivoire and the Sudan.

As we recently learned from the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, conflicts remain the
major cause of the increasing number of refugees and
internally displaced persons in the world. Their
conditions are often exacerbated by serious security
problems and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law by combatants in the conduct of
hostilities, which are often characterized by sexual
violence and impeded humanitarian access. Croatia
places great importance on the security situation in and
around refugee camps. Given that, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, such places
remain the primary recruiting ground for child soldiers,
more efforts are needed to mainstream child protection
advisers in both Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and Department of Political Affairs
missions.

Although this Council has established a broad
framework of thematic resolutions on this issue,
greater systematic follow-up by the Council is
required. In particular, Croatia advocates the need for a
more consistent approach at the country-specific level.
Even in cases where mandates include measures for
civilian protection and respect for international
humanitarian law, such as, most notably, in the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the results have
been very mixed to date. This failure to effectively
implement these measures is often attributed to the
absence of a systemic understanding of what types of
activities fall under the umbrella of protection within
peacekeeping mandates. Only when the Council's
intent is translated into clear and actionable guidelines
can protection-oriented initiatives on the ground be
fully achieved by adequately trained personnel armed
with the requisite resources.

While the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the State, world leaders at the 2005
World Summit recognized the responsibility we all
share to protect vulnerable communities from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. The international community has
already demonstrated its preparedness to take
collective action when national authorities manifestly
fail to investigate, prosecute and adequately punish
violations of international humanitarian law. We should
not be seen wanting in translating these words into
action. For its part, Croatia believes that the
International Criminal Court has a key part to play
when States fail to uphold these inherent
responsibilities. It is our conviction that the obligation
to cooperate with the Court, arising both from the
Rome Statute and from decisions of the Security
Council, must be strictly adhered to.

Furthermore, the full implementation of smart
sanctions and other targeted measures by the Security
Council with respect to individuals or parties to
conflict carrying out widespread or systematic
violations of international humanitarian or human
rights law, including sexual violence, should not be
overlooked.

We learned from the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, in an earlier debate this past October, that
some important progress has been achieved in
mainstreaming a gender perspective into the overall
peace and security architecture. Indeed, the Council's
thematic debates and discussions of country-specific
conflict situations on its agenda that have addressed the
protection of women and children have produced
positive results. The watershed recognition in
resolution 1820 (2008) of all sexual violence against
civilians as a security threat and the need for a
systematic response has created important momentum
towards the protection of civilians, which we must be
careful not to lose in the ensuing work of the Council.
As part of this systematic response, Croatia further
believes that, in line with the Secretary-General's
recommendation, the Council should dispatch more
missions to assess situations in which sexual violence
is being used as a tactic of war.

Alongside the protection of civilians, another
critical humanitarian challenge continues to be that of
access of humanitarian assistance. The interests of
civilian populations must be placed first, especially by
guaranteeing unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance and supplies. Croatia is also deeply
concerned by the continued dangers and security risks
faced by humanitarian personnel at the field level as
they operate in increasingly complex situations.
Croatia commends the courage and commitment of
those who work under great personal risk, especially
locally recruited staff. We urge all humanitarian
personnel on the ground to adhere to the principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence.

As a strong supporter of the Oslo process from its
inception, Croatia joined other signatories in signing
the Convention on Cluster Munitions in December. The
conclusion of a legally binding international instrument
that prohibits the use, production, transfer and
stockpiling of cluster munitions represents an
important step towards enhancing the security of
civilians in conflicts in many regions worldwide.

In conclusion, Croatia views the latest updated
version of the aide-memoire to be annexed to the draft
presidential statement as a welcome step. We would
like to express our gratitude to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for all its efforts
in compiling the latest text in consultation with the
Council. It represents an important catalogue of
Council precedents on key issues, which will allow the
Council to be more systematic in its approach to
integrating the protection of civilians into all relevant
aspects of its work. Given the current trends in
contemporary conflicts, Croatia would like to see the
aide-memoire updated on a more regular basis.

Finally, in line with the EU's position, Croatia
supports the establishment of an informal expert group
on the protection of civilians. Croatia reiterates its
continued commitment to the protection of civilians
and looks forward to working with Council members
and the international community to greatly improve
their situation worldwide.

