Mr. De Vengoechea (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
for the briefing he has just presented. We would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his presentation to the members of the
Council.

The picture painted by the Secretary-General's
report (S/2008/6l7) shows how difficult and
complicated the work of Mr. Eide and his team has
been. We therefore commend the work that he has done
to date and wish him every success in the coming
months, which we know will be of crucial importance.

"Afghanistan is at a crossroads" is a phrase we
have heard before, but it has never been more fitting
than at the present moment. The wave of setbacks
suffered by the international community in recent
months has presented us with two options: we can
continue with the same strategy, becoming bogged
down in an unending asymmetric war in which nobody
wins and everyone comes out a loser, particularly the
Afghan people. Or, on the other hand, we could change
course and accelerate our steps towards rebuilding the
country, not by exclusively using force but through a
dialogue that seeks national reconciliation, which can
sow the seeds of peace, human security and social
development.

Panama is of the opinion that, to change course in
Afghanistan, two actions must be taken as a matter of
urgency. First, we must recognize that, as history has
taught us, a military victory in Afghanistan is not
merely a vague notion; it cannot be achieved in
practice. If we think that victory in Afghanistan means
totally removing insurgent groups, then we are
mistaken. The Afghan insurgency is much more than a
group of terrorists; it arises from a complex social
movement with strong roots in local culture.

It is certain that greater commitments on the part
of the members of the international security forces are
necessary to bring peace to the country, particularly the
most violent parts. But beyond that, Panama believes
that the Government of Afghanistan, with the support
of its international partners, must redouble its efforts to
integrate moderate elements of the insurgency,
including those members of the Taliban who renounce
violence, in order to reestablish the Afghan State.
Without them, national reconciliation, which is the
basis of any stable, multicultural society, will be
impossible.
The second action to be taken is to increase the
political commitment to Afghanistan. That does not
just include increased political, diplomatic and
economic aid for reconstruction, but also redoubled
efforts so that ordinary Afghans feel that their country
is changing for the better and that it is improving
because of the actions of its Government and the
international community.

As indicated in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, such action requires great efforts to,
among other things, establish the rule of law
throughout the country, root out the corruption which
permeates certain parts of the bureaucracy and improve
the standard of living of each citizen, particularly those
who live in remotest parts of the country.

Ultimately, a reconstructed State is worth little if
its people live in poverty and insecurity and do not
enjoy the dividends of peace. Such a situation leads
only to desperation, violence and extremism.

