Ms. Frankinet (Beligium) (spoke in French):
It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom of
Belgium.

Following the recommendations set out in your
concept note (S/2016/585, annex), Sir, and mindful
of the end goal of improving the Security Council's
inclusiveness, transparency and effectiveness and
building further on important work that has been done
over the past years, I would like to focus on three
action-oriented topics.

First, with regard to strengthening procedures in
sanctions regimes, which includes ensuring the fairness
of those procedures, Belgium and the Netherlands are
part of the Group of Like-minded States on Targeted
Sanctions. We would like to draw the Council's
attention to the concrete proposals made by the group
and set out in the document on fair and clear procedures
for a more effective United Nations sanctions system
(S/2015/867, annex), which was sent to the Security
Council on 12 November 2015. Belgium and the
Netherlands would like the Council to consider those
proposals in the framework of the review of presidential
note S/2010/507.

Secondly, with regard to strengthening the
Council's capacity in the area of prevention, we think
that it would be worth exploring the revival of the
practice of the wrap-up briefings, or coming up with
an innovative formula that stimulates reflection and
action on the root causes of conflict and the timely
consideration of emerging conflicts. Council members
could also consider interacting more closely and
flexibly with other bodies and individuals working
actively on conflict prevention. We are thinking about,
among others, the Peacebuilding Commission and its
configuration Chairs, the special envoys of regional or
subregional organizations and the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. Arria
Formula meetings could also involve more civil society
actors working on conflict prevention. In addition,
Council members could specifically consider measures
to facilitate the use of Article 99 of the Charter of
the United Nations as a key mechanism to help the
Secretary-General call the attention of the Security
Council to any matter that may threaten international
peace and security.
Thirdly, with regard to the operationalization
of thematic debates, the Netherlands and Belgium
believe that the concept notes set forth good practices
to be implemented in all thematic debates - first by
emphasizing the guidelines aimed at making the debates
more succinct and action-oriented and, secondly,
by issuing a clear, specific and operational outcome
of the debate. To the extent possible and if relevant,
operational outcomes of debates could also be pursued
in other relevant United Nations forums. For example,
the Council adopted a resolution on youth and terrorism
at the end of last year (resolution 2250 (2015)). That
initiative was followed up in June by a high-level
thematic conversation in the General Assembly on
children and youth affected by violent extremism.

Finally, I would like to also reiterate the support
of Belgium and the Netherlands for initiatives aimed at
minimizing the use of the veto. Like others, we firmly
believe there should be a moratorium on the use of the
veto in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. We hope that this could be further explored
by all Security Council members.

