Ms. Honore: I would first like tojoin other speakers
in welcoming the initiative of Argentina during its
presidency of the Security Council in placing on the
Council's agenda the question concerning Haiti and
the attendant consideration of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/493) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I deeply appreciate the
support expressed for the work ofmy predecessors in the
post of Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for the work of the military, police and civilian
personnel, including United Nations volunteers, as well
as the support expressed for the efforts of the United
Nations country team in Haiti, as we continue to assist
the Government of Haiti in ensuring an environment
of stability and security. I have also noted the support
expressed by members of the Council and other Member
States for the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the mandate of the Mission be extended by an additional
year.

Careful note has been taken of the concerns,
recommendations and timely advice to the Mission on
critical aspects of its work with the Government of Haiti,
in keeping with the conditions-based consolidation
plan 2013-2016 submitted by the Secretary-General in
March in the core areas of police development, electoral
capacity-building, the rule of law and key governance
issues, including the promotion of a dialogue on a
minimum political consensus regarding elections,
the legislative agenda and the strengthening of State
institutions. The progress that has been highlighted by
speakers today in those core areas and the benchmarks
yet to be attained are Vital to the creation of a framework
that will contribute to attaining the socioeconomic
goals outlined by the Administration of President
Martelly n his Government's plans, in particular the
"five Es" priorities of education, employment, energy,
the environment and the rule of law.

I have also noted the comments on the challenges
and systemic deficiencies facing Haiti and on the
support that MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country teams should provide in the humanitarian field
and in efforts of a social-developmental-stabilizing
nature, such as the reduction of community violence
and quick-impact projects.

The Council should rest assured that members'
entreaties that the Mission, in its work on human rights,
pay particular attention to the rights of women and
children have been noted and will continue to inform
our work.

I indicated earlier that the stakeholders in Haiti
have all expressed support for dialogue as a means
of arriving at an understanding on strengthening the
pillars of democratic governance in the country. I cannot
overemphasize the importance of such an all-inclusive
process in order to overcome the impasse and create
a framework in which the efforts of the Government
and society can be concentrated with serenity on
the country's pressing socioeconomic development
requirements. MINUSTAH will continue to support all
good-faith efforts in that direction and appreciates the
Security Council's continued support for it, as well as
all the other mandated tasks.

