Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
comprehensive and detailed briefing and for his
relentless efforts over the past four years to achieve
peace in Syria.

Three years ago in this Chamber, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015),
which set a road map for reaching a just political
settlement in Syria and restoring stability to that dear
Arab country, which has a great history. However, three
years have passed and we have, unfortunately, not been
able to implement that resolution on the ground.

In January, an agreement was reached in Sochi
to establish a constitutional committee. We have long
awaited the start of its functioning. Efforts made thus
far to allow the committee to begin its work before
the end of the year have been unsuccessful. We renew
our call for a balanced, credible, comprehensive and
inclusive committee in which all Syrian components
are represented. We believe that that would play a vital
role in moving the Syrian political process forward. The
constitutional committee is the first step in a political
transition that includes several steps, such as drafting
the constitution and holding free and fair elections,
pursuant to the constitution, under the supervision of
the United Nations and in line with highest international
standards of transparency and accountability. The
elections should also give voice to all Syrians, including
those living abroad, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).

We have listened to the Special Envoy and closely
followed the discussions of the Astana guarantors with
him in Geneva on 18 December to move forward with
the establishment of the constitutional committee.
In that regard, we stress that the United Nations has
a central role to play in facilitating a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process.

The political process in Syria is at a criticaljuncture
and requires decisive decisions. I am not exaggerating
when I say that the credibility of the Security Council
and the United Nations is at stake at this sensitive
period in the Syrian crisis. We reaffirm that there can
be no military solution to the crisis in Syrian. There is
a need to support all efforts to build trust among the
relevant parties, most notably through the release of all
prisoners and detainees, support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to investigate
all war crimes and crimes against humanity, and the
holding of all perpetrators accountable.

As long as Idlib province is relatively stable, thanks
to the Turkish-Russian agreement, there is a glimmer
of hope for achieving a breakthrough and make an
important step towards the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

The international community and the Security
Council have repeatedly failed the Syrian people. We
must not fail them again. We ought to implement the
relevant Council resolutions so as to enable the Syrian
people to achieve their legitimate aspirations through a
political settlement agreed by all Syrian protagonists.
That would enable the Syrian people to achieve their
legitimate aspirations, while preserving the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria.

In conclusion, we reiterate our thanks and deep
appreciation to Special Envoy Mr. De Mistura for
his relentless efforts over the past four years. We
look forward to working with the new Special Envoy,
Ambassador Geir Pedersen. The State of Kuwait will
fully support him and encourage his efforts to ensure
the success of his mandate.

