Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I thank Mr. Honwana for
his briefing. I join others in extending a very warm
welcome to Prime Minister Dileita and to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti. We strongly appreciate
that they have come from Djibouti to give us first-hand
accounts. I wish to thank Prime Minister Dileita and
the Permanent Representative of Eritrea, Ambassador
Desta, for their decision to take part, together around
this table, in this important and extremely timely
meeting, in order to convey their national perspectives
to this Council and to clarify their respective positions.

As we have heard, there are conflicting
perceptions and positions, but it is important that those
conflicting positions he expressed around a table, not
on the ground. I thank the Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States, Mr. Mahmassani, and the
representative of the African Union because their role,
as has been stated already, will be crucial in the future.

I mentioned the importance of the dialogue
around the table. In fact, Italy's expectation is that this
meeting - and this is important - will serve as the
beginning of a renewed engagement by both parties to
exercise restraint and resolve their differences through
dialogue, international law and diplomacy, thereby
demonstrating their attachment to peace and security in
the wider region. To the extent that we will be able to
catalyse and sustain that positive dynamic, fully and
promptly placing the United Nations political
machinery at the disposal of the parties, as expressed in
our presidential statement of 12 June, we will have
paid a significant service to our common cause of
advancing the role of the Security Council as an
instrument of conflict prevention, as mandated by
Article 34 of the United Nations Charter. In addition,
as recalled by Article 33 of the Charter and shown by
the African experience on a number of occasions, the
key to conflict prevention ultimately lies in the hands
of interested Member States, as has already been stated
by others.

Adopting a bottom-up approach, looking at
events from the ground and lending the strongest
possible support to the good offices or mediation
offices offered by the African Union and the Arab
League should be retained as essential elements of our
involvement. Cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations and Governments will be
particularly crucial in the coming weeks, as we will
need to acquire a more accurate and detailed picture of
the situation. The first account of events, as we have
heard, confirms the seriousness of current tensions
between the two countries. The crisis indeed has the
potential to become a threat to regional stability.

However, a number of elements will need to be
further investigated and brought to light. That is why
we strongly support the urgent launch of a fact-finding
mission by the Secretariat, which would provide
essential elements for this Council to develop its
position and approach to the issue. We feel that it is
equally important that the Security Council President
bring to the attention of the international media the
perceptions, assessments and concerns that have been
expressed by members of the Council. Here, we fully
recognize our position in the language that has been
proposed to the presidency by the French delegation,
which we thank. We fully recognize ourselves in those
elements.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our thanks to
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Djibouti and express once more Italy's trust in their
Government, as well as in Government of Eritrea, and
in the governing will and capacity to agree on a way
out of this crisis using the tools of diplomacy and
cooperation.

