Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of the
United States for this opportunity for an open debate
and to discuss honestly the very complex topic of
the use of poisonous substances in the context of
the Syrian conflict. Unfortunately, interest in such
events clearly has an ideological thrust. Let us
acknowledge that it is closely interwoven with the
anti-Damascus campaign, which has not yet reached
the place it deserves on the rubbish heap of history.
As soon as an element of realism appears, when the
political process in Astana and Geneva starts to really
take shape and gain speed, then, strangely, all kinds of
incidents start to occur. The last example is the tragedy
in Khan Shaykun.

According to our information, the Syrian
Government has requested the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to send a fact-finding mission to
Syria to investigate the incident, as well as an OPCW
rapid response and assistance mission. There is no need
to repeat that the Russian Federation has always had
a clear and unequivocal position: the use of chemical
weapons by anyone is absolutely unacceptable under
any circumstances. Those guilty of committing such
kinds of crimes must be held accountable.

Let us look at the origin of this problem. The
watershed in the history of the use of toxic chemicals in
Syria, and then of full-fledged chemical warfare agents,
was the establishment of the so-called "red lines"
initiated by the previous United States Administration
in 2012. Crossing those red lines was supposed to have
led to military intervention in the intra-Syrian conflict.
That decision served as a starting point for future
provocations by terrorist and extremist groups with the
use of chemical weapons. They sought to discredit the
official Damascus regime and to create a pretext for the
use of military force against a sovereign State.

Back then, our Western partners preferred to
remain silent, including regarding the request that came
from Damascus in March 2013 about investigating the
use of sarin by insurgents in a suburb of Aleppo, Khan
Al-Assal. We hope that this kind of attitude will not be
repeated this time. It was such inaction that encouraged
the insurgents, who felt they enjoyed impunity, to
commit more large-scale acts on 21 August 2013 in
eastern Ghouta, when sarin was used again. By the
way, quite coincidentally, this action was timed to
coincide with the first mission to Syria of a United
Nations group of experts, led by Ake Sellstrom. It tried
to ascribe responsibility for the attack on Government
troops, but they did not succeed in doing so because,
at the time, Damascus showed sufficient good faith,
and, through the efforts of the Russian Federation and
the United States, with the support of the international
community, it was possible to achieve a successful
chemical demilitarization of Syria.

When it became clear that the Government of
Al-Assad in very brief time frames and in very complex
conditions of the armed conflict was able to eliminate
its chemical arsenals, we saw reports about the alleged
use in Syria of chlorine as chemical weapons. The
OPCW established a Fact-finding Mission for that
chemical attack, with the support of the Government
of Damascus, which was meant to swiftly investigate
such incidents. But in fact this mission never visited
the supposed sites where chlorine was used to verify
this. And so a poor foundation was laid in the work
of the Fact-finding Mission, and then of the OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
in Syria to investigate cases of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. In fact, reports were fabricated
by the Syrian opposition and non-governmental
organizations that support it about the alleged use of
chlorine by Government forces. Those reports were
taken at face value, and no one sought to conduct an
objective investigation.

If anyone has any doubt that the images of the so-
called use of sarin incidents, in particular in Sarmin,
were staged in advance, one need only look at the
videos that were filmed on that subject by certain
pseudo-humanitarian non-governmental organizations,
such as the White Helmets, which were praised by
some in this Chamber, and by Jabhat Al-Nusra. In those
videos, one sees the same "actor-correspondents".
It is a fact that the White Helmets are closely linked
to that terrorist organization, or perhaps those who
fabricated those materials were the same persons who
were exaggerating about the humanitarian catastrophe
in eastern Aleppo while they were busy filling their
warehouses with medication and food when the
population was starving. I asked here at the United
Nations, "Is that true"? They said, "Yes ,that is true.
Why"? Apparently, they were getting ready for a long-
term siege. Can you believe the degree of cynicism:
those are the organizations that provide video materials
for this, and these video materials should serve as a
basis for us to draw conclusions?

The OPCW experts have confirmed that these
kinds of terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and Al-Nusra, produce fully fledged
weaponized chemical substances, mustard gas and
sarin, which are regularly used in Syria and Iraq. By the
way, the Western intelligence community also agrees
with those kinds of conclusions. We have often argued
our position in the Security Council regarding the
preliminary outcome of investigations in the framework
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Much still needs
to be examined. That is why we agreed to extend the
mandate of the Mechanism for another year. We need to
conduct a thorough, depoliticized investigation of cases
of the use of chemical weapons, based on reliable and
verified facts. The future work ofthe Joint Investigative
Mechanism needs to be expanded geographically. Its
mandate needs to be buttressed by real anti-terrorist
content, which is provided for by a Security Council
resolution.

No one should seek to sew the seeds of discord
between the Russian Federation and the government of
Iraq and other countries of the region. We have a solid
position in the Middle East. People believe us, and what
we are doing is to support Baghdad and not act against
it, as some affirm. There should be some bounds of
propriety.

We are very concerned about the fact that certain
States are already manipulating the preliminary results
of the work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. An
example of this kind of irresponsible approach was
the draft resolution on sanctions (S/2017/l72) under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
that was put to the vote on 28 February, even while
the political processes in Astana and Geneva were
working very well. The aforementioned States created
an absolutely artificial provocation in the Security
Council without even explaining the purpose of putting
the draft resolution to a vote. If the Russian and
Chinese initiative had been taken seriously two years
ago, including the draft resolution that we submitted,
then the situation today would be radically different.
But that initiative was disregarded.

To respond to the question posed by the United
Kingdom as to whether Russia has a plan, the answer
is yes. We have more than one plan. The first plan is
to combat terrorism. The second plan relates to the
draft resolution before us. At this stage, we do not see
a particular need to adopt a draft resolution. Previously
adopted decisions are more than sufficient to conduct a
thorough investigation of the incident. But, if some of
the Security Council members think that a new draft
resolution is desirable or necessary, then it needs to
have a completely different shape and form.

The preambular part should state that the Security
Council deeply regrets the massacre of people as a
result of the use chemical agents in Khan Shaykhun.
It should also state that those reports dictate the need
to carry out a comprehensive investigation in order
to find out what happened and who is responsible.
The preambular section should also condemn the use
of chemical weapons by anyone. The operative part
should be limited to one paragraph indicating that the
OPCW Fact-finding Mission should conduct a thorough
investigation of the reports on the ground, but with one
important condition - the staff of the investigative
Mission should be introduced to the Council and should
reflect a geographical balance. There should also be
a demand that illegal armed groups that control the
area where the incident took place must provide full,
unimpeded and safe access to that area and furnish all
the necessary information. The main task now is to
conduct an objective inquiry into what occurred.

Thus far, all falsified reports regarding the incident
have come from the previously mentioned White
Helmets or the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights,

based in London. Those two sources have long been
discredited. To take their reports at face value as a basis
for making important decisions is neither professional
nor prudent. At the same time, we note the contradictory
character of the reports about the incident. The White
Helmets are jumbling information in their reports; their
versions keep changing. They refer to bombings, either
from helicopters or aircraft; they mention the use of
chlorine or sarin; and they constantly change the number
of victims. In the videos and photos released on social
media, we see the representatives of the White Helmets
providing assistance to the victims while acting very
unprofessionally and without any decent protective
means. Also, the behaviour of the representatives of
the White Helmets in extreme circumstances is very
relaxed, which leads one to question the plausibility of
those materials. Such actions are meant to provoke.

As a matter of fact, the aforementioned
discrepancies arealso reflected in the draft resolution.
The second preambular paragraph, for example,
expresses the horror of what occurred 4 as though
it were an established fact. The operative paragraph
3 states that we need to establish whether or not the
event took place. Has anyone even checked what was
written? In other words, this draft resolution is hasty
and superficial. Let us be clear - putting forward such
a text for adoption by the Security Council is simply
inappropriate.

As for the incident that allegedly took place on
territory that since 2014 has been under the control of
terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front, it is true that on
4 April, from 11.30 to 12.30, local time, Syrian planes
conducted an air strike in the eastern edge of Khan
Shaykhun, on a large warehouse containing ammunition
and military equipment. At that site, there was a facility
for producing ammunition with toxic agents. That
ammunition was for use in Iraq and Aleppo. Their
use in that region was confirmed last year by Russian
military experts. The symptoms of those affected in
Khan Shaykhun, as shown in video footage on social
networks, were the same as those who were affected last
year in Aleppo, when all of the information regarding
the use of those chemical substances, found in samples
of soil from that city, was collected and forwarded to the
OPCW, where they continue to be reviewed hesitantly.

What is clear to us is that chemical terrorism is
increasing and needs to be countered as decisively as
possible. Unfortunately, over the past three years, all of
our attempts to get the Security Council to respond to
the crimes ofterrorists who are using chemical weapons
with increasing frequency have been unsuccessful
due to the opposition of our Western colleagues. In
typical fashion, they were completely indifferent to
the recent actions of terrorists in Mosul, and that fact
was confirmed by reputable and impartial international
organizations, such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross.

I now draw the Council's attention to the Secretary-
General's statement. He called for a thorough inquiry
into what really happened in Khan Shaykhun. We
fully support that position. The investigation must be
comprehensive and objective. We must put an end to the
very poor practice ofinvestigation from afar, often based
on information that is posted on the Internet or taken
from neighbouring countries - used even by the Fact-
finding Mission. That information is questionable and
very difficult to prove. Any investigative body, including
the Fact-finding Mission, must actually visit the site
where the alleged use of chemical weapons occurred
in Syria, while using a broad range of methodologies,
such as taking samples and consulting with medical
and legal forensic experts. The need for such a serious
and professional approach was specifically mentioned
in the fourth and fifth reports of the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (see S/2016/ 888 and S/2017/13l), in paragraphs 49 and 11, respectively.

I once again stress that the team of investigators
must be truly international, in line with the principles
of broad geographical representation as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. In its current form,
the composition of the Fact-finding Mission in no way
respects that foundational principle. The conclusions
of the Fact-finding Mission cannot possibly be
called impartial.

There is one other thing I would like to talk
about, which is, once again, the utterly irresponsible,
disrespectful, unprofessional statement by the British
Ambassador. It can be explained by the fact that
they are doing nothing - nothing - to normalize
the situation in Syria. Actually, they are doing one
thing - dumping provocative draft resolutions in
the Security Council - and, by the way, openly
putting unilateral pressure on the Joint Investigative
Mechanism in an attempt to extract the conclusions that
he needs. Just in general, Mr. Rycroft's pronouncements
about China and Russia cross a diplomatic line that is
simply unacceptable and must not be repeated. We are
not going to sit here and listen to it any more. Better
that they should tell us what Britain is doing to solve
the situation in Syria. They keep asking questions of
Russia and China. Do they feel any such responsibility
with regard to the issue? No, they do not.

This is all about an obsession with regime change.
That is what is preventing the Security Council from
working constructively. It is they who are undermining
the Council through their attempts to use Council
decisions to give their illegitimate plans a veneer of
legitimacy. But it is not working, and it will never work.
It is time to change that broken record. Nor should they
attempt yet again to set us against the peoples of Syria,
Iraq and other nations of the Middle East. I thought that
British diplomacy had long ago abandoned such crude
tactics. They should think very hard about that.

I reiterate once again that we will never be able to
resolve the Syrian conflict or any other global problems,
including that of aggressive terrorism, without genuine
united effort. We are ready to work together on that.

