Mr. Tilegen (Kazakhstan): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) group in
New York.

Our open debate today comes at a time when
the situation in the Middle East, and the occupied
Palestinian territory in particular, is becoming
increasingly unstable. Israel's military occupation of
Arab lands, its flagrant violations of international law
and its denial of the national rights and aspirations of
the Palestinian people remain major causes of unrest in
the region and pose a serious challenge for this body.

The OIC group affirms that the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East requires firm
and prompt action by the Security Council to ensure the
full compliance of Israel, the occupying Power, with
its legal obligations and commitments, and to end its
military occupation. At the same time, the international
community has a special responsibility to assist the
Palestinian people in realizing their national rights
to self-determination, sovereignty and independent
statehood in the territory occupied by Israel since 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as to help find
a just solution for the plight of Palestinian refugees, in
line with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

Prospects for peace and justice in the region are
challenged by Israel's colonial and discriminatory
policies in Arab-occupied lands. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to illegally build settlements in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, construct the
apartheid wall, restrict Palestinians' access to places
of worship, escalate acts of violence by fanatic settlers
against civilian Palestinians, deny the free movement
of people and goods, and confiscate Palestinian homes
and lands. Such violations of international law have
become a daily practice that systematically undermines
prospects for the two-State solution and destabilizes
the region.

Similarly, Israeli illegal practices in East
Jerusalem - including settlement construction,
excavations underneath the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the
depopulation of East Jerusalem of its indigenous
Palestinian citizens, the illegal confiscation of
Palestinian properties, the isolation of East Jerusalem
from its Palestinian environs and the alteration of its
demographic fabric and character - have reached
alarming rates. These illegal Israeli practices are
flagrant violations of international law and pose a
challenge to the international community.

The OIC group reaffirms the centrality of the cause
of Palestine for the entire Islamic world, and stresses
the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic character of occupied
East Jerusalem, as well as the need to fully respect the
sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy places therein. The
OIC group also reaffirms that East Jerusalem remains
an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied
by Israel since 1967, and that its illegal annexation by
Israel continues to be rejected and unrecognized by the
international community.

Muslims will never tolerate Israel's aggressions
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, one of the most sacred
Islamic sites. Israel's continuing acts of aggression
against Muslim and Christian holy sites in East
Jerusalem could have serious repercussions on regional
and international peace and security. The United
Nations therefore has a special responsibility to pressure
Israel to put an end to those aggressions and to respect
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.

We wish to affirm that an international consensus to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle
East conflict requires the enforcement of international
law and the implementation of international legal
resolutions. At this important juncture, acknowledging
and fully supporting Palestinian State-building efforts,
meeting our obligations and maintaining our political
will and financial commitments to the Palestinian
Authority are therefore of special significance.

I wish to reaffirm the full support and solidarity of
the OIC with the Palestinian people in their endeavour
to regain their legitimate and inalienable national rights,
including the rights of return, self-determination and
the establishment of the independent Palestinian State
on their national soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

