Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eide for his briefing and our colleague, the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. I would like to assure the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of our full
support for the approach he has developed. Like him,
we wish to express our confidence in the commitment
of the international community. We should not be
discouraged and we should not blame ourselves. We
need to engage in passionate, determined action. There
is no alternative, in any event.

UNAMA has been given a key role by the
Security Council, including in the coordination of
civilian aid and it is essential that all international
actors actively support that coordinating role. It is also
necessary to give UNAMA the resources necessary to
enable it to fully carry out its mandate.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/617) indicates, developments in the situation
over the past few months show varying results. Real
progress must be acknowledged, in particular the
efforts to strengthen the Afghan National Army and the
launching of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, as well as some progress in the area of
economic and social development. We must also
acknowledge the progress made in the fight against
drug trafficking, reflected in the reduction in opium
production and the enhanced international cooperation
in preventing access to chemical precursors for heroin
production. As Mr. Eide pointed out, the recent
ministerial reshuffle shows that President Karzai truly
wants to make his Government more effective.

We also see, however, the persistence of
disturbing elements regarding, for example, the
security situation, the risk of humanitarian crisis this
winter and the human rights situation. The problem of
good governance, in particular the fight against
corruption, remains a challenge that will require
increased efforts on the part of the Afghan Government
in addition to the measures taken over recent months.

We too are concerned with regard to the issue of
civilian victims. As Mr. Kai Eide emphasized, civilian
casualties result mainly from anti-Government
activities. France has very strict rules of engagement,
but we are aware of the need to continue the efforts
undertaken by the international forces to avoid any
civilian victims. We are determined to work resolutely
towards that end with our allies and partners.

The difficulties and challenges faced by
Afghanistan should not obscure the progress made
during the past seven years. I wish to stress in
particular the 25 per cent drop in the infant mortality
rate, the 6 million children - one third of whom are

girls - who are now attending school and the
establishment and continued strengthening of Afghan
democratic institutions.

The Afghan people clearly expressed their choice
for democracy and stability in 2004 and 2005, and we
must help them to prepare for the upcoming elections
in 2009 and 2010, which will be crucial to completing
the democratic process.

We share the sense of urgency expressed by the
Special Representative. The international community
and Afghanistan have a strategy defined in the
Afghanistan Compact, which was adopted in 2006 in
London, which has now been extended by the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and the
road map that was drawn up during the international
Paris Conference. The road map is based on a renewed
partnership around mutual commitments aimed at
better taking into account the specific needs of the
population. That is a fundamental point, because the
involvement of the international community will be
judged in part by the improvement of the situation of
the population, which will also enable us to determine
whether we have attained our objective. In addition to
the initial individual institutional steps that have
already been announced, such as the reorganization of
the Afghan Government and reform of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB), decisive
measures must be taken quickly by the international
community and by the Afghan authorities to implement
their commitments. The latter will be called upon to
share a greater degree of responsibility in the
reconstruction and development process.

Speaking for the presidency of the European
Union, I wish to reiterate here that Afghanistan and the
United Nations can count on the unswerving support of
France and the European Union. In conformity with the
framework established by the Council of the European
Union in May 2008, we will continue to play a major
role in the mobilization of the international community
in support of Afghanistan.

The European Union is the second-largest
financial contributor to the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. It contributes, in particular, to building
the capacity of the Afghan police, which is a priority
for the international community, especially through the
European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan, whose
numbers there will be significantly increased. On the
military front, I wish to recall that 25 of the European
Union member States are participating in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
together account for nearly half of the total personnel.

A lasting solution to the crisis in Afghanistan
cannot be only military; it must also be political, first
and foremost. Our objective is to help the Government
to establish the structures of a democratic State which
will ensure the security of its citizens, respect human
rights and promote economic and social development.
That will require a comprehensive approach based on
better integration of the civilian and military
components. We encourage development by the Afghan
authorities of a national political dialogue that is as
broad as possible and at all levels. That dialogue
should lead to respect for the constitution and
obviously cannot include the proponents of jihad,
whom we must continue to fight until their defeat.

As stressed in particular by Mr. Eide and the
Permanent Representative of Italy, stability in
Afghanistan is intrinsically linked to the stability of the
region. It is therefore essential to develop a
coordinated approach at the regional level. France is
prepared to contribute to that actively, as Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, has
announced, through the proposed organization of a
regional conference bringing together Afghanistan and
its neighbours, as an extension of the work done during
the international Conference in Support of Afghanistan.

We welcome the strengthening of cooperation
between Afghanistan and its partners to fight threats
such as those of terrorism and drug trafficking, and the
improved relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan,
whose new democratic Government has shown its
determination to fight terrorism.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm emphatically the
resolute commitment of France, both within ISAF and
alongside the Special Representative, to support their
efforts to ensure that the Afghan people, as soon
possible and as they well deserve, will find the path to
peace, security and development.

