Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all, Madam, very sincerely to thank you for
having convened and for presiding over the fifth debate
on this extremely important topic. Algeria is gratified
that the United Nations system has taken a holistic
approach to combat illegality and silence and that it has
mobilized to safeguard the rights and the well-being of
children, as exemplified by the outstanding work of
Mr. Olara Otunnu.

Today's debate is taking place at a time when the
momentum created some years ago by the Security
Council is reaching the critical stage of the
implementation and follow-up of its earlier resolutions.
The fact that the Security Council regularly discusses
this topic is evidence of the high level of interest that
we attach to this issue, which is at the point of
convergence between international peace and security
and human rights. This twofold connection reminds us
that we have a duty to be vigilant and an obligation to
succeed.

To that end, we have today at our disposal a
framework of binding rules that includes many
international, universal and regional instruments on the
protection of the rights of the child, which are
complemented by the Geneva Conventions.

Regrettably, the qualitative progress that has been
made at the normative level and with respect to the
commitments made, in particular during the special
session of the General Assembly on children, has not
yet had the expected results. This is clearly stated by
the Secretary-General, who emphasizes that the general
situation of children remains grave and preoccupying.
The extent of the tragedy is highlighted by the long list
of violations and grave abuses committed against
children in situations of armed conflict. The
multidimensional nature of this tragedy, which affects
the most vulnerable sector of humanity, reminds us that
there is an urgent need for the Security Council
effectively to discharge its responsibilities.

It also emphasizes the need to promote an
approach that integrates, from the conceptual point of
view and with respect to the practical follow-up of our
resolutions, all issues related to the rights of children in
armed conflict, in order to arrive at an integrated and
comprehensive solution.

When dealing with this question, we cannot
overlook the underlying causes that lead to the
emergence and development of conflicts, of which
children are the primary victims. That is why this
question cannot be addressed separately from the issue
of conflict prevention, which requires, inter alia,

ensuring a number of rights - to education, social
protection, health care and a wholesome natural
environment - which all are standards that should

inspire and guide all productive efforts to promote and
protect the rights of the child.

Algeria welcomes and encourages the integration
of the dimension of the protection of the rights of the
child in peacekeeping missions, which represent an
indispensable element of the follow-up and monitoring
effort.

It is also essential that the follow-up and
reporting system be based on credible information and
that it attach priority to the most serious violations,
such as the recruitment of children, massacres and
mutilations, sexual violence, the use of children for the
illicit exploitation of natural resources, abductions, and
the denial to children of access to humanitarian
assistance.

In order to be fully effective, the follow-up
system must be based on reports that are precise,
objective and supplemented by appropriate measures.

To that end, the United Nations system has an
effective protection and monitoring system that
includes treaty-based mechanisms and special
procedures, whose recognized expertise and effective
potential must be part of a synergetic process that is
complemented by the indispensable contribution of
United Nations bodies with a presence in the field. In
that context, the role of Mr. Otunnu's Office is
essential in providing leadership, coordinating follow-
up and disseminating information. Non-governmental
organizations and local structures of civil society also
deserve praise for the role they play.

The relevant recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General ensure that the nascent
system of implementation is long-lasting and
irreversible. Algeria welcomes the adaptability and
flexibility planned for the system, ensuring that each
situation receives individual treatment. Its evolving
nature is the best guarantee of its effectiveness.

Algeria supports the principle of systematically
incorporating children's issues into peace negotiations
and agreements, making them essential components of
post-conflict programmes. Algeria also supports
finalizing an effective monitoring and vigilance
mechanism in which non-governmental organizations
would have a role to play.

Algeria supports the updating of the lists and
hopes to see the inclusion of specific situations of
children living under foreign occupation. In that
regard, Algeria encourages all appropriate measures to
be taken when the parties have not made progress or
have not made sufficient progress in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. However, such measures must be
targeted in such a way that the children do not suffer
directly from their negative effects. The illicit trade in
natural resources and small arms also calls for
appropriate measures to be taken.

Monitoring and the imposition of justified
sanctions will suffice only if they are strengthened by
complementary parallel measures. We believe the most
important of such measures is an increase in the
resources allocated to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes through planned, predictable
and adequate financing.

The need to be effective requires close support -
so necessary for long-term undertakings such as the
present one. In that regard, Algeria particularly
supports the growing involvement of regional
organizations and urges support for their activities. The
African Commission on Human and People's Rights,
which deserves credit for being the first to outlaw the
recruitment of children under the age of 18, can fully
play that role of close support once its means for action
have been strengthened.

In conclusion, let me say that today's debate
touches on the very essence of human dignity, which is
not only a value shared by all but also an essential
foundation of our Organization. It therefore requires of
us the adoption of a global approach based on
solidarity. It is through such an approach, which draws
its inspiration from the universal need for peace,
democracy and development, that we will be able to
"give the world to the children", to use the beautiful
expression of the great poet Nazim Hikmet.

