Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. There is an urgent need to find a political solution to the crisis in Yemen. We are concerned about the continuing clashes there, particularly in Ma'rib. We call on the Yemeni parties to put an end to all hostilities, and particularly on the Houthis to stop attacks in Ma'rib province. Attacks carried out by the Houthis in Saudi territory must also cease immediately. We deplore the ongoing clashes observed in the South. The Riyadh agreement must be fully implemented. Discussions on the formation of a new Government must be brought to a successful conclusion, as it is an important step for the resumption of political talks. The Yemeni parties must urgently engage in dialogue with the Special Envoy and reach agreement on the draft joint statement he has proposed. That should enable a ceasefire, in accordance with resolution 2532 (2020), confidence-building measures and the resumption of negotiations to reach an _ inclusive political agreement. In that context, it is also essential that the Stockholm Agreement be fully implemented, including with regard to the payment of wages, in the light of the deteriorating situation in Al-Hudaydah. The humanitarian situation, particularly the worsening of food security, remains tragic. The spectre of famine looms once again. The figures presented by Mark Lowcock speak for themselves. In addition to the ongoing conflict, the coronavirus disease pandemic, the economic and humanitarian crises and the locust crisis every day increase the number of people living with food insecurity. We must therefore do everything we can collectively to avert such a disaster. Even as needs are increasing, the humanitarian response plan remains underfunded and many humanitarian programmes are on _ hold. The humanitarian response must be commensurate with the needs. All parties must ensure unhindered humanitarian access to all vulnerable people. In thatregard, the Houthis' decision to close the Sana'a airport to United Nations and humanitarian flights is totally unacceptable. We call on them to reverse that decision. With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we call on the Houthis to authorize access, without delay or preconditions, to the United Nations expert mission. An oil leak would have catastrophic consequences. Urgent action is therefore necessary. Finally, we cannot repeat often enough that the protection of civilians must be a top priority. Respect for international humanitarian law is non-negotiable. France will remain fully mobilized for a_ political solution in Yemen. More broadly, the French authorities are fully committed to the search for a solution that would lead to regional de-escalation.
