Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his update and his hard work over recent
months. I also thank Ambassador Saikal for his
comments this morning.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains a critical asset for the
Security Council and the Afghan Government. We look
forward to ensuring that its comprehensive range of
support continues. Today I would like to briefly touch
on three key areas, namely, the ongoing toll on the
civilian population, actions that must be taken to ensure
economic and political progress, and the importance of
the Council's action to renew the mandate of UNAMA,
which continues to play a critical role in guiding the
Government through this difficult period.

The briefing of Special Representative Haysom
once again underscored the fact that this conflict
continues to exact a significant toll on the civilian
population. The year 2015 was especially difficult,
with anti-Government elements' brutal tactics and the
use of indiscriminate violence pushing the number of
civilian casualties to record-setting levels. Hundreds of
thousands of able-bodied citizens have fled the troubled
nation to seek asylum elsewhere. We encourage the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces to
continue to develop its operational capacity and do its
best to limit civilian casualties.

As the Special Representative also noted, perhaps
none have endured more suffering than the most
vulnerable Afghans - children - who sadly comprised
a significant number of last year's casualties and who
continue to be exploited by anti-Government elements.

As the security of Afghanistan is so closely linked
to the nation's economic and political stability and
progress, the international community must continue
to provide its full support to the Afghan Government to
deliver on its ambitious reform agenda, led by President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah.

Governance and development remain critical
elements for stability and progress; therefore, we
encourage the Afghan Government to continue to fill
key leadership positions in Government, follow through
on its Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework reform commitments and make
progress towards electoral reform. We welcome the
recommendations announced by the Special Electoral
Reform Commission, as they represent an important
step in strengthening public confidence in the electoral
process and in democratic institutions.

We continue to believe that outreach from the
Government to all major segments of society is critical,
as those who feel excluded are more likely to undermine
the National Unity Government and foster greater
instability. Accordingly, we commend and strongly
support the Afghan Government's efforts to foster a
peace and reconciliation process with the Taliban and
other armed groups. Moreover, we welcome the support
from regional partners to advance this Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned initiative. We will continue to work
through the Quadrilateral Coordination Group to do
our part to advance the peace process.

On the economic front, we welcome President
Ghani's efforts to increase regional connectivity. We
also commend the Government for its significantly
increased revenue collection in 2015. Slow economic
growth remains a serious concern, and we encourage
the Government to take steps to improve the investment
climate for both foreign and domestic businesses.

In 2016, the international community will have
an opportunity to renew security and development
assistance for Afghanistan at the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization Summit in Warsaw in July and
at the Brussels ministerial meeting on development
in October. We encourage nations to sustain their
commitments for financial and security assistance
through the transformation decade.

I would like to conclude with a few words
about the importance of UNAMA. We agree with
the Tripartite Review Commission's assessment
that Afghanistan continues to demand significant
international assistance; it is essential for the country
to achieve political and economic stability and security.
UNAMA is representative of our common resolve to be
Afghanistan's partner. With the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate, the Council will once again demonstrate
its collective commitment to Afghanistan and to the
Afghan people.

We thank Special Representative Haysom again and
reaffirm our support for his ongoing efforts to ensure
UNAMA effectively discharges its mandate, namely,
exercising good offices, promoting human rights and
the rule of law, coordinating humanitarian assistance
and donor support, and countering narcotics.

In the face of tremendous obstacles, the Afghan
Government has made great strides towards its stated
goals; however, there is much work to be done. The
Government's continued focus on the tasks ahead
remains imperative. The international community
must continue to buttress Afghanistan's efforts with
technical, financial and moral support.

