Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting Ambassador Tanin and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2011/l20*) and the Special
Representative for his insightful briefing. We remain
strongly supportive and appreciative of the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) under the effective leadership of the Special
Representative.

At the last Council meeting on Afghanistan, I said
that 2010 had been an important year and a milestone
for Afghanistan. Today, I would like to add that 2011
will be crucial. According to the decisions taken at the
London and Kabul Conferences and at the NATO
Lisbon summit, this is the year that Afghanistan and its
international partners will move steadily forward
towards a transition to Afghan ownership and
responsibility. We are encouraged by the steps taken so
far and look forward to the official announcement by
President Karzai next week of the launch of the first
tranche of the transition to Afghan-led security, which
is to be finalized in 2014.

While we are optimistic, we are also realistic
with respect to the fact that, given the challenges
facing us, the transition is not going to be an easy
process. We appreciate the results already achieved by
the Afghan authorities in the implementation of the
Kabul process and urge them to push forward to bring
about more tangible outcomes. A great deal remains to
be done. However, we are confident of success as long
as Afghanistan and its international partners are
committed to working together. We will ensure that this
gradual and conditions-based process is irreversible by
exerting concerted and sustained efforts in conformity
with the priorities and requirements of the Afghan
Government. I must also once again emphasize that the
transition does not mean an end to the international
community's commitments in Afghanistan. It has been
made clear that transition is not an exit and that the
international community will continue to be engaged in
Afghanistan beyond 2014.

This is also evidenced by the readiness and
dedication of the United Nations to assist Afghan
authorities and to support the Kabul process through a
constructive, comprehensive, transparent, practically
focused and complementary partnership. We are
confident that the United Nations and its Mission in
Afghanistan, under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura, are capable of playing the critical role
expected of them if provided with the necessary tools.
We therefore endorse a strong mandate for UNAMA
that is in accordance with the principles of Afghan
leadership and ownership.

While we work towards a sustained and credible
transfer of responsibility in the areas of security,
governance and development, the ultimate goal of
lasting peace, prosperity and stability in Afghanistan
will be achieved only by parallel efforts in the political
process. We are pleased to see a consensus on the fact

1 1-26621
that military means alone will not guarantee a
sustainable resolution of the conflict. It will certainly
take time and dedicated effort, but 2011 will be crucial
also in making credible progress towards reintegration
and a political reconciliation which embraces all
segments of society. This process should be Afghan-
led, and we are pleased to see that Afghan authorities
are indeed taking the lead. In that respect, we are
supportive of the efforts of the High Peace Council and
of the steps taken to implement the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. We also encourage
Afghanistan's regional and international partners to
continue to provide the necessary support to those
efforts as requested by Afghanistan.

While the transition to Afghan ownership and
responsibility is progressing with the support of the
international community, Turkey has been taking steps
to ensure that its contributions to this effort continue in
an effective manner. In this vein, we have been
concentrating our efforts mainly on two levels. At the
national level, we will intensify our ongoing efforts
towards the development, reconstruction, capacity-
building, education and training of the Afghan national
police and army in line with the needs and
requirements of the Afghan Government.

At the regional level, proceeding from the belief
that the resolution of many of the challenges
Afghanistan faces requires, first and foremost, the
constructive support of its neighbours and regional
partners, we will strive to continue our work towards
regional cooperation, confidence- building and
development. The year 2010 has been a busy and
constructive one in setting down the fundamentals of a
common vision for this purpose. It is our firm intention
to take the regional dimension forward by holding
another regional conference in Turkey in the fall. We
will be consulting with Afghanistan and the regional
countries in the process of preparing for that
conference, which be will aimed at furthering the
existing regional vision as based on the principles set
out in the Statement adopted at the "Heart of Asia"
conference. At the same time, we are convinced of the
need to bridge the efforts made at the regional and
international levels. Towards that end, we will continue
to have intensive consultations with all relevant actors,
making use of all available opportunities, in various
formats.

11-2662]
In conclusion, let me emphasize that Turkey's
commitment to Afghanistan is long-term and will
continue as long as required by the Afghans.

