Mr. Annabi: I should like to begin this briefing on
the situation concerning East Timor with an expression of
deep appreciation to the Governments that participated in
the donor conference held in Tokyo on 16-17 December.
That conference was, in our view, very successful. Pledges
were made amounting to a total of $522 million, covering
humanitarian assistance, administration and capacity-
building for self-government and reconstruction and
development. The timely disbursement of these funds will
ensure that the United Nations will have the resources
required for the large and complex tasks it has undertaken
in East Timor. We are most grateful for this support, and
I think a special word of appreciation is due to the
Government of Japan, which made a significant
contribution to the success of the conference, both as host
of the conference and as a major donor.

The preparations for the Tokyo conference involved
exceptionally close cooperation between the United
Nations and ita agencies and programmes, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and, of course, the
representatives of the people of East Timor.

Turning to the security situation, the situation has
remained largely stable. There have been isolated cases of
verbal and sometimes physical abuse of returning refugees
on the grounds that they had supported autonomy rather
than independence during the popular consultation, but no
serious casualties have resulted. The fighters of
FALANTIL remain in their cantonment area at Aileu,
from where some minor incidents of indiscipline have
been reported.

The military observers of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) are
deployed throughout the territory and have also set up 11
liaison posts on both sides of the border with West Timor
to ensure appropriate liaison between the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET) and the Indonesian armed
forces and to facilitate the return of refugees.

The planning for the establishment of UNTAET's
military component is proceeding in close consultation
with INTERFET. The transition from INTERFET to the
United Nations is to take place during the month of
February, from the beginning to the end of that month, on
the basis of an agreed concept that will ensure that a
strong operational capacity will be maintained throughout.
While much of UNTAET's force will come from
INTERFET, a number of important assets will need to be
brought in from abroad. These include, in particular,
engineering units and helicopter support. The Force
Commander, as the Secretary-General has announced, will
be an officer from the Philippines and the Deputy Force
Commander will be an officer from Australia.

Turning now to the return of refugees and the
humanitarian situation, globally the humanitarian situation
has improved, although it remains very difficult in the
wake of the extensive destruction that took place
following the announcement of the results of the popular
consultation. The coordination of humanitarian relief
activities among United Nations agencies, government

 

agencies and non- governmental organizations has been very
effective.
Ensuring the voluntary return of refugees remains a
top priority of UNTAET. As of yesterday, close to 120,000
refugees had returned. Despite the agreement between
INTERFET and the Indonesian forces, which was reached
on 22 November under the auspices of Ambassador
Holbrooke, there has been no significant increase in the rate
of return. Several factors, I think, may account for this; one
of them is continued intimidation and misinforming of
refugees in West Timor by militias; another is the lack of
infrastructure, aggravated by the rainy season, which may
be acting as a deterrent. In addition, there are indications
that the number of refugees still in West Timor do not
foresee, for various reasons, or do not wish, for various
reasons, to return in the immediate future to East Timor.

Relations between UNTAET and the East Timorese
are very good. UNTAET is administering East Timor in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1272 (1999),
in close cooperation and consultation with the Timorese, as
envisaged under that resolution. To this end, UNTAET has
established the National Consultative Commission of East
Timor, which will be the primary mechanism for
cooperation with the East Timorese. The Commission is
chaired by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative and Transitional
Administrator, and will be composed of 15 members. Seven
of them are designated by the Council of National
Resistance of East Timor (CNRT), a broad coalition that
favoured independence; Mr. Jose Alexandre Gusmao, also
known as Xanana Gusmao, and Mr. Jose Ramos Horta,
who returned to East Timor on 1 December after 24 years
in exile, are the acknowledged leaders of the CNRT. Three
members of the Commission are designated by political
parties that supported autonomy and one by the Catholic
Church, and four will represent UNTAET.

The first meeting of the National Consultative
Commission was held on 11 December, and the next
meeting is scheduled to take place on 28 or 29 December.
The Council will create sectoral committees that will
comprise East Timorese and international experts. Members
of the Consultative Commission attended the donor
conference in Tokyo as part of the United Nations
delegation, including Mr. Xanana Gusmao, who addressed
that meeting.

While two of the seats allocated to the pro-autonomy
parties have yet to be filled, the fact that their participation
was readily agreed to by the CNRT is a positive sign as
regards prospects for national reconciliation. There have
also been meetings between CNRT representatives and
pro-autonomy groups abroad. Another positive
development was the meeting on 12 December between
Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Joao Tavares, a militia leader,
and the subsequent announcement by the latter of the
militia's disbandment.

The establishment of good relations between East
Timor and Indonesia is also high on UNTAET's agenda.
At the end of November, Mr. Gusmao visited Jakarta at
the invitation of President Wahid. Mr. Gusmao was
warmly welcomed by President Wahid and other senior
Indonesian officials, who assured him of their
determination to build friendly relations with East Timor.
They also undertook to assist in a number of areas,
including the release of all remaining East Timorese
political prisoners, and I am happy to report that this has
occurred since then.

Mr. Vieira de Mello also visited Jakarta earlier this
month, where he met with President Wahid and other
senior officials. They discussed, among other things, the
establishment of an Indonesian representation in Dili, the
resumption of flights between Indonesia and East Timor
by Indonesian carriers and future commercial links and
cooperation on banking and financial services. It was also
agreed, subject to a decision by the Indonesian Cabinet,
to constitute a working group with UNTAET
participation, which is to work out measures to end militia
harassment of East Timorese refugees still in West Timor.
The Secretary-General has invited President Wahid to
visit East Timor, and President Wahid has accepted and
indicated that he will visit at an early opportunity.

Turning to governance and public administration,
UNTAET has now established a skeleton administration
in East Timor, including an effective presence in each of
the 13 districts of East Timor. The immediate priorities
for the administration are the restoration of essential
infrastructure, the provision of basic social services, the
recruitment of civil servants and the revival of commerce
and trade. A total of 275 civilian police are deployed
throughout the territory, and UNTAET is making every
effort to begin the training of T imorese police by the
beginning of February.

INTERFET, together with United Nations police,
continues to uncover the bodies of persons who were
killed during the period leading up to and after the ballot
on 30 August. Steps have been taken to record and secure
the evidence for further investigation once the requisite

 

expertise and facilities are available. The United Nations is
working with several Governments that have offered
assistance. The Special Rapporteurs on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions and on the question of
torture and violence against women visited East Timor from
4 to 10 November. The international commission of inquiry
established by the Commission on Human Rights visited
East Timor from 25 November to 8 December. Both groups
are expected to report to the General Assembly in the near
future.

I wish to acknowledge with appreciation the assistance
of those Governments which have given us the names of
experts for the broad range of functions that UNTAET has
to carry out in East Timor. However, there are still
significant gaps in the staffing of UNTAET, particularly in
the fields of labour and social affairs. We are also searching
for an appropriate official to serve as the ombudsperson.

UNTAET will be working with the East Timorese
civil servants, whose recruitment will begin in the near
future. The Timorese have agreed that the civil service,
which used to be subsidized from Jakarta, should be much
reduced to a size that East Timor can afford and can itself
sustain once UNTAET leaves. UNTAET is in the process
of setting up a commission, composed mainly of East
Timorese, to deal with the appointment of civil servants and
to determine salaries and other conditions of employment.

