Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the Swedish
delegation for having convened this open debate, and
also to congratulate it on assuming its mandate in the
Security Council.

Argentina is convinced that, in order to achieve
sustainable peace, prevention and peacebuilding
activities must be included not just in the post-conflict
phase but also before, during and immediately after
conflicts. For that reason, my country has for many years
supported the adoption of a comprehensive approach
that tackles the deep-rooted causes of conflict through
the strengthening of the rule of law, the promotion of
sustained and sustainable economic growth, poverty
eradication, social development, the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights, including
ensuring that the needs of all sectors of the population
are always taken into consideration. Such an approach
covers activities aimed at preventing the outbreak,
exacerbation, continuation and recurrence of conflict.
It does so by addressing the deep-rooted causes and
by supporting parties to conflict so that they can put
an end to hostilities, enable national reconciliation and
move towards recovery, rebuilding and development.

The United Nations system is endowed with
a broad array of tools in the areas of preventive
diplomacy and mediation. Nevertheless, as was made
glaringly clear during the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, there is a need to strengthen those tools
and to achieve greater coherence in our prevention
strategies. Each of the organs of the United Nations
has a specific responsibility and function, mandated
by the Charter of the United Nations, with regard to
prevention and the broad concept of peacebuilding.
The General Assembly and the Security Council,
as well as the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, deal with issues relating
to prevention. Regrettably, experience has shown us
that the preventive action carried out by each of those
bodies is often fragmented, and there is a lack of a
single overarching vision to shape the efforts made. If
we wish to enhance our prevention capacity, we need
to craft concrete strategies, notjust so as to ensure that
there is early warning of conflict but also to encourage
early action. Emphasis must be placed on preventing
and not just mitigating or resolving conflict. We must
give priority to political ~ not military - solutions.

Coordinated work between the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Secretary-General is vital
in order to boost the capacity of the United Nations in
thia area. The Secretary-General has a key role to play
in achieving greater coherence in conflict prevention.
It is for that reason that Argentina welcomes and
supports the proposals of the Secretary-General aimed
at strengthening the prevention agenda and at giving
fresh impetus to diplomacy for peace. We believe that
the proposal of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
mediation and good offices agenda of his Office is very
appropriate. We must not lose sight of the fact that, for
those efforts to be successful, all parties to a dispute or
conflictmust cooperate fully with the Secretary-General
as he seeks to fulfil his mandate. That would allow us
to bolster the role of the United Nations as an honest
and mutual broker. It is crucial that we deliver greater
consistency in the actions taken by the Secretariat and
the United Nations system in terms of prevention and
peacebuilding. Putting an end to fragmentation and,
in many instances, to the duplication and overlapping
of efforts must be one of our priorities. And it is for
that reason that we commend the fact that one of the
roles of the new Special Adviser on Policy will be to
seek out and deliver greater systemic coherence and
consistency among the policies, tools and operations
linked to prevention.

A comprehensive preventive approach necessarily
includes full national involvement in the process of
peacebuilding. The participation of Governments and
the various political and social actors of Member States

involved in those processes is essential. Such national
involvement must be encouraged by the United Nations
and by other international actors, who can support and
facilitate that process, but not lead it.

There is also much to be done at the regional level. We
must continue pursuing actions that will deliver peace
in concert with regional and subregional organizations,
which are crucial allies in the development of strategies
conducive to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
In the Americas, I think it worth pointing out the role
that could be played by the Organization of American
States and other subregional organizations, such as the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
the Union of South American Nations and the Southern
Common Market.

The allocation of greater resources to prevention
will contribute to avoiding the outbreak of new conflicts
and the recurrence of old ones. That is the only way
to save lives and to protect the progress that we have
made in terms of sustainable development and to avoid
having to devote untold resources in the future to
alleviating the aftermath of conflict. Argentina believes
that peacebuilding activities must be underpinned by
predictable and sustainable financing. For that reason,
we will continue to support the recommendation
that the Peacebuilding Fund should be allocated an
appropriate sum drawn from the contributions of
individual Member States, which should be established
by the budget of the Organization.

Finally, I would like to highlight that, as a country
committed to the purposes and principles of the
Charter, Argentina reiterates the resolute concern of
its foreign policy and its diplomatic action to support
conflict prevention, the sustaining of peace, the rule of
law and human rights.

