Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Your Excellency Mr. Davutoglu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, for presiding
over our meeting today. I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura
and the representative of Iraq for their briefings. This is
the last appearance of Mr. De Mistura in the Security
Council in his current capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I wish to avail myself of this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation for the major
contribution that he has made to aiding peace and
reconstruction in Iraq. I wish to thank him and wish him
every success in his future endeavours.

Earlier this year, provincial elections were held
successfully in Iraq. The Council of Representatives
laid down plans to accelerate its legislative work. The
Iraqi Security Forces have been assuming an increasing
level of responsibility for maintaining peace and
stability in the country. The progress that has been
achieved in all areas in Iraq deserves full recognition.
At the same time, we must not ignore the fact that Iraq
is still confronting multiple challenges in the political,
security, reconstruction, human rights and national
reconciliation areas. Bombing incidents still frequently
occur. The issue of disputed internal boundaries
remains unresolved. Economic recovery and
reconstruction need greater support from the
international community. Large numbers of refugees
and displaced persons need to return to their homes and
be resettled, and the rights and interests of women and
children must be more effectively secured.

The primary responsibility for the future and
destiny of Iraq rests with the Iraqi Government and
people themselves. For Iraq to have a good future all
the political leaders of Iraq must put the national
interest above all else and seek reconciliation,
consensus and cooperation. We support efforts by the
Iraqi Government to take measures conducive to the
stability, unity and development of the country, and we
hope that the Iraqi Government and the various parties
in the country can join in continuing to make good
progress in national reconciliation, development of
legislation, accelerated reconstruction and the
protection of human rights. We hope that the Kurdistan
regional Government and the parliamentary elections
will proceed smoothly and successfully.

Progress in the security and political fields can be
fully consolidated only by promoting economic and
social reconstruction. We appeal to the international
community to effectively honour its pledges of
assistance to Iraq and to help Iraq to accelerate its
reconstruction and development. We support reviewing
the priorities of the International Compact for Iraq in
the light of the needs of the current situation. We are
pleased to see that Iraq has been improving and
strengthening its relations with its neighbours in the
region.

Iraq's improvement of relations with regional
countries is conducive to its stability and
reconstruction and is also in the common interest of the
neighbouring regions. The international community
should acknowledge and continue to encourage and
support Iraqi cooperation with countries in the region
through multiple regional mechanisms and bilateral
initiatives.

Under the leadership of Mr. De Mistura, UNAMI
has achieved good results through gradual and focused
efforts on all fronts to implement its mandate under
resolution 1770 (2007). We expect UNAMI to continue
to strengthen cooperation with the Iraqi Government,
to provide assistance to key elections in Iraq, to make
reasonable and feasible recommendations with regard
to the political dialogue in Iraq and to push for greater
progress in Iraqi national reconciliation.

We also expect UNAMI to continue to coordinate
humanitarian assistance to Iraq, including creating the
necessary conditions for the return, resettlement and
integration of Iraqi refugees and displaced persons. We
also hope that UNAMI will provide greater assistance
to the Iraqi people in the area of human rights.

We support efforts by the United Nations to
continue to expand its presence and activities in Iraq in
the light of that country's needs. At the same time, we
appeal to the parties concerned to take effective
measures to enhance the safety and security of United
Nations personnel.

China supports Iraq's resumption of its
international status. We look forward to the Secretary-
General submitting a report pursuant to resolution 1859
(2008).

