Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I thank Japan in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for convening this important meeting.
We also thank the 14 Security Council members who
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060 and
recognized the urgency of this matter and the need
for serious follow-up and action in the light of the
recent provocative decision announced by the United
States of America, which is contrary to international
law and to United Nations resolutions regarding the
Holy City of Jerusalem. We are grateful to the Arab
Republic of Egypt for its efforts in leading the process
and introducing the draft resolution, as the sole Arab
member of the Council,.

The total rejection of the American decision and
the international consensus on Jerusalem are beyond
clear. The message today has been unequivocal: all
the relevant Security Council resolutions concerning
the status of the Holy City of Jerusalem and other
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967
are legally binding and must be respected, without
exception. They include resolution 2334 (2016), which
constitutes a road map and an established component of
international law, and which only reflects the reality of
the situation. The latest American decision regarding
Jerusalem lacks that sense of reality, as did its words
earlier this morning and this afternoon. They do not
accord with reality, and we unequivocally reject them
in their entirety.

Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly condemns
settlements, violence, and terror directed against
civilians. It calls for efforts to promote peace. It is
entirely wrong to say that it is the implementation of
international law, not the building of illegal settlements,
that stands in the way of bringing about peace. It is a
farce when the Security Council and its resolutions
and international law, rather than the illegal stance of
the occupying Power and its settlements, become the
problem - as we heard today from the representative
of a permanent member of the Council.

That was firmly reaffirmed in statements
by Governments and civil society organizations
throughout the world, as well as during the emergency
meeting of the Security Council on 8 December (see S/PV.8128), the resolutions of the Arab Ministeral
Council in Cairo on 9 December and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation summit meeting in Istanbul on
13 December. It was also reaffirmed by the position
taken by the African Union, among others, and the
overwhelming support demonstrated by Council
members with regard to today's draft resolution. The
veto stood in the way of the adoption of the latter,
but the will of the international community will find
another framework. The draft resolution reiterates that
any decisions intended to alter the character or status
of Jerusalem have no legal effect, are null and void and
must be rescinded, in compliance with resolutions of
the Security Council.

We appeal to all States to heed the call not to
establish diplomatic missions in the Holy City and not
to recognize any measures or actions in violation of the
relevant resolutions. We also call for the intensification
of international and regional efforts aimed at achieving
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution,
based on the relevant resolutions, international
legitimacy and the peace principles in order to end the
Israeli occupation of our occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

The result of the vote today is a demonstration
of the position of the international community. which
recognizes the sensitivity and specificity of the
situation of Jerusalem, as well as the Palestinian right
to the city. Yet, regrettably, one State has stood today in
opposition to the rest of the world on this long-standing
issue that has been universally respected - including
by the former United States Administration - since
1947. The only exception is Israel, the occupying
Power, which has flagrantly violated international law
and all relevant resolutions day after day and only acted
in total contempt of this Council.

The United States has chosen to disregard
international law and ignore international consensus
to side with Israeli occupation at the expense of our
rights and the just nature of our cause. With this veto,
the United States has missed an opportunity to rectify
its illegal decision with regard to the city of Jerusalem,
remaining on the wrong side of history. Nevertheless,
we reiterate that this American decision has no legal
effect on the character and status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem by any means.

However, this decision affects the status of the
United States as a peace broker and in fact underscores
its bias, undermining its role in any future peace process.
What we have heard today is totally biased in favour
of the occupying Power, rather than a neutral position
between us and the Israelis. It is indeed paradoxical
that, while we were awaiting a peace plan from the
United States, the Administration instead decided to
further obstruct peace and delay its realization. That
underscores yet again the failure of the old formulas.
Going forward, there should be a new mechanism,
apart from the old forumlas and the imperative of a
collective process.

The Security Council's resolutions are binding
and remain valid until their implementation. A veto
cannot negate adopted resolutions. No veto in the past
has been able to do so, and no veto in this era ever
will, either. It is truly paradoxical that the same State
casting its veto today asserts the Council's authority in
all other cases, demanding respect for resolutions on
every other issue aside from Palestine. When it comes
to Palestine, there is imbalance. We refuse to accept
that Palestine be the exception to every rule. The
international community has concurred, speaking in
one voice, insisting on respect for the applicable laws
and resolutions that are the core of the peaceful solution
to the Palestinian question.

The United States decision encourages Israel to
persist in its crimes against our Palestinian people
and to continue its occupation of our territory. No
rhetoric will hide that complacency in prolonging the
occupation. No veto can conceal those facts, nor can
it legitimize any provocative, unilateral decisions or
actions in violation of Security Council resolutions.

No one can deny that such provocations fuel
the unending cycle of tensions and ignite religious
sentiment among billions of Muslims and Christians
around the world. Everyone knows those actions
make peace more elusive and threaten to transform
this political and regional conflict into a devastating
religious conflict with grave consequences for regional
and international peace and security, benefiting only
the forces of extremism and terror.

We therefore caution once more against such
recklessness and call for full respect for the historic
status quo at the holy sites, including at the Haram
al-Sharif, and for the special custodial role of Jordan
in the protection of the Muslim and Christian holy
sites. We will continue all efforts and coordination in
that regard to ensure such protection and to rebuff all
provocations and illegal measures undermining the
historic status quo.

This illegal and irresponsible decision will change
nothing for the Palestinians. Jerusalem will always
remain the heart of Palestine. Our history, our culture,
our heritage and our religion as Muslims and Christians
are so attached to this city, so woven into it -the cradle
of civilization and land of the prophets.

East Jerusalem remains occupied and is an integral
part of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967. It
is the capital of the State of Palestine, as recognized by
the majority of States around the world. However, this
decision has permitted Israel to continue in the plotting
and scheming of its settlers to encroach on Palestinian
rights, rather than deterring Israel and compelling it to
respect international law to achieve peace and security.

Therefore, we once again call on all peace-loving
nations around the world to stand firm in support
for the rule of law and for the steadfast Palestinian
people defending their land, including Jerusalem, their
identity, holy sites and their natural place in history
and geography, and to oppose injustice, oppression
and subjugation.

In the coming days, while the world will be
celebrating Christmas and the birth of Jesus Christ,
lights will remain turned off in the land of Jesus Christ
and celebrations will not take place in Jerusalem,
Bethlehem or Nazareth. Joy has been stolen from us
by a decision that, in the name of realism, has denied
reality and violated the rights of an entire nation and
insulted the feelings of believers around the world.

Protests have erupted against this decision, not
only in Palestine but across the globe, in defence
of justice, freedom and dignity and in rejection of
colonialism and unilateralism. In Palestine, thousands
have demonstrated against the United States decision
and face killing, repression, arrest and oppression by
the Israeli occupying forces. Eleven Palestinians have
been killed, 3,500 wounded and hundreds arrested.
Five hundred of them were shot. Israel has also detained
hundreds of our people, including children.

We pray for the families of the martyrs. We wish
a speedy recovery for the wounded and freedom for
the detained. How many more lives will be sacrificed
before our people can finally enjoy the same rights as
those enjoyed by the rest of the world? We reiterate
that the arrogance of the occupying Power will only
serve to strengthen our determination to liberate our
land, achieve our independence and restore our rights
and dignity.

The time is past due for our people to achieve their
rights, including to self-determination, and to finally
live in freedom, dignity, peace and security in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, side by side with all peoples of the region
and the globe. We urge the Council to continue to
firmly stand on the side of right. Those in favour of
peace do not ratify illegal acts and measures; instead,
they uphold the rights of the Palestinian people, as
enshrined in international law and General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. They also recognize
the State of Palestine and stand in support of freedom,
which is the key to ensuring that peace will finally
prevail in the land.

