Mrs. Smith (Norway): Let me first thank Special
Representative Kubis for his briefing today and express
our firm support to him and the dedicated staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We welcome the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate to be adopted this week. The essence of that
mandate is political, not technical. As we gradually
transfer power from international to Afghan ownership,
UNAMA'S role as the guarantor of the integrity of the
transition process becomes indispensable. UNAMA
serves the purpose both of supporting the Afghan
Government and of empowering the Afghan people in
their tireless efforts to build a peaceful and democratic
future.
Good offices and political outreach in supporting
an inclusive, Afghan-led process for a political
settlement and monitoring human rights remain
essential to UNAMA's mandate. It is also vital that the
United Nations continue to promote the capacity of
Afghan electoral institutions and the integrity of future
electoral processes as the key to empowering
democratic institutions. Building robust electoral
institutions that can hold elections that meet
international standards remains a key area of reform. In
parallel to assisting with capacity-building and
promoting increased aid coherence in international
assistance, UNAMA should focus on supporting the
Afghan Government in becoming more accountable,
transparent and inclusive.

Today's debate takes place during an important
transition period for Afghanistan. The security
transition is progressing and will be reviewed at the
upcoming NATO Chicago summit on Afghanistan in
May. Well-performing Afghan security forces are a key
to stability and peace. Another equally important factor
is the ability of the Afghan Government to properly
perform its functions. Progress on good governance,
the rule of law and the protection of the human rights
of all Afghans is vital to a sustainable security
transition and a durable peace. Promoting the
accountability of Government institutions, including
separation of powers, will be necessary to build a
viable Afghan State.

Moving towards transition, it is equally important
that efforts to promote human rights also strengthen the
Afghan State's ability to fight impunity and protect the
rights of its citizens. It is also vital that the necessary
monitoring and watchdog functions of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, civil society
groups and free media are not undermined. In that
regard, we expect that the appointment process of the
new commissioners to the Commission will be
finalized shortly in a transparent and inclusive manner.
Afghan civil society has a crucial role to play, but the
Government should also improve its own institution-
building and internal cooperation.

Afghanistan needs a political settlement that
brings the insurgents and key political and social
groups, including civil society, on board to address the
root causes of the conflict. A political settlement will
not be viable unless it is supported by a majority of
Afghans across the political and social spectrum. In the
long run, the most sustainable basis for a peaceful
future is formed by a broadening of the political space.
The strengthening of political parties, civil society
groups and free media will be crucial, as will the
establishment of the rule of law and the fulfilment of
the demands of the Afghan people for justice.

Furthermore, all parties must respect the
achievements of the past decade, in particular
Afghanistan's international human rights obligations
and core principles enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution. Women's rights and the empowerment of
women should be critical elements of the peace
process, and must remain on the top of our agenda.
Violence against women remains a major challenge,
and the legal rights that Afghan women now enjoy
need to be protected through the transition. In that
regard, we welcome the Afghan Government's recent
publication of its first report to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women.

At the Tokyo Conference in July, we must make
progress on the development cooperation with the
Afghan Government by making tangible and
sustainable commitments based on Afghanistan's own
national priority programmes. Norway's development
assistance to Afghanistan is long-term and based on
mutual promises of governance reforms.

In conclusion, a peaceful and stable Afghanistan
depends upon good relations with its neighbours. We
therefore fully support the follow-up to the Istanbul
process and the regional confidence-building measures
that are being developed. Norway strongly encourages
Afghanistan and its neighbours to develop and expand
political, security and economic relations.

