The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

At the outset, I should like to express our
condolences and sympathy to the Governments and
the peoples of Japan and Ecuador. We are certain that
they will overcome their difficulties and rebuild their
countries as soon as possible.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and
we appreciate the efforts by the Secretariat and the
Secretary-General himself for advancing the peace
process in the Middle East.

The question of Palestine is the core of the Middle
East question and underpins peace in the Middle East.
It is the shared responsibility of the international
community to safeguard the legitimate interests of the
Palestinian people. At present, the situation between
Palestine and Israel is grim. Violent conflicts are on
the rise, the peace talks have come to an impasse, the
security situation has deteriorated, and humanitarian
disasters have intensified.

The conflict between Palestine and Israel poses
the danger of continuous escalation, with the spillover
effect also on the rise. A comprehensive and fair solution
to the Palestinian question is in the interests of all sides.
The international community should take swift action
and focus its efforts on the following aspects.

First, we must stay the right course: establishing an
independent State of Palestine and peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel. Establishing a Palestinian
State with full sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, is the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people as well as the key to
resolving the question of Palestine. Intra-Palestine
reconciliation could facilitate the establishment of the
State of Palestine.

Secondly, peace talks, as the only way forward,
must continue. If they stall, this could exacerbate
differences, incite hatred and drag Palestine and Israel
into a vicious circle of escalating violence in which
both sides would pay a heavy price. The use of force is
never a solution. The earlier the peace talks start, the
sooner the people of Palestine and Israel will benefit.
It is only by resuming negotiations at an early date
that it will be possible to achieve peace and stability
between Palestine and Israel and the region. This is in
the fundamental interests of both sides.

Thirdly, in promoting the peace process we must
abide by the principle of land for peace, the two-State
solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. These are important
outcomes achieved by the international community
following difficult negotiations and serve as important
guidance for advancing the peace process in the Middle
East. On this basis, all sides should stay the course and
help to promote a political solution.

Fourthly, both Palestine and Israel should take
specific steps to move the peace process forward.
Israel must first demonstrate its sincerity by taking
practical steps to stop its settlement activities, cease
the demolition of Palestinian properties and stop the
violence against innocent civilians. It should lift the
blockade on Gaza so as to create conditions conducive
to the resumption of talks. At the same time, the
legitimate security concerns of the States of the region
should also be respected.

Fifthly, in order to advance the peace process,
the international community should provide vital
guarantees. The international community recently
intensified its efforts to resolve the Palestinian question,
with new ideas and innovative thinking, including
creating an international support group, convening
an international peace conference on the Palestinian
question, and cultivating forces for peace in the Middle
East. The international community should strengthen
coordination, turn the positive momentum into concrete
action and make every effort to achieve realistic and
operable results. The Security Council should respond
positively to the legitimate demands of the Palestinians
and the Arab States and give serious consideration to
draft resolutions on providing international protection
to the Palestinian people and ending the expansion and
construction of settlements. It should take the necessary
actions to promote the relaunching of peace talks.

Sixthly, the international community should do its
best to improve the humanitarian situation in Palestine
and continue to advance its economic reconstruction.
China calls upon Israel to cooperate with the
international aid efforts by completely lifting the
blockade on Gaza. All parties should respond positively
to the United Nations aid plan for Palestine and scaled-
up assistance to Gaza. They should engage economic
cooperation with Palestine so that the humanitarian
situation and the climate for survival on the ground
will improve and the Palestinian people will be able to
see hope.

China has always supported the Palestinian people's

struggle for its legitimate national rights and has worked
to promote peace and negotiations. In 2013, President
Xi Jinping made a four-point proposal for resolving the
Palestinian-Israeli issue. During his visit to the Middle
East in January 2016, President Xi reiterated that China
would firmly support the just cause of the Palestinian
people. The Chinese Government's Special Envoy on
Middle East affairs has been actively engaged in efforts
to promote peace and negotiations. Every year, China
provides economic assistance to Palestine through the
United Nations or bilaterally for improving the welfare
of the Palestinian people.

Last January, China decided to provide
RMB50 million of free aid to Palestine. China is ready
to join the international community in a continued
effort to promote a bona fide solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian issue. As a steadfast supporter of, and
facilitator for, peace in the Middle East, China has been
working actively for a peaceful political settlement of
the questions in Syria, Yemen, Libya, among other
hotspots, with a View to achieving peace and stability
in the Middle East at an early date.

With regard to the Syrian issue, the agreement
between the parties on the cessation of hostilities is
holding. Progress has been achieved in the field of
humanitarian relief and the peace talks in Geneva are
on track. The international community should continue
to support the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura in his good offices and make the
following efforts.

First, it should support United Nations relief
agencies in their efforts to expand humanitarian relief
activities. The countries concerned should strengthen
communication and coordination with the Government
of Syria to facilitate the process.

Secondly, it should ensure that all the Syrian parties
will continue to abide by the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities so as to continue to ease the situation.

Thirdly, it should promote progress in the
peace talks in Geneva and encourage the parties to
follow the principle of moving from the easy to the
difficult, starting with the issues where consensus
exists in order to produce a timely result and promote
confidence-building.

Fourthly, it should step up the international fight
against terrorism and join hands in combating the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist organizations listed by the Council.
The Chinese Government appointed Ambassador Xie
Xiaoyan as its Special Envoy for the Syrian crisis. As
always, China will promote the political process for a
settlement of the Syrian question.
On the question of Yemen, the nationwide cessation
of hostilities by the Yemeni parties and the new round
of political dialogue in Kuwait signify a return to
the political track of consultation and dialogue on
the question. We hope that the Yemeni parties will
honour their commitment to abide by the cessation of
hostilities agreement and demonstrate political will
in the national dialogue by tackling issues such as
the military conflict, security arrangements and the
restoration of State institutions, on the one hand, and
focus on the establishment of an inclusive political
system in Yemen and the formulation of a political
solution that meets Yemen's reality and accommodates
the concerns of all parties, on the other. All parties to
the conflict should actively cooperate with the United
Nations humanitarian relief efforts and provide safe
and unimpeded access to humanitarian relief items in
order to ease the humanitarian situation on the ground.

On the question of Libya, recently the Libyan
parties made an important headway in implementing the
Libyan political agreement. The Presidential Council
of the Government of National Accord moved into the
capital to start its work, but the country's deep-rooted
problems have yet to be completely resolved, while
the external environment is highly complex. Efforts
should be made to promote synergy between Libya's
internal efforts and external political support to further
consolidate the current state of affairs. Libya should
adhere to a political process that is led by Libyans and
open to all parties. They should work hard to defuse
conflicts, achieve national reconciliation and adopt
measures that are in keeping with the popular will and
the national choice. The international community should
urge the Libyan parties to join and fully implement the
Libyan political agreement, ensure safe and smooth
proceedings by the Presidential Council and settle
differences through dialogue and consultation.

Countries in the Middle East are all confronted with
the formidable challenge of terrorism. The fight against
terrorism is closely connected with the settlement of the
hotspot issues in the Middle East. Increasing cooperation
against terrorism is a joint responsibility of the States
of the region and of the international community. All
the parties concerned, within the framework of the
United Nations, should adopt common measures,

resolutely crack down on the spreading of ideologies of
violent extremism and terrorism, sever the channels of
financing for terrorism and stop foreign terrorist flows
in order to create favourable conditions for the political
resolution of hotspot issues. With regard to counter-
terrorism, there should be no double standards. Neither
should terrorism be linked with a specific ethnicity or
religion.

China is ready to work with the international
community in a joint effort to find a way out of the
chaos in the Middle East in order to reduce conflicts and
suffering, create more tranquility and human dignity
there and so that peace, stability and development may
prevail soon.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. 1 would like appeal to speakers to deliver
their statements at a reasonable speed in order that
interpretation may be provided accurately.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Isabella
Lovin, Minister for International Development and
Cooperation of Sweden.

