Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank Mr. Vij ay Nambiar and his team for the report on
their mission to the Middle East. We commend the
team for being able to cover much ground within a
short time, and we are encouraged by their efforts,
together with other diplomatic initiatives that are being
undertaken to explore ways to defuse the crisis. We
also thank Mr. Egeland for his update on the
humanitarian crisis in Lebanon and Palestine.

We are alarmed and saddened by the destruction
of Lebanon and Gaza in the last 10 days, resulting in
death and injury to hundreds of innocent civilians.
Over half a million people have been displaced by the
ongoing war, disrupting the life of the Lebanese and
Palestinian people with devastating consequences. As
mentioned by Mr. Egeland, essential supplies are
running out and a huge humanitarian crisis is
unfolding, which calls for an urgent response from the
international community.

Mr. President, since we have been discussing this
issue for the past week, and in order to heed your call
for short statements, we will not repeat what we said in
previous meetings and will limit ourselves to a few
comments.

First, while calling again for maximum restraint,
we believe that a plan to end the crisis can be
assembled quickly. The elements proposed by the
Secretary-General yesterday on practical action aimed
at stemming the spiralling violence have our full
support. In addition, we believe that it is extremely
essential that the Security Council respond, preferably
through a resolution preceded by a press statement,
along the lines discussed in our previous meetings.

Secondly, an immediate requirement is to bring
the hostilities to an end in order to stop further loss of
life and suffering. We have taken note of the proposal
by Mr. Nambiar to secure some form of cessation of
hostilities while working on an agreement for a
ceasefire, and we rally ourselves to the idea. We also
hope that Mr. Egeland's request for the establishment
of corridors to Lebanon and inside Lebanon will be
granted.

Thirdly, with regard to the Blue Line, we strongly
recommend the strengthening of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to make it more
responsive and effective. UNIFIL cannot discharge its
mandate in its current form, as the operative
circumstances have changed. We therefore call for a
more robust force with a new concept of operation and
powers, if not immediately, then soon enough.

Fourthly, we believe that it is not too early to
begin reflecting on the mammoth task of reconstructing
Lebanon. In this regard, we support the idea of
organizing an international conference to consider
timelines for the implementation of the Taif
Agreement, together with resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1680 (2006). The conference should also focus on the
delineation of the border with Israel and resolve the
dispute over Sheba'a Farms.

Lastly, we wish to reaffirm the need and urgency
to find a lasting, comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question based on relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Quartet road map.

