Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, I have the honour
to brief the members of the Council on developments
in the Committee since my previous briefing in this
Chamber on 18 December last year (see S.PV.8431).

I intend to focus first on the visit I made to South
Sudan and the region in October and secondly to
elaborate on the interim report of the Panel of Experts,
which was submitted to the Committee on 1 November
and published as a document of the Council on
22 November. On 18 November the Committee had an
opportunity to engage with the Coordinator of the Panel
on the findings and recommendations of the interim
report, and it subsequently considered various follow-
up actions aimed at improving the implementation and
effectiveness of the regime. Lastly, I will provide a
brief overview of developments in the Committee since
my briefing last year.

From 6 to 15 October, I had the opportunity to
visit, in chronological order, South Sudan, Uganda, the
Sudan and Ethiopia. The purpose of my visit was to
obtain first-hand accounts of the implementation of the
measures imposed by resolution 2206 (2015), expanded
by resolution 2428 (2018) and most recently extended
by resolution 2471 (2019); to strengthen dialogue and
engagement with the States concerned regarding the
implementation of the measures, including any needs
for assistance; and to inform the Council's review of
the mandate, pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2471
(2019). It is important to note that my visit took place
roughly one month prior to the 12 November deadline
for the formation of the Transitional Government in
pursuance of the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement for the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, following which the parties
decided to extend the transitional period by 100 days.

Before turning to the actions that the Committee
has taken in response to the observations made during
my visit, I would like to highlight the key issues
observed and raised during the trip. On the political
front, based on the discussions held during my visit,
I continue to believe that the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement, particularly the progress on
the transitional security arrangements, remains crucial
to peace and stability in South Sudan. 1 continue to
be concerned about the dire humanitarian and human
rights situation in South Sudan, in which the civilian
population, particularly women and children, have
been pillaged by men in uniform. Sadly, the abuse and
recruitment of children, and acts of sexual violence
directed against women and girls in particular, have
been a continuing motifin this terrible civil war. In that
connection, the lack of accountability is of particular
concern. During my visit to Juba, Bentiu and Yei, I
noticed that some interlocutors held the view that the
communities in South Sudan did not fully understand
the sanctions regime.

I remain concerned about the fact that the region is
nottaking concrete actions regarding the implementation
of the sanctions regimes, and I encourage neighbouring
States to conduct inspections in accordance with
paragraph 8 of resolution 2428 (2018) in connection
with the arms embargo. It is also lamentable that
sanctioned individuals continue to travel unimpeded
throughout the region, sometimes with passports from
the region, and that in only a few cases have Member
States transmitted travel-ban exemption requests to
the Committee.

As a result of my visit, the Committee agreed on
several proposed actions based on my recommendations,
which included transmitting follow-up letters expressing
appreciation for the hospitality extended and reiterating
the importance of the effective implementation of the
measures and the need for more support for the Panel
of Experts. It was also agreed that the Committee
would organize an open briefing where the views of
my recent visit could be expressed. The Committee
also decided to organize a briefing by the Chair of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development on
the status of the peace process in South Sudan. And,
finally, the Committee is considering transmitting a
note verbale to all Member States on the measures in
place concerning South Sudan and reminding them of
their obligations.

Let me now turn to the second focus of my briefing,
the interim report of the Panel of Experts submitted
pursuant to resolution 2471 (2019) and, more specifically,
the actions taken by the Committee in response to the
Panel's findings and recommendations. 1 will not repeat
the contents of the interim report in detail, given that
it was transmitted to the members of the Council and
is now available as document S/2019/897. I will simply
remind the Council that the Panel of Experts has
presented its findings with regard to the political and
security situation in South Sudan, violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, the implementation of
the arms embargo, including the provisions related to
the exemptions to the regime, and the implementation
of the targeted financial and travel-ban measures. In
that context, I would like to reiterate the importance
of ensuring that the States of the region, particularly
South Sudan's neighbours, continue strengthening
their cooperation with the Panel of Experts and the
Sanctions Committee.

For the third and final element of my statement
today, I would like to provide a brief overview of the
Committee's work since my briefing to the Council
last December. To date, the Committee has met on
five occasions in informal consultations, and has held
one joint informal consultation with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
On 8 February, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan,
open to Member States, concerning the Panel's interim
report, document S/2018/1049, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2428 (2018).

During the informal consultations held on
29 March, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Panel of Experts on South Sudan concerning the
Panel's final report, S/2019/301, submitted pursuant
to paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2428 (2018), and
discussed its recommendations.

During the joint informal consultations of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1591 (2005), 1970 (2011) and 2206
(2015), concerning the Sudan, Libya and South Sudan,
respectively, held on 21 June, the Panels of Experts on
the Sudan, Libya and South Sudan delivered briefings
and the Committees held an interactive discussion
on the importance of using a common approach in
addressing the presence of Darfuri armed groups in
Libya and South Sudan and preventing those groups
from engaging in destabilizing activities.

The Committee heard a presentation on 9 August by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on work plan of
the Panel, the mandate of which was renewed pursuant
to resolution 2471 (2019). The Committee received a
briefing on 21 August by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

During the informal consultations held on
18 November, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the Panel's
interim report (see S/2019/897), submitted pursuant
to paragraph 3 of resolution 2471 (2019), and also
discussed the findings and recommendations contained
in the report of my visit to South Sudan, Uganda, the
Sudan and Ethiopia from 6 to 15 October.

Finally, since my previous report to the Council,
the Committee received four requests for exemptions
to the arms embargo, all of which were granted. No
exemption requests were received concerning the
travel-ban measures. I would like to reiterate my call
to all Member States to increase their engagement with
the Committee, seek clarifications on the measures and
related exemption procedures and submit requests for
exemptions to the arms embargo, the travel ban and the
assets freeze.

