Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset,
Mr. President, and on behalf of my country, allow me to
convey to you and to your friendly country, Argentina,
my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this first month of
the year. My delegation would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm to you its readiness to fully
cooperate with you and your delegation.

We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Ambassador of Rwanda for his fine captaincy during
the closing month of 1994 and to applaud the excellent
work done by the retired members of the Security
Council - Djibouti, Pakistan, New Zealand, Brazil and
Spain, whose contributions will be felt for many years to
come.

We also welcome the new members of the Council
and assure them of our cooperation at all times. May I
also take this opportunity to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Italy.

Here we are starting the new year and deliberating
for the fourth year on the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia. Undoubtedly, today's deliberations on the
question of the suspension of sanctions imposed on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
are of due relevance to the events in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The measures taken by the Government of Belgrade
to close its border with the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to any transshipment of goods except
foodstuffs, medical supplies and necessary clothing to
meet essential humanitarian needs were positively met by
resolution 943 (1994), adopted on 23 September 1994,
suspending certain measures for a period of a hundred
days.

 

My delegation would like to stress that it was because
of the readiness of the authorities in Belgrade to seal the
international border with the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to help isolate the Bosnian Serbs, who had
rejected the territorial settlement plan, that the Security
Council took the necessary action. We also want to remind
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) that any continued easing and further easing
of the sanctions would be subject to how it meets all its
other obligations and to other positive steps that it takes.
They should include the following measures.

First, maintenance of the effective closure of the
international border between it and the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and further efforts by it to
enhance the effectiveness of the closure, including the
prosecution of persons suspected of violating measures
to that end, and the sealing of border crossing points,
as requested by the Mission of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) and as
called for in the third preambular paragraph of the
draft resolution.

Secondly, full cooperation with the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the ICFY and of the
Mission to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) which is entrusted with the task of
monitoring the closure of the border.

Thirdly, recognition of and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international border.

Fourthly, condemnation of all hostile acts by the
Bosnian Serbs, the so-called Krajina Serbs or any
other group that violates the Security Council's
resolutions on the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
and faithful cooperation with international efforts to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the crisis.

Fifthly, cooperation with the International
Tribunal to prosecute persons responsible for war
crimes in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

My country confirmed its position vis-a-vis suspension
of the sanctions upon the adoption of resolution 943 (1994),
which we supported. Our position stemmed from our
commitment to support the Contact Group's efforts to
create an environment of isolation for the Bosnian Serbs
until they accept the widely supported territorial settlement
plan, which was supported by all the other parties to the
conflict, including the Government and Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Although more than three months have elapsed since
the Council's adoption of resolution 943 (1994), the
situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
not changed for the better. On the contrary, it has
worsened, especially around the safe area of Bihac.
Fighting goes on, and the siege and strangulation of cities
is as common as it was in the past. Roads to towns and
cities are still blocked, and the movement of civilians and
the access of humanitarian convoys are still hindered.
Most important, the territorial settlement remains in
limbo, due to the defiance of one party.

Once again my delegation supports a draft resolution
that we hope will pave the way to peace. My delegation
will therefore vote in favour of the draft before the
Council.

