Mr. Muasher (World Bank): The President of the
World Bank, Mr. Robert Zoellick, is unable to be with
us today and asked me to transmit his greetings and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate and for inviting the World Bank.

I welcome the statement of the Secretary-General
and wish to assure him of our commitment to work
jointly with the United Nations system to meet together
the challenges of post-conflict countries.

Over the past 15 years, the World Bank has
considerably expanded its work on conflict and
fragility, both operationally and analytically. With the
broad support of our Board of Directors, the Bank
focuses more on peacebuilding, State building,
institutional reforms and partnerships. While our
knowledge base for countries in post-conflict or on a
gradual reform track is good, we still need to know
more about how to achieve results in terms of conflict
prevention and poverty reduction in countries facing
deteriorating governance or a political impasse. Our
partnership with the United Nations system will prove
essential in order to refine our operational approach.

The Bank recently approved a new state-building
and peacebuilding fund to address the needs of state
and local governance and peacebuilding in fragile
situations that offers the promise of high impact. It
aims to complement the Peacebuilding Fund of the
Peacebuilding Commission of the United Nations and
other efforts.

On the analytical side, the Bank has
commissioned applied research in areas such as
conflict and development and natural resources and
conflict, in collaboration with renowned research
institutions. I am emphasizing here the importance of
the contribution of research to our policy at the Bank
and to the international discourse at large.

Overcoming the multifaceted problems of
countries coming out of conflict or seeking to avoid the
breakdown of the State is crucial to the Bank's

development mission, its sustainability and
effectiveness. As more countries graduate from the
International Development Association, our

concessional finance window, we expect an increasing
share of our partner countries to be fragile and conflict-
affected countries. The objectives and expected results
we aim to achieve under that strategic theme fall into
three broad areas.

First, we aim at promoting better global
understanding. The World Bank aims to promote better
global understanding of the dynamics that affect fragile
situations and effective strategic and operational
approaches to assisting them. An important starting
point is to increase the consensus on international
frameworks and priorities to approaches in those

countries, including diplomatic, development,
institution-building and security linkages.

Secondly, we aim at promoting improved
country-level collaboration. On the country level, our
goals include practical examples of successful
international support to peacebuilding transitions,
consolidation of governance reform, progress towards
the Millennium Development Goals and private sector
development, particularly with our private sector
window, the International Finance Corporation.

Thirdly, we aim at delivering visible results
through a coherent World Bank Group approach. Our
goal is for a World Bank Group that is able to intervene
quickly and effectively, drawing on an expanded field
presence, while exercising flexibility in internal
operating procedures and close work with external
partners.

Against that background, I will now turn to the
concept note prepared for this debate. I commend the
United Kingdom for its succinctness.

With regard to leadership on the ground, we
believe that the leadership of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General is critical and
we look to their guidance, particularly in diplomatic
and security areas. To that end, a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General must enjoy the
full support of the international community.

We strongly believe in supporting a country's
institutions and systems as the best way to secure
national ownership and render reconstruction
sustainable. Concurrently, measures for accountability
to citizens and for empowering all citizens need to be
included.

Furthermore, we need to strengthen our
measurement of results in fragile and post-conflict
situations and scale up what works. To implement
coordination, we View a government's multi-year
budget as the preferred starting point. We
acknowledge, however, that in the immediate post-
conflict phase, capacities and instruments often do not
exist. It may, thus, be necessary to put in place an
alternative and temporary mechanism to deliver
services and assistance.

The international community must also deliver a
coherent message to post-conflict governments, based
on a shared platform for post-conflict recovery
planning and joint monitoring. For example, in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo, a broad-based
effort by the European Commission, United Nations
agencies, the International Monetary Fund, the African
Development Bank and the World Bank as well as
main donor countries, including Belgium, France, the
United Kingdom and the United States, was able to
harmonize donor views for discussion with the new
Government on government priorities for reforms.

The Peacebuilding Commission recently
undertook a mission to Guinea-Bissau, in which the
Bank participated. That mission assessed the current
situation in the country and resulted in the
establishment by the Government of a national steering
committee that will elaborate a peacebuilding strategy
and prioritize programmes for funding.

On civilian capacity, the Bank has just
established a callable roster for rapid deployment and
we will seek to link our callable capacity to that of our
partners with a view to jointly mobilizing our rosters in
crisis situations.

With regard to more rapid and flexible funding,
when properly designed, large-scale post-conflict
multi-donor trust funds can play a critical role during
the reconstruction process, as we have seen with the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund and the Trust
Fund for Timor-Leste, for instance. For the Bank-
administered multi-donor trust fund for South Sudan, I
am pleased that progress has been made and that, at the
recent conference in Oslo, both the Government of
South Sudan and donors confirmed that they saw the
trust fund as an effective instrument, with donors
making substantial new pledges to it.

However, we will have to deal with the tension
emanating, for example, from the trade-off between
ensuring fiduciary standards and showing quick results.
That tension could hamper implementation. In that
regard, we believe that the fiduciary principles accord
that is currently being prepared by the United Nations
Development Group and the Bank will significantly
improve the administration of such trust funds and
deliver results to the beneficiary population more
rapidly.
In order to be strategic, large-scale post-conflict
trust funds should be built upon post-conflict needs
assessments, transitional results matrices and sector
analysis. They do not always cater to the needs of the
start-up phase, such as initial facilities needed by a
new government, human vulnerability and emergency
employment creation. A number of other funds, for
instance the Peacebuilding Fund, can cover that phase
without the need for a separate assessment. In that
regard, we deem it important to move towards making
the humanitarian and development appropriations more
fungible in order to ensure a swift and appropriate
international response to possibly rapidly changing
needs on the ground.

We need to and we can leverage our cumulative
experience better in order to make tangible progress on
the ground. We are willing to work with our partners in
the United Nations system and the international
community to that end.

