Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset] would like to commend Uruguay for its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May and to wish you, Mr. President, every
success in conducting the Council 's work. I also thank
youfor preparing the concept note (S/2017/365, annex)
on today's open debate on resolution 2286 (2016) on
the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict, one year after the adoption of that resolution.

I would like to seize this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and the representatives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Human Rights Watch for their briefings this morning.

The appalling figures on the civilians victims of
wars and conflicts clearly demonstrate the plight of our
world today. The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts (S/2017/414)
refers to huge numbers ofpeople in need ofhumanitarian
assistance and protection. More than 65 million persons
have been displaced because of conflicts, violence or
persecution. This meeting provides a good opportunity
to review the appalling incidents that occurred in the
world last year and to assess the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the ground.

We have seen the various conflicts in the world
at large, especially in the Middle East and Africa,
including militias and terrorist groups, which have
targeted residential areas, key infrastructure facilities
and places that provide basic services. Those actions
have become tactics of war so that one party can
achieve victory over the other. It has indeed been proven
that there have been wide-ranging violations of and
disregard for international law in the various conflicts.
In Iraq, we have seen such violations by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, which have included attacks against
civilians and the basic civilian infrastructure, the use of
human shields, sexual violence and others. In Palestine,
the Israeli occupying forces continue their violations
against the Palestinian people and their violence and
provocations against them, especially in the form of the
settlements. We call upon all parties to address those
continuous violations. We remind members that the
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), which stresses
that all Israeli settlement activities are illegal and must
immediately be removed.

In Syria, despite the many humanitarian efforts
made to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people
and the efforts of the State of Kuwait in hosting three
international donor conferences and presiding over
two conferences on Syria, those efforts were not
enough. We welcome further efforts to maintain the
ceasefire, establish de-escalation lines and continue
negotiations in Geneva. We support the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2254 (2015), to maintain the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.

In Yemen, we would like to commend the coalition
for restoring legitimacy in Yemen and the efforts aimed
at reconstruction in various parts of the country. We
support all efforts that would preserve the territorial
integrity of Yemen. That can only be achieved through
a political solution in accordance with the three major
instruments agreed in Kuwait. We have made many
efforts to reach a peaceful settlement to the crisis in
Yemen. We have hosted three months of consultations
among the various Yemeni parties. However, it has been
to no avail. Still, we are willing to host our brotherly
people in Yemen, once again, at a meeting to sign a
final accord.

As I have stated, there have still been gross
violations of Security Council resolution 2286 (2016),
even after its adoption. We have to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We have to provide the necessary protection to all
humanitarian and medical missions and give priority
to the protection of civilians in all peacekeeping
operations. We have to work on preventing forced
displacements and find a durable solution to the
problem of refugees and internally displaced persons
everywhere in the world.

In conclusion, we would like to stress our support
for the vision and recommendations of the Secretary-
General contained in his report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. He referred to the need to
make a leap forward in diplomatic efforts to address
this issue and prevent conflict, enhance early-warning
systems and encourage the collective efforts to reform
the United Nations.

