Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first thank
Under-Secretaries-General Pascoe and Malcorra for
their briefings today. Let me also add that we highly
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union.

Austria aligns itself with the statement that the
representative of Sweden will deliver in the course of
this debate on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.

Austria fully supports the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). In the first half of this year,
important progress in the Djibouti peace process has
been achieved. However, the security situation has
deteriorated considerably since then. While the focus
of our efforts needs to be on stabilizing the situation, it
is also important that efforts continue at reaching out to
opposition groups which are not part of the Djibouti
process.

The Djibouti Agreement constitutes the only
viable and legitimate framework for achieving lasting
peace in Somalia. We therefore urge all parties in
Somalia to join this process and its structures and, by
doing so, to contribute to the stabilization and
development of the country. A renegotiation of the
Djibouti Agreement cannot be an option.

Austria condemns the attempts of extremists to
overthrow the TFG. We are deeply worried by reports
about foreign support to the insurgency. We also note
the deep concern expressed by the heads of State or
Government of the African Union during their recent
summit in Sirte concerning arms supplies to insurgent
groups in Somalia.

As others have already said, we will have more
information on this issue when the Monitoring Group
of the Somali sanctions Committee reports to the
Security Council at the end of this month. That report
will give us a very important opportunity to further
discuss this issue as well as to discuss possible action
by the Council.
With reference to the comments made by the
Permanent Representative of Somalia about the
presence of foreign fighters in his country, let me add
that substantiated information on this issue may also be
of interest to the Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

Those who suffer most in the situation are
civilians, including internally displaced persons
(IDPs), especially women and children, who are the
most vulnerable. We have seen a surge in the number
of IDPs in the past two months. More than 200,000
people have fled Mogadishu alone, increasing the
number of IDPs in the country, as others have already
noted, to over 1.2 million. We are deeply concerned by
their catastrophic humanitarian and human rights
situation. Extrajudicial and arbitrary executions, arrests
and torture, as practiced by Al-Shabaab, must stop
immediately.

We also call on all parties to allow unhindered
access to humanitarian aid for those in need and to
ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel in
Somalia. We condemn recent attacks on aid
organizations. We pay tribute to humanitarian workers,
Who continue to deliver much-needed humanitarian aid
in this very difficult environment.

We applaud the establishment of the Justice and
Reconciliation Working Group as a vehicle to
addressing impunity for human rights violations in
Somalia. We encourage the parties represented in the
Working Group to work closely together to address this
problem vigorously.

We express our deep appreciation to the African
Union, and to Uganda and Burundi as AMISOM. troop-
contributors, for the efforts and risks they are taking to
improve the situation in and around Mogadishu.
Austria also strongly supports the United Nations
logistics support package for AMISOM. Moreover,
Austria stressed the need for close cooperation between
the United Nations, the African Union and donors, such
as the European Union, in addressing the most pressing
needs of Somalia and the wider region of the Horn of
Africa.

Concerning the scourge of piracy, we attach high
importance to addressing its root causes and ensuring
accountability. Operation Atalanta, the European Union
mission to fight piracy, is undoubtedly the most visible
and most recent contribution of the European Union in
Somalia. Of course, it is not the only one.

The European Union's contribution in the form of
humanitarian aid and development programmes is also
considerable. Like all other members of the European
Union, Austria attaches high importance to support for
the Somali security sector and AMISOM, thus
contributing to a climate conducive to achieving peace
and development.

