Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to join others in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
and the Permanent Representative of China on his
successful stewardship of the Council last month. We
thank Mr. Khan for his first report to the Council
(see S/2018/103l) on the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.

Resolution 2379 (2017) stresses the global nature
of the threats posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). It is therefore important that Council
members form a united front in counteracting that evil.
There can be no double standards in that fight, including
with regard to seeing justice done. We are firmly of
the view that the crimes of ISIL terrorists must not go
unpunished, wherever they were committed. However,

it is the Governments of the States affected by those
crimes that play the leading role in holding them to
account. Resolution 2379 (2017), which represents the
basis for the establishment of the Investigative Team,
emphasizes in that regard that it must operate with
full respect for Iraq's sovereignty and its jurisdiction
over crimes committed on Iraqi territory. We hope
those provisos will be an indisputable basis for the
Investigative Team's operations.

We should point out that the fact that the Team
was established at the request of the affected State is a
bold kind of innovation for the Security Council with
many new aspects. First, as a body it is neither judicial
nor prosecutorial, but merely documents evidence.
Furthermore, the evidence it collects has to be kept in
Iraq and used by the Iraqi judicial system and other
national judicial bodies exclusively upon the agreement
with Baghdad. Unfortunately, it is very seldom that
the views of the States concerned are so carefully
taken into account. To take the example of the entity
in Syria with similar functions - the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, which was the result of the General Assembly's
illegitimate decision - it did not even occur to its so-
called architects to talk to Damascus and they utterly
disregarded the prerogatives of the Security Council.
We want to caution the Investigative Team's leadership
against any contact with that illegitimate entity.

We note Mr. Khan's willingness to work
constructively to carry out the mandate entrusted to
him, which we view first and foremost as in a context
of criminal rather than international humanitarian law.
We concluded from his report that his mission has
support within Iraqi society, and we truly hope that
approach will be maintained and welcome all steps in
that direction.

We expect the Investigative Team's operations

to be conducted impartially, transparently and in
full compliance with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, and that it will make
a meaningful contribution to the efforts to bring ISIL
terrorists to justice for the crimes they have committed
on Iraqi territory. That is important with regard to
further counter-terrorism activities in Iraq. ISIL's so-
called caliphate has been dealt a crushing blow, partly
thanks to the uncompromising war against terrorism
that the authorities in Iraq's neighbour Syria have been
waging, with Russia's help. Despite that, however, ISIL
still remains active in a number of Iraqi provinces and
is still carrying out terrorist and asymmetrical attacks
there.

For our part, we will continue to assist the Iraqi
authorities on the security front both politically and
practically, as well as in the work of establishing
long-term normalization. We will continue to help
strengthen the Iraqi army, including by coordinating
on regional security issues through the quadripartite
centre in Baghdad, and we intend to broaden our
bilateral cooperation on other fronts as well.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we want
to see Iraq become a strong, whole, independent and
prosperous State where all of its various ethnic and
religious groups can live in peace and harmony. We
believe that all international assistance, including from
the Investigative Team, must be part of the effort to
achieve that goal, and the shortest road to that runs
through robust national reconciliation processes.

