Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I thank the President of
the Security Council for giving us the opportunity to
once again focus on the situation in the Middle East,
particularly the Palestinian question, a question that
has occupied the attention of this Council time and
again. Sri Lanka has consistently supported a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian issue and called for the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the realization of the two-State
solution. Our sincere wish is that Israel, Palestine and
their neighbours in the region coexist in peace and
security. As a country that has suffered much at the
hands of unbridled violence unleashed by terrorism, Sri
Lanka knows only too well the human and material
cost of such violence, which can impede political
solutions. We have consistently endorsed the two-State
solution to the problem. A peaceful Middle East is our
wish for the people of the region.
My Government, it may be recalled, expressed its
deep anguish and concern over the developments that
took place in Gaza late last year and in the early part of
this year - developments that led to the loss of
civilian life, an increase of tensions in the region and
unnecessary suffering among civilians. Sri Lanka is
fully aware, through its own experience, of the need to
provide for and supply civilians affected by conflict
owing to terrorist violence. At that time, my
Government called upon all parties to end military
action and violence immediately and ensure a climate
conducive to finding a way forward towards a two-
State solution, which all parties concerned, including
Israel and Palestine, agree is the only possible lasting
solution. In spite of those unfortunate circumstances
earlier this year, my Government was pleased to note
the several important developments on the ground
since then and the continued international efforts to
create the conditions for the early resumption of
negotiations by the two sides. Those gave us reason to
renew our hope for a peaceful solution.

It is our sincere hope that the issues before the
Council today will be addressed in a just and equitable
manner that will not obstruct the search for peace. I
believe that we will have further opportunity to discuss
these issues at the forthcoming sessions of the Human
Rights Council. We believe that at this time the unity
of the Palestinian people is of utmost importance and
that they will unite in pursuit of their aspirations.

Sri Lanka wishes to reiterate its support for the
Palestinians' quest for their legitimate, human and
national rights. The Government and the people of Sri
Lanka would like to reassure them of our continued
support and solidarity.

