Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to express my
sympathy to you, Madam President, because under your
presidency we have just wasted two hours discussing
the format for this meeting. We agreed that only three
people would speak in an open format: Mr. Eliasson, my
Ukrainian colleague Mr. Sergeyev, and the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation. As I
understand it, some of my Security Council colleagues
already intend to depart from that agreement, but what
can we do when there is a game without rules?

I would like to thank Mr. Eliasson for his briefing
and I support his conclusion that, in the current
situation, cool heads must prevail. Unfortunately, I
must note that my Ukrainian colleague did not choose
to follow that advice, and what I heard in his statement
was a number of terms characterizing the situation in
Ukraine and the actions of the Russian Federation to
which we cannot agree at all.

We are discussing a crisis that should not have taken
place. There was no objective reason whatsoever for it
to happen. There was and remains our fraternal country
of Ukraine, our neighbour. If we talk about this in terms
of the situation last autumn, it has a democratically
and legally elected President, Mr. Yanukovych. He
undertakes his functions on basis of the parliamentary
majority in a democratically elected Parliament. His
country is certainly dealing with serious economic
challenges, and the leadership of Ukraine had serious
decisions to make. In particular, it needed to decide
whether to join or Sign an association agreement with
the European Union. That is a complex decision.
One of the mistakes made the Ukrainian leadership
was perhaps its last-minute recognition that this
association agreement could have significant economic
consequences for Ukraine.

In such conditions, the Ukrainian leader, President
Yanukovych, took a completely constitutional decision
that was fully in line with the prerogatives of the
Head of any State, namely, to refrain from signing
an association agreement with the European Union.
That did not mean, as many have said, that there was
a complete repudiation of a European orientation; he
simply had to weigh the circumstances that had arisen
at that time. Therefore, I repeat, his decision was fully
within the prerogatives of the Ukrainian leadership.

This raises a question: Why did that problem need
to result in street demonstrations? Why do those street
demonstrations need to be encouraged from abroad
by members of the European Union? Why did the
representatives of several countries of the European
Union need to appear at those meetings, which were
ignited by protests against a decision taken by the
Ukrainian leadership? Why did some officials need to
talk about stirring up the public and opposition leaders?
Why did there have to be such crude interventions in
the internal affairs of a sovereign State?

There is another question that must be asked.
I do not want to condone the actions of President
Yanukovych during the crisis in reaction to the
protests. Many things could be said in that regard, but I
will just reiterate the facts. A leader of the opposition,
Mr. Yatsenyuk, was offered the post of Prime Minister.
Why did he not accept that proposal? Why continue
to escalate the situation? Mr. Yatsenyuk could have
formed a Government. If he had wanted to sign an
association agreement with the European Union, he
could have - and then he would have been responsible
for the catastrophic economic consequences for the
country if he had done so. Moreover, there will be
presidential elections in Ukraine in 2015, and if the
people do not like President Yanukovych's position,
they can elect another President. That has happened
before. Mr. Yanukovych lost an election and other
Presidents were elected in Ukraine.

Why continue to whip up the situation? Why are
some of our Western colleagues trying to prolong the
confrontation? Why are they bringing armed militants
into the streets? Why do those armed militants need to
throw Molotov cocktails at the police? Why are they
going after the police? Have we heard any censure
of these activities from the Western supporters of
democracy in Ukraine? We, for one, have heard not one
word from any of the many institutions that promote
democracy. It is therefore unclear why they even exist,
if they do not react to such manifestations.

As a result of the emergence of the crisis, an
agreement between President Yanukovych and the
opposition was signed on 21 February. It contained
the signatures of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of
Germany, France and Poland. It was a very important
agreement. At a later stage, it would have provided an
opportunity to defuse the crisis. Under the agreement,
a national unity Government was to be formed within
10 days, constitutional reforms were to be undertaken,
a new constitution was to be adopted, and presidential
elections were to be held by December 2014. The
opposition and its leaders pledged not use force. They
were to surrender their weapons to whomever was
supposed to keep them.

Why was that agreement not implemented? Why
were threats aimed at President Yanukovych that
resulted in his having to leave Kiev? Why, with all
the traumatic changes that have taken place, was the
first action of the Ukrainian Parliament and its new
membership a decision to change the law on language,
which accorded Ukrainian minority communities - not
only Russians but others as well - the right to use
their own languages? Why was that decision taken the
very first day? This was not the result of a political
coalition or process. One opposition leader sought to
assert himself, claimed victory and tried to impose his
will on the people. I would not venture to estimate their
numbers, but there are a number of political groups
whose membership includes radical extremists working
in the field of Ukrainian security.

What has occurred over the past few days, which
is the reason for our meeting today? A very difficult
situation has arisen in Crimea and the eastern part of
Ukraine in recent days. There has been a lot of concern,
and in Crimea in particular. People have come in from
Kiev with the clear intention of repeating what they have
done in Kiev and in the western Ukraine by replacing
the regional governments. That has created great
concern in the eastern part of the country, especially in
the Republic of Crimea.

In those circumstances, the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Crimea, Mr. Aksyonov, made
a statement that was referenced today by Mr. Eliasson,
in which he said:

"In spite of the agreement that was reached
with the central authorities concerning the
inadmissibility of the appointment of leaders of
power structures without the consent of the Supreme
Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, in
violation of the norms of the Constitution of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Ukrainian
laws governing the police, yesterday, 28 February,
Mr. Igor Avrutsky was appointed chief of the local
Crimean militia. That appointment, the presence of
unidentified armed groups and military equipment,
and the inabaility of the power structures of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea to effectively
control the situation on the territory of the Republic
have led to disorder and the use of firearms."

I will now quote the statement issued today by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia.

"On the night of 1 March, unknown armed
people sent from Kiev attempted to storm the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea. As a result of those perfidious
provocations, there were casualties. The decisive
action of self-defence groups prevented the attempt
to overrun the Ministry. These developments
confirm the aspirations of certain well-known
political circles in Kiev to destabilize the situation
on the peninsula. It is very irresponsible to stir
up tensions in the Crimea, which is already very
tense."

In those conditions, Mr. Aksyonov, Prime Minister
of Crimea, went to the President of Russia with a
request for assistance to restore peace in Crimea.
According to available information, the appeal was
also supported by Mr. Yanukovych, whose removal
from office, we believe, was illegal. As a result of that
appeal, the President of Russia, in accordance with
our constitutional procedures, sent to the Federation
Council the following request.

"With respect to the extraordinary situation
in Ukraine and threats against the lives of
Russian citizens, our compatriots, and members
of the military contingent of the armed forces of
the Russian Federation deployed in conformity
with international agreement on the territory of
Ukraine, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea - in
accordance with paragraph (g) of part I of article 102
of the Constitution of the Russian Federation - has
requested the deployment of the armed forces of
the Russian Federation on the territory of Ukraine
until the civic and political situation in Ukraine can
be normalized".

I therefore draw the Council's attention to the fact
that it says"on the territory of Ukraine" - not "against
Ukraine", as my Ukrainian colleague said, but "on
the territory of Ukraine until the civic and political
situation in Ukraine can be normalized". In recent
reports that I have received, including the statement
issued by the press representative of the President of
the Russian Federation, the President of the Russian
Federation has not taken a decision on the use of armed
forces on the territory of Ukraine.

With regard to how to get out of this situation, I
repeat, as Mr. Eliasson said quite correctly, that cooler
heads must prevail and we must return to the political
path in the constitutional framework. We need to go
back to the agreement of 21 February and establish
a national unity Government, and we need to put an
end to attempts to converse with our ethnic or political
opponents in the language of force. The international
factors that are especially interested in the situation in
Ukraine need to call the radicals to order. They must
advise the Ukrainian opposition, or whoever happens
to be in Kiev, to distance itself from the radicals and
not allow them to lord it over Ukraine, as such actions
could lead to very difficult developments, which is
what the Russian Federation is trying to avoid.

