Ms. Yelich (Canada): I thank French Foreign
Minister Fabius for mobilizing the Security Council
and international community today.

It is crucial that we address the widespread
persecution of religious and ethnic groups in the
Middle East and the wider region, particularly those
acts committed by the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups.

The region, known as the "cradle of civilization",
has long been home to great cultural and religious
diversity, characterized by the coexistence of Sunni
and Shia Muslims, Christians, Yazidis and a host of
others. ISIL and other terrorist groups seek to wipe out
that diversity. We watched in shock as tens of thousands
of Yazidis were stranded on Mount Sinjar last August,
fleeing for their lives. In February, we witnessed the
beheading of 21 Coptic Orthodox Christians in Libya,
murdered by ISIL simply because of their religion.
More recently, ISIL kidnapped hundreds of Assyrian
Christians in north-eastern Syria. ISIL has destroyed
churches, monasteries and other sites of religious
significance, including the tomb of Jonah - a site
revered by Christians and Muslims alike. This week
also marks the one-year anniversary of the desecration
of Armenian Christian religious sites in Kessab, Syria,
at the hands of terrorists affiliated with Al-Qaida.
And of course, ISIL and its ideology of hatred have
directly threatened the citizens of countries around
the world, including Canada. These are attacks on the
global community, and by some estimates the near
total disappearance of Christians from the region is
unfolding.

The latest report from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights is stark. It states that ISIL may have
committed all three of the most serious international
crimes: war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. As we have heard again today, ISIL's
territorial expansion and religious persecution have
been characterized by acts of barbarism: executions,
gross acts of sexual and gender-based Violence, and
mass displacement.

Canada condemns those acts in the strongest
possible terms. They are an affront to human dignity, to
our shared values and to the very principles upon which
the United Nations was founded. We stand in solidarity
with the victims, whose only supposed crime was to
oppose ISIL's warped ideology ofhatred and oppression.
Left unchecked, like cancer this extremism will only
grow and spread. We cannot fail to respond, to protect
our citizens and principles, to support the people of the
region who seek to preserve the pluralism and diversity
that we embrace, and to hold the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes accountable.

Together with our allies and partners in the
region, Canada is taking a stand to support the Iraqi
State, maintain stability in the region and halt ISIL's
campaign ofterrorism. And of course, Canada is part of
the international effort to counter ISIL and ensure that
Canadians at home are safe. For that reason, Canada's
Minister of Foreign Affairs yesterday tabled a motion
in Parliament to extend our mission against ISIL.

Tragically, ISIL's actions are part of a wider global
trend of increased persecution of religious minorities
and growing restrictions on freedom of religion or
belief. Through Canada's Office of Religious Freedom,
we are speaking out on behalf of persecuted religious
communities, opposing religious hatred and advancing
pluralism. The need for this effort has never been
greater. Without tolerance and religious freedom, there
is little hope for the establishment of stable democracy
grounded in respect for human rights and the rule
of law. That is why the threat of continued religious
persecution at the hands of ISIL is so severe. The
killings and displacements seek not only to erase the
presence of religious and ethnic communities, but also
to undermine the basis for lasting peace and stability.

Accordingly, Canada considers the protection
of persecuted religious groups and the promotion of
religious freedom as imperative from both a peace
and security, as well as a human rights perspective.
We therefore welcome France's initiative to convene
today's debate. We support strengthened efforts by the
United Nations and this Council to address persecution
on religious or ethnic grounds. Those efforts include
briefings by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation in Iraq and the wider region, as well
as the Council's mandate on conflict prevention, given
that restrictions on freedom of religion or belief fuel
conflict and extremism. We also support efforts to
hold accountable the perpetrators of egregious human
rights violations, and to sanction those who provide
financial and material support to terrorist groups such
as ISIL. Canada further supports the recommendation
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights that the
Security Council address, in the strongest terms, any
information that points to genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

Today's meeting provides us with an opportunity to
stand up for what is right and just, to defend the values
of freedom, pluralism and mutual respect - values that
speak to a universal truth grounded in the inalienable
dignity of all people. We must counter and discredit the
extremist ideology of ISIL, which craves a culture of
impunity and Violence, and seeks to rule by brutal and
barbaric intimidation. We must speak up for religious
and ethnic diversity - a diversity that ISIL seeks to
destroy 4 and recognize the imperative of religious
freedom or beliefin our efforts to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the Middle East.

