The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the aforementioned States took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible got Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the former Yugoslavia
since 1991; Judge Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States, between 1 January and 31 December 1994;
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2007/469, containing a note by the
Secretary-General dated 1 August 2007 transmitting
the fourteenth annual report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and S/2007/502,
containing a note by the Secretary-General dated
21 August 2007 transmitting the twelfth annual report
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2007/663, containing the text of a letter
dated 12 November 2007 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
document 8/2007/676, containing the text of a letter
dated 16 November 2007 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

I now give the floor to Judge Fausto Pocar,
President of the International Tribunal for Former
Yugoslavia.


