Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): My delegation is
nearing the end of its membership of the Security
Council. In fact, these two years have been filled with
hard work. There have been moments of happiness,
frustration, success and failure. These two years have
proven to be the most exciting and the most interesting
that I could ever have imagined.

Incidentally, one of our young diplomats who
came to work at the mission recently, said after several
months in the Council that those months had equalled
several years of diplomatic activity. I fully agree. To
me, these two years in the Council have been the best
part of my three-decade-long diplomatic career. I am
proud of them and I am going to cherish this
experience through my life.

Our life in the Council has been filled to the brim
with important and fascinating events. Sometimes it
was a bit too full, but I think this is probably the way
the Council works.

The world in which we live gives us more and
more tasks to perform. The Council needs to be ready
to respond to these important developments. We should
not regret the fact that the Council tries to do as much
as possible and continues to be involved in conflict
resolution whenever necessary or possible. Sometimes
it can even achieve success, although not as often as
we would like.

I would like to avail myself of this opportunity to
thank all of my colleagues whose work and experience
have provided an excellent example for us to follow for
the future. For my delegation, over these two years
there has been a real parade of distinguished and
eminent personalities whom we sincerely admire. The
Council members helped my delegation to acquire
valuable, indeed priceless, experience that we will use
in our future work.

By the way, I want to stress that this does not
mean that we will simply leave the Council. I am
happy to say that we are planning to follow closely the
Council's activities, just to be sure that it is doing
things the right way.

At this juncture, I wish to recall that, before being
elected to the Security Council and at its first open
meeting on 10 January 2000, we made a pledge to
make a meaningful and worthy contribution to the
Council's work and to discharge this important mission
in the spirit of openness and cooperation, while
maintaining a wide and constructive dialogue with all
United Nations Member States.

Standing at the crossroads of North and South,
East and West, we wanted to bring the Ukrainian
perspective into the work of the Council. I do not think
that we managed to achieve everything that we wanted
or planned to do, but we sincerely tried to live up to
these commitments, to bring and share with you here
the best that we had. Delegations like to criticize the
Council for many things on many occasions.
Sometimes my delegation does this. And sometimes
there are good reasons for doing so. Needless to say, on
the topics of reform, working methods and
transparency, there is much room for improvement,
even after all the achievements that have been made.
Also, there are still grounds for dissatisfaction in many
areas. Frankly speaking, however, having looked at the
work of the Council from the inside, I am sometimes
amazed that we still can find the time during such a
heavy schedule to do something to improve working
methods and to repair the Council's image in the eyes
of the general United Nations membership.

All the little work that very often passes
unnoticed by the public at large does, in fact,
accomplish a lot to make this Council a body that aims
at achieving results, that decides not only on behalf of
but also for and in the name of the Organization's
Member States. We probably have not done enough in
this area, but what has been done should be
acknowledged. It should be recognized that the
Security Council reform we have been discussing for
such a long time is actually taking place in the Council
before our very eyes, through the efforts of the Council
members. United Nations Member States are now
better informed as to what is going on in the Council.
They now have more opportunity to participate in the
deliberations of the Council, and they have a greater
chance to influence its decisions - although not all, of
course. Just five years ago, one could only have
dreamed about having the chance to get fresh
information from Presidents' websites on an almost
daily basis concerning the Council's deliberations in
informal consultations. With every passing month, we
transfer more and more briefings by the Secretariat on
various subjects from the Consultation Room to this
Chamber. And with the new format of the discussions
with troop-contributing countries, the troop
contributors have more say in future decisions directly
affecting them.

I would like to note, however, that within this
particular area we are just at the beginning of the road.
Much of what has been achieved has been
accomplished thanks to the perseverance and
innovative thinking of all Council members,
specifically new members, who, like fresh blood, enter
this body with new ideas, new energy and an appetite
for making a mark on the Council's work. They will
continue to do so - I am sure. No matter who will be
elected in the future, this process of change will have
to persist, because without it the Council may lose the
balance it needs. The continuing shift in political
power within the United Nations family towards the
Security Council must be counterbalanced by
increasing the body's openness, democratic character
and responsiveness to the expectations of United
Nations Member States.

I wish to repeat my belief that there is a growing
recognition, including within the Security Council, that
reforms are indeed indispensable if the Council wants
to respond to the demands of the times. I think that the
permanent members are feeling the heat. The very fact
that they pushed for changes in the Council's work - I
do not want to make specific references, but everybody
knows what I am talking about - speaks for itself.

Finally, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you
on the successful conclusion of your presidency. I also
wish to thank you for the efficient and professional
performance of your presidential duties that greatly
facilitated the work of the Council in December and
contributed to a constructive consideration of issues on
the Council's agenda.

Under the presidency of Mali, this month has
indeed become a genuine "Month of Africa". The
Council has taken stock of what has been achieved and
what remains to be done by taking a number of
important decisions with regard to the situations in
Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and West Africa. We commend Mali's initiatives
undertaken this month and throughout its membership
in the Security Council to bring the Council closer to
the African continent and to its problems so that it can
adequately respond to the challenges falling within its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter.

