Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I take this opportunity
to express to the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation the Brazilian Government's sorrow
at the tragic deaths that were a consequence of last
night's aerial disasters. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. My delegation is grateful to
Mr. Jean Arnault, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2004/634), which covers the period
since 19 March.

The report of the Secretary-General describes the
state of affairs in Afghanistan in all its complexity. Its
paragraphs 53 and 54 may well amount to a synthesis
of the present situation: on the one hand, the
Government is making commendable progress in areas
such as public administration, fiscal management and
aspects of private sector and economic and social
development; on the other, there is timid advance in
areas such as the rule of law, land management,
disarmament and counter-narcotics. The report makes
it very clear that difficulties arise whenever

"the reform process comes up against entrenched
informal actors and networks whose interests are
abetted by a weak State that is unable to apply
force or to impose formal rules throughout the
country". (S/2004/634, para. 54)

Success ultimately depends on promoting the
increased legitimacy of the Government - hence the
core importance of the electoral process - and on the
effectiveness of its organs and institutions, including
the police, the courts and the armed forces. It is the
responsibility of both the Afghans themselves and the
international community, working together, to create
the conditions for a better future.

Preparation for elections has made sizeable
progress, even against the unfavourable backdrop of
violence and terrorism. The registration of voters,
which closed last Friday, totalled more than 10 million
Afghans, and the significant proportion of women
among them is indeed a very positive, albeit uneven,
development. Also, the accreditation of 18 candidates
for the presidential elections and the registration of 30
political parties seem to reflect the diversity of the
Afghan people and their interest and mobilization
regarding the political process.

The completion of a truly representative vote will
depend, however, on the provision of adequate security
for the 5,000 polling sites operating across the country;
this has been mentioned by other speakers. We concur
with the Secretary-General that a net increase in
international security assistance is therefore
indispensable in time to protect the electoral campaign
in early September and beyond the holding of the
parliamentary election.

It is no secret that the already fragile security
situation has been deteriorating in recent months.
Terrorist attacks in the whole territory against targets
of the Government, the Afghan army and the
international presence have become commonplace and
risk undermining the peace effort. An eloquent
reminder of how the lack of security is compromising
the viability of humanitarian assistance was given last
month when the organization Medecins sans Frontieres
felt compelled to interrupt its humanitarian activities in
the country. Further deployment of troops by NATO,
following the recent summit in Istanbul, is taking
place, as it seems that an expansion of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) presence in
Afghanistan is needed.

Yet we note with satisfaction the gradual
strengthening of the Afghan National Army - with all
the limitations that are pointed out in the report - and
the commitment of the international community to
increase its support for the reconstruction of the
Afghan National Police. National capacity-building in
the enforcement of the rule of law is a key factor for
long-term stability and should be carried out in parallel
with the actions taken by the international community.

A thorough process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) is also
required for any improvement in the security field, and
for tackling the power of warlords and terrorists
determined to sabotage the peace process. The report
shows, however, that DDR is facing considerable
challenges and remains behind schedule. The
containment of rising activities by militias throughout
the country depends on some Vigorous progress in this
area.

Drug trafficking has become a thriving and
lucrative activity that finances the acquisition of illegal
weapons and the formation of militias, with all kinds of
destabilizing consequences. The alarming drug
situation requires further action. Eradication initiatives
have had very limited success, and drug trafficking still
accounts for more than half of the gross domestic
product. More effective strategies to combat drugs
must be urgently devised and pursued. The recent
issuance by the Council of Ulemas of a religious decree
condemning narcotics and other related activities can
be instrumental in discouraging the cultivation of
opium poppy. Also, we welcomed the follow-up on the
implementation of the Declaration on Counter-
Narcotics within the Framework of the Kabul
Declaration on Good-Neighbourly Relations.

Unfortunately, there are disquieting reports that
systematic human rights violations continue to take
place. The situation of women has shown little
progress. We reaffirm our conviction that the
programmes of the Independent Human Rights
Commission of Afghanistan are key in dealing with
systematic human rights Violations that still occur in
the country and that such programmes must be
reinforced and supported by local and international
authorities.

Persisting problems in the security area as well as
in the promotion of human rights affect the
commendable role of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in repatriating
hundreds of thousands of Afghans that are still
internally displaced or who are taking refuge in
neighbouring countries. That was the case last week,
when some 13,000 Afghans were prevented from
returning home due to clashes in the western part of the
country.

Promoting security and stability remains a vital
challenge. The new rise of violence, factionalism and
the narcotics industry expose the frailty of the
achievements reached since the Bonn Conference.
Those achievements risk being undermined if effective
responses are not provided. The current state of affairs,
being so complex, demands the energetic engagement
not only of the Afghans themselves but also of the
international community, which must live up to the
many commitments it made in the past. The upcoming
elections certainly constitute a crucial test on the road
towards democracy and peace in Afghanistan.

