Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by congratulating Poland
on having assumed for the second time the presidency
of the Security Council, as well as by expressing our
gratitude and appreciation to His Excellency Minister
Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Poland, for having convened this open debate on
the extremely complex, important and timely topic of
children and armed conflict. We are very pleased that
he has travelled to New York to preside over this debate.

At this time, we would like to congratulate
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra on Peru's
successful presidency of the Security Council during
the month of July. We also welcome Ambassador Zhang
Jun among us.
We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, as well as
our guests, Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund, Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, for their important
and informative briefings.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea is extremely
concerned that a year ago the Security Council adopted
its twelfth resolution on children and armed conflict
(resolution 2427 (2018)), with the aim of addressing the
widespread impact of armed conflict on children and
the long-term consequences of this impact on peace,
security and sustainable development (see S/PV.8305)).
Despite the fact that, since the publication ofthe historic
Graca Machel report (A/51/306) in 1998, progress has
been made in advancing the protection of the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict, the statistical
figures provided in the annual report of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations (S/2019/509), which
covers the period from January to December 2018,
illustrate great violations against children both in
situations included in the agenda of the Council and
in those that are not: recruitment, exploitation, killing,
abduction, rape, mutilation and all forms of sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial
of access to humanitarian aid. More than 24,000 grave
violations against children in 20 countries have been
documented. Even more seriously, the report indicates
that the number of violations attributed to State actors
and international forces is increasing, while those
attributed to non-State actors have remained stable.

Today we have witnessed two moving stories told
in the first person by two young people who have lived
the horror and meaninglessness of war in their very
own flesh. Their stories, however, are two stories of
overcoming, of resilience and extraordinary fortitude.
These stories should never have happened, but they did
happen, and they are happening every day; while we are
sitting here, they are happening. Right now, in South
Sudan, in the Central African Republic, in Yemen, in
Syria, in Libya, and many other places, thousands of
children are still being recruited to fight adult wars. In
the twenty-first century, they continue to be exploited,
brutalized, raped, mutilated, mercilessly murdered.
These barbaric acts remain ongoing.

Where is the progress that humankind claims to
have achieved? Let us not fool ourselves. We are all
fathers and mothers. As long as the children of some
may enjoy a full childhood and those of others have
to lose their innocence fighting wars from the age
of five, humankind has not made and will not make
progress. I sincerely thank Mariatu and Majok Peter for
their courageous testimony. Let us seriously consider
adhering to the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers in order to make a better village.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
applauds the release and reintegration of 13,600
children, and expresses its support for efforts to protect
children in armed conflict, thanking and congratulating
UNICEF and non-governmental and civil society
organizations that are sparing no effort in their noble
work to protect children. In addition, we call on all
States Members of the United Nations to continue to
support the implementation of action plans and other
commitments to strengthen the protection of children
in armed conflict.

