Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes your presence, Sir, to preside over
the deliberations today. We thank Mr. Mamabolo,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), and Ms. Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
their briefings.

In recent years Darfur, in the Sudan, has maintained
a stable security situation on the whole. Since the
implementation of UNAMID's transition plan began in
the second half of last year, Darfur has continued to
remain stable. However, Darfur is still confronted with
some challenges. In view of the current situation, the
international community should focus its efforts on the
following two aspects.

First, it is imperative to continue to advance the
political and peace processes. Darfur is presently at
a key juncture, transitioning from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. The international community should
continue to advance the relevant political and peace
processes in a bid to achieve a steady and smooth
transition. The parties to this issue should continue their
restraint, avoid the use of force and jointly safeguard
the peace and stability of Darfur. Some opposition
and armed groups should abandon military solutions
in earnest, actively participate in the peace process
and resolve their tensions and differences politically
through dialogue and consultations.

Secondly, it is necessary to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance and economic support. The
humanitarian situation in Darfur is still challenging.
The foundation for economic and social development is
still weak. Those factors will affect the long-term peace
and stability of Darfur. The international community
should continue to honour its commitment by actively
providing humanitarian assistance and economic
support. The current focus should be on helping with
the return and the settlement of Sudanese internally
displaced persons, building and improving local
infrastructure and improving agricultural development.

China welcomes the necessary support from
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other relevant bodies
for the reconstruction and development of the Sudan.
China commends UNAMID's contribution to the
maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur and
supports its continued activities, in accordance with the
mandate to ensure the implementation of the priorities
that have been given to it. China hopes the Secretariat
and the African Union will keep in close contact and
conduct full and objective assessments ofissues such as
the implementation of UNAMID's transition plan and
Darfur's transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
so as to provide timely and feasible suggestions to the
Security Council.

The Sudan is an important country in Africa and
in the Arab region. Maintaining stability there not
only serves the long-term and fundamental interests of
the Sudanese people but also contributes to the peace
and the security of the wider region and of Africa as a
whole. China follows closely the developments in the
Sudan. The Transitional Military Council has engaged
with parties in the Sudan to carry out dialogue and
listen to their aspirations. China welcomes and supports
that development and hopes the relevant parties in the
Sudan can build consensus and jointly advance the
process of political transition and safeguard stability,
order and development in the Sudan. The international
community should respect the decisions made by the
Sudanese people themselves and adhere to the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States.

Along with the wider international community,
China stands ready to jointly play a constructive role in
promoting stability and development in the Sudan and
in Darfur.

