Mr. Godana (Kenya): The Security Council is today
gathered in a special ministerial meeting to deliberate
important issues on Africa. This is the second time that
the Council has done so, following last year's September
meeting, at which the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to submit to it a comprehensive
assessment of the African situation.

Last April, when the Secretary-General submitted his
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,
Kenya warmly welcomed it. We once again pay tribute to
the Secretary-General for being pragmatic, objective and
bold in his presentation and analysis of the current
situation and the way forward.

The report sets out a multifaceted and practical set
of recommendations for action by the international
community, the Security Council included. In his own
words, the Secretary-General wished the report to form
the beginning of a new relationship between the United
Nations and Africa. He has in this spirit challenged us all,
both individually and collectively, as organizations and as
States, to take the cue and seek to create a new beginning
that is results-oriented, productive and meaningful, and
one that is designed to resolve the current unhealthy
situation.

One of the most enduring truths that permeates the
report from beginning to end is the intrinsic linkage
between peace and development. This is an idea that we
in Africa are happy to see reflected in the report. I am
happy to note that the report is receiving positive
consideration by many bodies within the United Nations
system. In this regard, we welcome paragraph 2 of
resolution 1170 (1998), in which the Security Council

"Stresses that the challenges in Africa demand
a comprehensive response and, in this context,
expresses the hope that the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, other relevant bodies
of the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions and
other relevant organizations, as well as Member
States will consider the report and its
recommendations and take action as they deem
appropriate within their respective areas of
competence".

In order to succeed in building a framework for
enduring peace and stability in Africa, we call upon the
international community to support the African people in

 

strengthening the region's economic and social foundations
by providing assistance for development.

In the recent past, many have doubted the resolve of
the United Nations in its commitment to Africa. In the area
of conflict-prevention, major omissions in the early 19905
occurred that left an unfortunate experience with respect to
Africa. The intervention in Somalia and the non-
intervention in Rwanda were recently followed by the
Council's hesitation to intervene in the former Zaire and in
Congo (Brazzaville). That these unfortunate omissions took
place in the post-cold-war era, when the Security Council
had a much freer hand in deploying forces and when Africa
was more and more taking tangible and positive steps in
settling its disputes, is to be regretted. It is my fervent hope
that the current reassessment by this Council with regard to
its Charter obligations will make it possible for the Council
to avoid such moments of indecisiveness when faced with
similar situations in the future. We urge the Council to
establish clear criteria for authorizing peacekeeping and
enforcement action whenever situations arise, regardless of
their geographical locations.

Since the early 1990s, African States have embarked
on important first steps in instituting far-reaching political
reforms. Many have held free and fair elections. But a lot
more is needed in order to comprehensively promote and
enhance the process of democratization. In his report, the
Secretary-General has encouraged African Governments to
boldly institute the necessary steps in this direction. This is
an important challenge for African States as they seek to
establish firm structures that would ensure respect for
human rights, the rule of law and transparent and
accountable leadership.

The uprooting of hundreds of thousands of innocent
civilians from their homes in the Great Lakes region has
been a preoccupation for us for quite some time now.
Africa today has the highest number of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The problem of forced
displaced population in Africa is real. It is a problem of
grave concern not only from a human rights and
humanitarian standpoint, but also because, by virtue of its
sheer regional dimension, it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. Since 1994, forced
population displacements in the Great Lakes region have
continued to send ominous reverberations across the entire
continent. A proportion of that displaced population
constitutes what is now being referred to as armed labour.

Kenya is concerned that despite the evident danger
that this problem of forced population displacement in the
region portends, no meaningful action has been taken by
the international community in seeking to resolve this
crisis in a comprehensive manner since it emerged in
1994. I am glad to note that the Secretary-General wisely
raised this issue in his report. I wish to challenge the
members of the Council, as well as all members of the
international community - as individuals, States or
organizations - to summon sufficient political will to
deal with this problem once and for all.

Another important issue of concern to Kenya is the
problem regarding the illicit flow of arms. The Secretary-
General rightly identifies the flow of illicit arms to Africa
and in Africa as one of the greatest challenges that faces
the international community in addressing conflicts and
their prevention there. Today, Africa accounts for the
largest accumulation of small arms circulating worldwide.
There is therefore an urgent need to respond to this
situation in a comprehensive manner, as it affects the
security, political independence and social and economic
development of many African countries. In this
connection, we join those that support the holding of an
international conference on all aspects of the illicit arms
trade at the earliest possible opportunity, for the stemming
of this menace can be met effectively only within a global
framework. In this regard, we are encouraged by the
statement made by the representatives of the United States
and France.

It is evident that to succeed in building a framework
for enduring peace and stability in Africa, the
international community must work together with the
African peoples to strengthen the region's economic and
social foundations. In this context, assistance for
development is an indispensable complement to the
policies of African States and needs to be made sufficient
and effective.

At present, Africa's total debt is about $350 billion.
We believe that a more realistic and holistic policy on
debt is urgently needed. The appeal by the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) for an international agreement to
clear the entire debt stock for the poorest countries in
Africa deserves serious consideration. Steps should also
be taken to increase market access for African exports
through the removal of trade barriers and other
protectionist policies. We welcome the positive remarks
made by some colleagues today on this important issue.

Since the holding of the first special ministerial
meeting on this question in September 1997, new, specific
issues have been added to the African agenda. The

 

resurgence of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is of grave concern to us, particularly in View of its
impact on the region's stability. We believe that a
comprehensive approach to this conflict is needed in order
to resolve it.

The border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
another situation which worries us, as it could easily
destabilize the entire Horn of Africa once again. We call on
Ethiopia and Eritrea to use peaceful means to resolve their
dispute and to desist from resorting to force, and in this
regard, we urge them to cooperate with the OAU mediation
initiative.

Other issues that deserve urgent attention are the
internal conflict in Guinea-Bissau and the fragile situation
in Angola.

We are deeply concerned that the number of conflict
situations in Africa is going up instead of decreasing. We
pledge to work closely with others in the search for
peaceful solutions to all these conflicts.

Finally, the bombing incidents that took place in
Kenya, Tanzania and South Africa last month are a telling
reminder that the scourge of terrorism is a problem that
concerns not only other regions but Africa as well. In the
Kenya incident alone, 257 of our people have died and over
5,000 have suffered debilitating injuries, such as permanent
loss of sight or hearing. The cost of repairing some 70
buildings and the infrastructure which were devastated as a
result of the incident is now estimated at over $500 million.
Acts of terrorism, for whatever ideology or justification,
should not and cannot be tolerated. We call for concerted
international efforts aimed at an early conclusion of a
comprehensive international convention for combating
terrorism. In this regard, the suggestion to hold a world
conference on terrorism should be seriously explored.

In connection with this subject, we welcome the
positive development in the Lockerbie case and look
forward to its earliest possible finalization by way of the
commencement of a fair trial in the chosen neutral country
and the lifting of sanctions on the country of Libya.

