Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
its appreciation to the Nigerian presidency for initiating
this debate and for providing an excellent concept note
(S/2015/599, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General for his detailed briefing earlier today.

No country can be effective in pursuing its
national agenda without engagement with others.
That is particularly obvious for countries with modest
capacities. The regional and subregional levels of
cooperation provide an effective platform for pursuing
specific common objectives for countries bound by
common security goals, common values, or mere
geographic proximity. In the context of the present
debate, the global level of cooperation here in the United
Nations, inter alia, is a critical form of interregional
engagement.

As a member of numerous regional organizations,
including the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), Armenia benefits greatly
from the institutional strength and effectiveness of
the European regional and subregional landscape of
cooperation, including in the fields ofpolitical dialogue,
security, human rights, democratic transformation and
the strengthening of the rule of law, trade and economy,
culture and youth.

In our national context, the peaceful resolution of
conflicts on the basis of the norms and principles of
international law without exception are of particular
significance, given the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
within the internationally supported format of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship. This format is
by far the most effective one in our particular case for
several reasons, not least its capacity to sustain focus
on a compromise solution, to defuse tensions and to
prevent escalation. Consolidated support for these
negotiations by the international community, including
this body and the Secretary-General, is critical in
deflecting attempts to pursue mediation shopping and
lopsided, often highly biased interpretations of the
causes and consequences of the conflict.

Armenia welcomes the unwavering and continued
support of the United Nations system and the Secretary-
General for the established format of negotiations and
for the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs.

As a member ofthe CSTO, Armenia will continue to
deliver on its commitment to forge stronger cooperation
with the United Nations in order to contribute to
international peace and to United Nations peacekeeping
capacities. As a troop-contributing country, Armenia
has acquired considerable national experience in its
engagements in NATO-led peacekeeping operations
in Afghanistan and in Kosovo. Previously, Armenian
peacekeepers have also been engaged in Iraq. Over
the past year Armenia also has acquired new and
valuable experience in a United Nations-led operation
in Lebanon. Armenia has been investing its experience
in the strengthening of preparedness for peacekeeping
within the CSTO. In this context, we welcome the
expanding cooperation of the United Nations with the
CSTO, including between their respective secretariats.
We look forward to the United Nations presence at
and observance of a combined exercise of the CSTO
peacekeeping forces entitled "Cooperation 2015", to be
held in Armenia in early autumn.

Armenia attaches equally high importance to
its work within all other regional and subregional
organizations of which it is a member or with which
it has close cooperation. The present international
agenda, with proliferating threats, disagreements and
conflicts, makes it particularly urgent to redouble the
efforts made towards seeking common solutions and
sustainable dialogue. Smaller States are particularly
vulnerable and sensitive to situations in which
disagreements at the regional and global levels pose a
risk of the emergence of dividing lines. Armenia is not
an exception to such vulnerabilities and sensitivities.

Civil society is an important contributor to the
effective addressing of security challenges globally and
regionally. For decades, non-governmental organization
representatives and human rights activists have been
playing an indispensable role in promoting peace,
reconciliation, mutual trust and understanding. That
function remains a critical supporting and consolidating
factor for all peace processes, wherever they might
take place, not least in the peaceful settlement of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Such efforts must be
continually supported.

In conclusion, Armenia believes in the viability
and efficiency of both the United Nations and regional
mechanisms in enhancing trust, confidence-building
and dialogue among nations. Regional and subregional
organizations have an essential role to play. They often
have a better understanding of local circumstances,
tailored approaches and effective tools, as well as their
own resources and financing. Cooperation and dialogue
among States from the subregional to the regional to
global levels has been and remains the modus operandi
for the sustainability ofpeace, security and cooperation.

