Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I want to thank the Chilean delegation for its
commitment to development issues and for preparing
the concept note (S/2015/6, annex) that is guiding our
debate.

As this is the first time that my delegation addresses
the Security Council this year, I want to congratulate
and wish every success to the new non-permanent
Council members: Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

As we have heard in the Security Council on
several occasions, security and development are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing and key to attaining
sustainable peace. The Council has also recognized
that that relationship is complex, multifaceted and
case-specific. That is why the Council, in the framework
of its competencies and in addressing the issues on its
agenda, has a very distinct role in promoting decisions
that significantly contribute to sustainable and inclusive
development in those countries that are immersed in a
conflict or emerging from conflict it.

It is clear that, in and of themselves, purely military
or security strategies are not enough to address the
current conflict situations. The Security Council must
consider how to encourage the establishment and
development of conditions propitious to sustainable
peace, in which economic and social welfare are key
elements to which it can contribute. The Council has
taken steps in that direction and has incorporated
some relevant reconstruction tasks in some of the
peacekeeping operation mandates. However, these
practices are still emerging, and there are still sectors
in which we must deepen and strengthen our efforts.
As the Secretary-General said, what is needed is more
robust support and strengthening the work being
undertaken with the Peacebuilding Commission, the
other agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system, international financial institutions and
regional and subregional organizations.

Furthermore, and as was mentioned several times
in the course of this debate, a central element is the
participation and empowerment of women in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Women should be
part of the discussions and play a principal role in
the implementation of strategies for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, inasmuch as the gender
dimension is a sine qua non for establishing successful
strategies for peace.

I believe it is timely to recall the words of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, who in an
open debate of the Security Council of 2011 said

"It is clear that the Council is not the body to make
decisions regarding development. Nevertheless, we
must not ignore that its decisions have an impact
on the long-term development of countries and that
this is a fundamental component of any sustainable
peace."

The Minister went on to say that

"it is imperative that the activities ofits main organs
effect real change, make a meaningful contribution
to the well-being of populations and have a genuine
impact on the situations that have been on their
agendas for decades." (S/PV.6479, p. 10)

That is why Colombia considers it necessary to
continue working with greater collaboration among
the various components of the United Nations system
on those issues related to development and security.
The aim here is not to turn the Security Council
into a development agency. Rather, what it can do
is collaborate and draw on specialized experience
and knowledge, and develop synergies with other
components of the system tasked with addressing
development. A clear and appropriate division of work
is indispensable to achieve the best results and use
resources efficiently. The Council could make full use
of its working methods to benefit from the value added
offered by United Nations agencies and work with them
to achieve lasting solutions to these conflicts.

In conclusion, allow me to highlight two key
concepts in the relations between development and
security and the role of the Security Council.

National ownership is a fundamental principle that
should be continued, strengthened and supported by the
Security Council, recognizing that the State concerned
is the main stakeholder and under whose leadership
the priorities, programmes and integrated strategies to
resolve conflicts and promote development should be
established.

Secondly, creating and strengthening national
capacities and institutions is a priority issue.
Encouraging inclusive development in conflict-affected
countries requires knowledge, capacity and national
institutional structures that make it possible to achieve
the legitimate aspirations of the population.

The Security Council possesses considerable
potential for development in the framework of its
mandate and to contribute to that goal.

