Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
taken the initiative to hold an open debate on this
important question, which has a critical impact on
peace and stability in many countries, particularly
those in which central Governments have lost control
over their internal affairs.

Small arms and light weapons are no small
matter, despite their description, because they are a
source of disturbance and instability. As Governments
have been unable to control or trace them, they remain
a scourge and a cause of turmoil.

Allow me also to thank Ms. Hannelore Hoppe,
Officer-in-Charge for the Department for Disarmament
Affairs, for having presented the third report of the
Secretary-General, which he submitted as part of a
series of reports dealing with the illegal traffic in small
arms and light weapons. The report covers the period
from January to December 2005.

In his previous report, the Secretary-General had
made 12 core recommendations on the best ways and
means of dealing with the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. I will address some of the
recommendations which we believe to be important
and of concern to the international community in its
fight against that dangerous trade.

The first recommendation was for the Security
Council to call upon the Member States to support
efforts aimed at developing an international instrument
to enable States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
In that context, the international community,
represented by the United Nations, has made strenuous
and commendable efforts. Those efforts led to a
consensus on a draft international instrument of a
political character that included a number of provisions
concerning requirements for the marking of small arms
and light weapons; record-keeping; and cooperation in
the tracing of illegal small arms and light weapons.

My delegation followed closely, and participated
in, the deliberations of the Working Group established
by the General Assembly. We would have liked the
Group to have succeeded in adopting a legally binding
instrument obligating those countries and Governments
that export and import small arms and light weapons to
commit legally and morally to its provisions. However,
the different points of view and conflicting interests
prevented the conclusion of a legally binding
instrument. Nevertheless, we welcome the results
achieved so far and consider them a first step which,
we hope, will ultimately lead to reconciling differences
and giving international interests precedence over
narrow national ones. We hope also that this political
instrument will be progressively developed into a
legally binding one that will provide the means for
effective control of illegal trafficking in small arms and
light weapons.

The second recommendation highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General under consideration is a
call for Member States to use, as required, and to
provide technical and financial support to, the Interpol
Weapons and Explosives Tracing System.

To ensure success for the international
community's efforts to track the movement of illicit
small arms and light weapons, we need a database and
a central information system accessible to Member
States that can be used, when and as needed, to share
and exchange information. Interpol possesses such
capabilities, which ultimately makes it one of the lead
agencies in tracking and communicating information
on the movement of firearms. We therefore stress the
need to support that organization and to provide it with
the necessary technical and financial assistance. The
international community would be serving its own
interests by understanding Interpol's mission, believing
in it and providing it with information about both the
legitimate and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons as soon as such information becomes readily
available.

In that regard, we also support the third
recommendation contained in the report, which
encourages Member States that are in a position to do
so to assist the Secretariat in establishing the small
arms advisory service, on the basis of extra-budgetary
resources. Such assistance would allow the Secretariat
to continue to carry out meetings in the field with a
View to raising awareness of, and improving the
coordination of activities related to the threat posed by
illicit small arms.

Control of the trade in small arms and light
weapons has many advantages, the most important of
which is preventing armed conflicts and strengthening
the foundations of peace and stability. The sooner we
succeed in mustering genuine political will, the better
we can control that illicit trade, which will, in turn,
minimize the outbreak of armed conflict. We therefore
believe that it is extremely important to continue to
coordinate efforts among Member States at the
bilateral, multilateral and regional levels.

Coordination of efforts in the Arab region, to
which we belong, is satisfactory. Meetings of Arab
focal points entrusted with monitoring and tracking the
movements of small arms and light weapons are held
periodically, with a view to exchanging expertise and
following up on regional and international
developments in the field. Furthermore, the Arab
member States provide the secretariat of the League of
Arab States with the texts of laws and legislations
regulating small arms, which the secretariat of the
League of Member States then incorporates into a
database accessible to member States. That
information-sharing mechanism will allow members of
the League of Arab States to keep abreast of the
achievements realized and to benefit from the expertise
available in the Arab region.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
international community will succeed in safeguarding
the international priorities of disarmament, eliminating
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction,
upholding the right to self-defence, and addressing the
root causes of armed conflicts.

