Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
country is very pleased that you, Sir, are presiding over
the Security Council today. We consider you to be a
great friend of Mexico. We hope with all our heart that
this workshop will be a success and that its conclusions
will promote discussion in the Council on the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, links
with mercenaries and the threats they represent to
peace and security in West Africa.

We have listened very closely to the opinions and
proposals put forward by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, the Interim Commissioner of the African
Union, the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
representative of the Chairman of ECOWAS, the
representative of the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development, and
ministers of West Africa on this situation. It cuts across
all borders, because small arms and light weapons and
their connection to the use of mercenaries exist in other
conflict regions.

Mexico attaches great importance to the follow-
up and full implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Combat, Prevent and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in 2001, as well as
the proper coordination of activities among the
Security Council, including the design of mandates for
peacekeeping operations; the other organs and
programmes of the United Nations; and regional bodies
and agreements with specific mandates to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

Members of the Council periodically examine
developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. One of the greatest
causes for concern in our discussions has been the
excessive accumulation of small arms and light
weapons and their destabilizing effect on the region of
West Africa, in particular on the countries of the Mano
River Union.

We note that the illicit flows of those weapons
have not been stopped, despite the arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council. We therefore call
once again on all countries, particularly those countries
that export arms, to comply fully with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Similarly, we
support accompanying all legal transfers of arms with
end-user certificates as an effective tool for combating
the diversion of, and illicit trade in, small arms and
light weapons.

We encourage the States of West Africa to carry
out the necessary steps for full compliance with the
Moratorium agreed in 1998 on the importation of this
category of arms. Those efforts, as well as compliance
with the commitments entered into under the United
Nations Programme of Action, will lead to a reduction
in the amount of arms available to use by mercenaries.

The recruitment, financing, training and use of
mercenaries are a cause of concern to the international
community because of their responsibility for
violations of human rights and the provisions of
international humanitarian law, and due to their links to
the illicit trade in arms and diamonds and other
criminal activities in which they are involved.

Mexico is committed to combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and has
demonstrated its concern for that trade's links with
transnational organized crime, the illicit traffic of drugs
and international terrorism, as well as its negative
impact on democracy and the development of
countries. In that context, Mexico promoted the
adoption of the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Munitions, Explosives and Other Related Materials and
was an active participant in the negotiations on the
United Nations Programme of Action and on the
complementary protocol of the Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime, prepared in Vienna.

Mexico is particularly concerned that the
presence of mercenaries has been detected in the
conflicts in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire because those
activities not only contribute to the internal
destabilization of those two countries but also
constitute a risk for the stability and security of Sierra
Leone, Guinea and other countries of the subregion.
They also impede the access of humanitarian
organizations and agencies to the areas where refugees
and internally displaced persons are located.

We therefore reiterate the call made by the
Security Council in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2002/36) of 13 November 2002 on the
situation in Liberia, for States in the region to prevent
armed individuals from using their national territory to
prepare and launch attacks on neighbouring countries.
We also support the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union and the United Nations to put an end to
the practice of the use of mercenaries, including child
soldiers, in conflicts in West Africa.

I would like to mention the following suggestions
to prevent, combat and eradicate the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the use of
mercenaries in this region of the African continent.

The lessons learned in the disarmament process in
Sierra Leone should be taken into account in order to
carry out similar actions in Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire.
The collection and destruction of surplus arms should
be an integral part of peace agreements in the
subregion. The supervision of disarmament and
destruction activities by regional organizations and the
United Nations will provide a guarantee for preventing
excessive accumulations and the destabilizing effects
of these weapons.

The international community must continue to
support programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
Sierra Leone, as the lack of financial resources has
meant that a significant number of young people move
to conflict zones in the region where they can obtain an
income by taking up arms. The Security Council must
support the use of programmes of that type in Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire.

The countries of West Africa must strengthen
mechanisms for political consultation in order to deal
with the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and the phenomenon of mercenaries. The forums
provided by ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and the
Rabat Process must be used fully to benefit security,
safety, stability and peace in the subregion.

The Security Council must take into account the
regional context of the conflicts in Liberia and cote
d'Ivoire and promote mechanisms of coordination and
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in the search for peaceful solutions to
these crisis situations.

Finally, allow me to express Mexico's
appreciation to the delegation of Guinea for preparing
and leading negotiations on the annex to the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of this meeting.

