Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): In the
year following the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), one of the major achievements
of the international campaign to combat terrorism
launched after 11 September 2001, important results
were achieved in strengthening the anti-terrorism
potential of the United Nations and in the
establishment, under its auspices, of a broad
international coalition to counteract terrorism as a
serious threat to peace and security.

Belarus is firmly committed to a policy of
expanding international cooperation to combat
international terrorism and to implement resolution
1373 (2001). It considers itself an integral part of the
international anti-terrorism coalition. We value highly
the efforts of the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), which is charged with overseeing
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
CTC has become a key link in the United Nations anti-
terrorism system and has received needed support from
national and regional institutions involved in the
struggle against terrorism.

Belarus has submitted two timely reports for
consideration by the CTC on progress in its
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). It has also
submitted the questionnaire on the provision of
technical assistance to ensure more effective border
control to combat terrorism, illegal migration and
related criminal activity. Work is now under way on the
next report on the implementation of the resolution.

The dual political position of Belarus, which is a
kind of corridor between Europe and the States
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), makes it particularly important to ensure tight
border and customs controls to prevent the illegal
transportation of weapons and munitions and to halt
illegal migration, drug trade and other actions linked to
terrorist activity. Those measures require significant
material and financial resources.

Belarus has done much to improve border and
customs controls within the context of combating
terrorism and related criminal activity. Nevertheless, to
resolve that problem our State is counting on the future
assistance of the CTC, international organizations and
donor countries. In our view, the Security Council
meeting held at the ministerial level on issues related to
combating international terrorism, which took place on
20 January 2003, was very significant in terms of
determining the future strategy for the activities of the
CTC and of the Security Council as a whole. We
support the provisions of the declaration annexed to
resolution 1456 (2003), and we are ready to contribute
to the attainment of its objectives. Moreover, we hope
that, in the light of the approach set down in the
declaration, the process of implementing resolution
1373 (2001) will continue to be as open as possible and
will encourage a constructive dialogue between the
CTC and States regarding measures needed to help
States to fully carry out their obligations.

Continuing and giving fresh impetus to the
present dynamic of cooperation between the CTC and
Member States within the framework of resolution
1373 (2001) will be impossible without the further
consolidation of an atmosphere of mutual trust
regarding issues related to combating international
terrorism and respect for the positions of all members
of the international community on anti-terrorist
activity. Only thus will it be possible to foresee a
successful campaign against terrorism.

Belarus welcomes the intention of the CTC to
hold a special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations on 7 March 2003 at the
United Nations. The CTC initiative to merge the efforts
of international, regional and subregional organizations
to combat international terrorism will undoubtedly
promote closer coordination of action among those
organizations regarding the problem and will have a
positive impact on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) by Member States.

Regarding the CIS, Belarus, together with other
States, is taking measures to strengthen the potential of
the CIS Anti-Terrorism Centre and is considering ways
to involve that international body in the process of
promoting implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) at
the regional level, as a promising area for its future
work.

In conclusion, we wish to note that the practice of
holding open Security Council meetings at which all
Member States have the opportunity to state their
positions on the Council's anti-terrorism efforts is a
valuable way to assess the effects of measures
undertaken to overcome this global problem of our
time - namely, international terrorism - which is
currently having a significant impact on international
security policy. We hope that that practice will be
continued and that it will make it possible in the near
future to achieve a greater degree of unity among the
participants of the campaign to combat terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and to avoid the use of
double standards in the approaches taken by members
of the anti-terrorism coalition.
