Mr. Kpotsra (Togo)(spoke in French): Mr.
President, first and foremost, I wish to welcome your
assumption of the presidency of this prestigious United
Nations body during this particularly sensitive time
when the world is wavering between peace and war. It
is a sensitive period, because of tensions, conflicts and
threats of war prevailing all over that are continuing or
will not fail to cause many victims and destruction.

Sir, my delegation is convinced that this sad state
of affairs in the world can only reinforce your
commitment to the search and the strengthening of
international peace and security.

In addressing these warm congratulations to you,
my delegation would like to assure you that we have
great confidence in your eminent qualities as a skilled
diplomat to successfully conduct the Council's
proceedings during this month when all are looking at
the Council.

Mr. President, by including on the Council's
agenda the question entitled "Proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities:
threats to peace and security in West Africa", your
country, Guinea, is once again demonstrating its
unswerving devotion to peace, security, friendship and
the policy of good-neighbourliness. Our Government
welcomes this fortunate initiative, which again
provides an opportunity to the international community
to assess the crises in the subregion and to determine in
the light of the assessment that it makes the best ways
and means to provide West Africa with the political
stability and security that it so much wishes, with a
view to ensuring that the integration policy can
flourish.

Before going any further, I should like to bring
your attention to an excerpt from a speech delivered on
Friday, 7 March, by the President of the Togolese
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Gnassingbe Eyadema, in
the presence of His Excellency John Kufuor, President
of Ghana, the current President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), at the
opening of the Third ECOWAS Trade Fair:

"By creating ECOWAS, we sought an ideal
to become fact: to build a vast common market
for harmonious trade and development in a space
of peace and security. We rightly think that the
peoples and nations of West Africa are as capable
of taking their own fate in their hands, to succeed
in integrating their economies and to work
together to ensure their prosperity, as have the
peoples in Europe, America and Asia. We are
aware that no development effort is possible
without peace and security. Hence, we have
decided to give pride of place to dialogue,
working together and preventive diplomacy to
avoid having conflicts distract us from economic
progress.

"We have also come to understand that
ensuring the free movement of people and
goods- which is an essential component of
economic integration - peace and security must
be guaranteed to all member States of the
Community.

"Unfortunately, like other parts of the
continent, our subregion continues to be at the
mercy of fratricidal conflicts that threaten
development efforts and subregional integration.

"Day after day, the climate of insecurity -
which began in December 1989 with the Liberian
war - is spreading like wildfire. As if part of
some domino effect, since 19 September 2002,
Cote d'Ivoire too has been beset by civil war.

"That succession of armed conflicts is
simply the direct result of the free movement of
light weapons and of the recruitment of
unemployed young people who are trained in
ECOWAS member States to attack other member
States. If we want such wars to stop, we must do
our utmost to fully implement the Protocol on
Non-Aggression we signed at Lagos on 22 April
1978, precisely to ensure that the territory of a
member State cannot be used for the recruitment,
training or arming of assailants who would attack
another member State.

"Only strict respect for the Protocol will
make it possible for our subregion to avoid the
fratricidal wars that lead to the loss of many
human lives, destroy property, maim people,
drive millions of men, women and children into
homeless exile and delay economic development
and prosperity in our States."

That statement by Togo's Head of State conveys
the steadfast nature of our country's foreign policy,
which seeks to make peace, security and political
stability the fundamental goals of its diplomacy. It is
for that reason that Togo is working tirelessly to find a
peaceful resolution to conflicts and to establish
peaceful and good-neighbourly relations of cooperation
with our immediate neighbours and with other
countries. That Togolese presidential statement also
demonstrates Togo's commitment to contribute as
much as it can to ensuring that West Africa becomes a
region of peace and an area that promotes economic
integration throughout our continent of Africa.

The item on our agenda illustrates the fragility
and precariousness of West Africa, particularly as a
result of the conflicts in the Mano River region and the
civil war in Cote d'Ivoire. With the conflicts in Liberia
and Sierra Leone, our region has been moving for over
a decade towards a state of instability marked by the
length of those conflicts and by the scope of their
humanitarian, economic and social consequences.

The end of the war in Sierra Leone led us to
believe that there would be a climate of peace; but then
Cote d'Ivoire plunged into turmoil. How could one
explain that progressive extension of war from State to
State in our subregion? Looking at the situation, one
could say that the ease with which armed insurrection
and war take place so easily in West Africa is due to
the proliferation and circulation of small arms and light
weapons and to the ease with which those who provoke
such conflicts are able to find the necessary local and
foreign human resources willing and able to undertake
destabilizing actions, aggression and war.

However, that state of affairs can also be
explained by the inconclusive results of two essential
phases of the consolidation of peace. The first phase is
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants in order to strengthen peace; the second is
the implementation of economic and social measures
conducive to reconstruction and to reducing social
injustice.

As the Council will recall in that regard, many
measures were put forth to strengthen peace after the
tragic conflicts in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Unfortunately, they did not meet expectations. The
pledges of financial contributions to bring about the
effective and seamless disarmament, demobilization
the reintegration of former combatants and the
reconstruction of economic and social infrastructure
have generally not been honoured. It is therefore
important to acknowledge that policies to re-establish
peace have had very limited success, thereby
promoting the proliferation and circulation of light
weapons and the resurgence of mercenary activity. That
activity has often occurred because former combatants
and child soldiers are prepared to provide their services
and expertise whenever conflict erupts or when there
are uprisings against constitutionally established
regimes.

Given the dangerous situation that has emerged as
a result of the proliferation of light weapons, on
31 December 1998, the heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS adopted a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa for a renewable period of three years. That
was followed by the establishment of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASD) in March 1999 as a body to
support the Moratorium. Progress has been made in the
implementation of those two mechanisms, namely,
through the setting up of national commissions to
combat the proliferation and illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons, the training of armed and security
forces and the collection and destruction of light
weapons. All of that justifies the importance and utility
of such bodies to our countries.

The essential goals of those mechanisms require
that the international community further strengthen and
make more effective its support through appropriate
financial assistance that makes it possible for the
mechanisms to better carry out their missions to deal
with the problems caused by the flow of these
weapons. The porous nature of borders makes it
possible for such weapons to, among other things,
nurture banditry, insecurity and cross-border crime.
Similarly, the international community must provide
considerable assistance to our States so that we can
work to implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which was adopted by the United Nations Conference
on the subject that was held in July 2001. A review of
that Programme will take place in a few months.

Togo is a party to the Organization of African
Unity's Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa, which was adopted on 3 July 1977 at
Libreville. We are also a party to the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries, which was adopted under
the aegis of the United Nations on 4 December 1989.
We are therefore very concerned about the use of
mercenaries in the current conflict in West Africa. We
vigorously condemn the use of mercenaries in
conflicts, and urge countries and others involved in
providing the services of mercenaries to end their
activities for the sake of peace, security, friendly
relations, brotherhood and cooperation among our
countries. At the international level, the United Nations
Convention against Mercenarism should be further
implemented and adapted to deal with new pernicious
forms of mercenarism today.

We are fully aware of the fact that the major
objectives of ECOWAS cannot be achieved without
first establishing lasting peace, security and
harmonious understanding between our member States.
Accordingly, Togo continues to attach special
importance to the Protocol on Non-Aggression signed
at Lagos on 22 April 1978, the scrupulous adherence to
which will spare West Africa from the challenges
posed by the wars it is experiencing.

In accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, the provisions of the Protocol
stipulate that member States must refrain from
threatening or using force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of other member
States. It also forbids States from committing,
encouraging or supporting any acts of subversion,
hostility or aggression against other member States.
States must also prevent such damaging acts on the part
of resident foreigners or non-resident aliens who are
using their territory as a base for operations. The
Council will agree with my delegation that the Protocol
provides a basis for healthy political cooperation
among ECOWAS States in order to decisively prohibit
any actions that may impair their sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity.

We are convinced of the relevance and positive
nature of the Protocol. My country would therefore like
to reiterate what President Eyadema said at a recent
CENSAD summit held in Niamey by the members of
the Community of Sahel and Saharan States. He stated
that every member State must fully respect and
implement the letter and spirit of the Protocol, as the
economic integration that will promote the prosperity
and happiness of the people of West Africa depends
upon it.

It is a fact that the proliferation and illicit
circulation of light weapons and the use of mercenaries
in West Africa poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. Our States must act to further pool
their efforts to eliminate these factors of political
instability that are also capable of destroying economic
and social infrastructure. Particular attention should
also be given to the traffic carried out by independent
intermediaries who facilitate the illicit trade in light
weapons between manufacturers and armed groups.
That must by achieved by strengthening national
legislation in this area and by increasing cooperation
between States in the field of border control.

Lasting peace and security, which our countries
wish so much to see and for which they are actively
working to lay the foundations, cannot be established
unless the international community makes a genuine
and determined commitment, through assistance that is
more sustained and is commensurate with our goals in
the implementation of policies for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and the financing of peace-building processes.

There is also a need for relevant and rigorous
measures to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries
from the usual countries of origin and for the countries
that produce and export weapons, particularly certain
members of the former Warsaw Pact, to commit to a
true ban on the illicit export of weapons to African
countries in general, and ECOWAS States in particular.
This is the only way that the States of ECOWAS can
hope to stem the proliferation of and illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and counter mercenary
activities, in order to preserve the peace and security
that are so dear to each of our nations, and to assure the
harmonious development of countries of the subregion.

