Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like now to
take the floor in my national capacity.

We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto for his briefing and personal
contribution to achieving peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan. We commend the work and dedication
of his qualified staff. We are also grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Fedotov for his comprehensive
update, and we express gratitude to Ms. Ghizaal
Haress from, the Independent Constitution Oversight
Commission, and to my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Saikal, for
their statements.

Today we are delivering our final statement as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council under
the agenda entitled "The situation in Afghanistan". As
the President of Kazakhstan, His Excellency Nursultan
Nazarbayev, noted in his policy address to the Security
Council, Afghanistan has been one of the main
priorities during our work at the Security Council. We
will continue to advocate for peace in our brotherly
country, both in the General Assembly and regional
organizations, and bilaterally after our membership of
the Council ends.

During our membership in the Security Council

we tried to focus the Council's attention on solving the
Afghan conflict to establish peace in that country and
to achieve progress and prosperity in the entire region.
We organized two visits to Afghanistan, which was
already mentioned. The first was in October 2017 by the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities. The second
visit was a Security Council visit in January. We also
held a ministerial debate in January (see S/PV.8162)
under the agenda item "Building regional partnership
in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link
security and development". Kazakhstan also initiated
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2018/2,
on Afghanistan and Central Asia. Those initiatives
helped Security Council members better understand
the current situation in Afghanistan and seek ways to
solve it.

Kazakhstan welcomes the parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan, which were held at the end of October.
It was an important milestone in the county's path to a
more democratic State. At the same time, we express our
concern at the increase in violence during the electoral
period. We agree with the Secretary-General on the
need to draw lessons from the electoral process and take
appropriate measures during the upcoming presidential
elections next year, both in terms of organization and
security. It is important that all political stakeholders
take responsibility for the process.

Kazakhstan fully supports the efforts of the
international community to assist Afghanistan. In that
regard, we welcome the recent Geneva Ministerial
Conference and its joint communique. We will continue
to support the Kabul process, regional structures and
initiatives, as well as the Heart ofAsia-Istanbul Process
and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan.

We commend our Central Asian partners for
holding the Tashkent conference in March, as well as
their efforts under the Moscow format. We also take
note of the importance of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group and the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity, in addition to the Resolute Support Mission.
We co-sponsored resolution 73/88, on Afghanistan,
which was recently adopted by the General Assembly.
However, all the efforts of the international community
must be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned in order to
be successful.

Despite considerable measures taken by the
Government of Afghanistan, the security situation
remains volatile. We are concerned about the increase in
the number of victims as a result of large-scale attacks
by anti-Government forces and terrorists, including
those using improvised explosive devices and suicide
bombings. We recognize the serious problems with
the high-level of civilian casualties, including women
and children, as a result of air strikes. We are worried
about the ongoing process of recruiting young men and
women for terrorist organizations, as well as incidents
of abductions and sexual abuse of children and attacks
on schools and medical institutions, during the current
reporting period. We welcome the joint efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
UNICEF in addressing those issues.

We remain deeply alarmed by the growing presence
of militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in northern Afghanistan. Despite the losses they
suffered, especially in Jowzjan province, the threat
posed to the Central Asian countries by their destructive
activities remains significant. ISIL militants continue
recruiting combatants, including from the countries of
the wider region.

The drug problem persists in Afghanistan, even
though the years 2017 to 2018 saw a decline in drug
production as a result of the drought, per the latest
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in November. The drought affected many areas
of Afghanistan and led to lower opium prices. In that
regard, we believe it is important to offer farmers
alternative ways of growing crops in order to reduce
their involvement in the production and manufacture of
narcotics in the future.

We are convinced that close economic cooperation
among countries of the region and the integration of
Afghanistan into the region will enhance stability
and facilitate the Afghan reconciliation process. It
will help create new opportunities for young Afghans
and reduce their participation in organized crime and
opium production, which, in turn, will have a positive
impact on the situation in the country and in the wider
region. We propose the promotion of an integrated
three-pronged strategy for Afghanistan based on the
following principles.

The first is strengthening the nexus between
security and development. That means that investment
in trade, transit routes, transport, and infrastructure
development should be seen as assets in promoting
stability through enhanced connectivity. We are
confident that projects approved by Central Asian
countries and Afghanistan, such as the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline, the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project power line and other planned railways and
highways, as well as the Lapis Lazuli Corridor and the
Belt and Road Initiative, can lead to economic growth
and prosperity, which would inevitably strengthen
security and stability in Afghanistan. We note with
satisfaction the improved World Bank ranking for
Afghanistan's investment climate going from 183 to
167 due to the ease of doing business. That indicates
progress toward the goals of the transformation decade
and economic growth.

The second principle is revamping the regional
approach. As threats today are transboundary, their
resolution requires concerted efforts, which also
happens to be more cost-effective than a country-
specific approach. Central Asia is today able to help
Afghanistan mitigate its challenges and increase its
connectivity to the world economy. Pursuing a regional
approach is the way forward to success.

The third principle is enhancing the role of
the United Nations by improving the capacity of
its agencies to coordinate and operate effectively
as one United Nations. That requires a revision of
practices both at Headquarters and in the field - a
streamlining that is ever more important in the light
of the diminishing development aid. We reiterate the
importance of enhancing the efficiency, transparency
and accountability of the work of the United Nations
in Afghanistan and Central Asia through enhanced
coordination and cooperation.

We also call on donors to increase their contribution
to peace and development in and around Afghanistan.
Kazakhstan is working on the establishment of a United
Nations regional centre in Almaty to ensure coordinated
support to the countries of the region in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. In that regard, we urge
the United Nations and its country offices to participate
in that regional development strategy for the benefit of
Afghanistan and the region. For its part, Kazakhstan
intends to host a high-level meeting ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe on Afghanistan
in 2019. The goal of the meeting is to develop regional
partnerships and discuss the link between security
and development.

Kazakhstan attaches particular importance to the
role of women in conflict resolution. In that regard, we
organized a regional conference in Astana in September
entitled "Empowering Women in Afghanistan".
The conference focused on sustainable economic
growth in Afghanistan through empowering Afghan
women, including in the business sector, and regional
cooperation with an increased focus on education. The
European Union, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan intend to
launch ajoint project in 2019 aimed at educating Afghan
women in universities in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
The project will be based on the success of our own
programme, with a total budget of $50 million. Thanks
to that programme, around 1,000 Afghan students are
studying in our universities.

Kazakhstan has made extensive investments in
the development of regional transport infrastructure
and continues to provide financial, technical and
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan supports the principle
of solving the problems of Afghanistan on the basis
of mutual benefit. We will continue our work with
regional and international partners to bolster stability
in the region. I would also like to thank all the members
of the Security Council for their fruitful cooperation
on the Afghan dossier and express our hope that in the
years to come we will continue to work collectively to
bring peace and stability to Afghanistan.

