The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, Canada, Egypt, Iraq, Israel,
Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, the Republic of
Korea, Slovenia and South Africa, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Ruyt
(Belgium), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Aldouri (Iraq), Mr. Lancry
(Israel), Mr. Motomura (Japan), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Navarrete (Mexico), Mr.
Adekanye (Nigeria), Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea), Mr. Petric (Slovenia) and Ms. Ndhlovu
(South Africa) took the seats reservedfor them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Executive Director of UNICEF to take
a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/200l/852, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I shall now give the floor to the Secretary-
General.


