Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming His Excellency Mr. Xanana
Gusmao, hero of the independence of Timor-Leste,
President of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. I
remind him that my country, through its permanent
representation in New York, took part in the
celebrations of the first hours of dearly bought
independence, sharing the joy of the Timorese nation.
We still cherish the memory of that jubilant crowd.
Thus, we have listened with great attention to President
Gusmao's briefing to the Council, and we appreciate
all that has been achieved in slightly less than four
years.

My delegation also listened with interest to the
briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, concerning the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste for the period 16 August
2005 to 13 January 2006 (S/2006/24). The report
struck my delegation in the following respects.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that despite
some residual insecurity, the overall situation in Timor-
Leste has improved, thanks to the progress made in
establishing effective democracy in the country. That
progress is marked by the successful holding of local
elections, together with the strengthening of the
juridical framework through the adoption of key
provisions and greater respect for human rights on the
part of the police.

My delegation believes that what is occurring in
Timor-Leste is a hopeful and encouraging sign. That
was attested to by the presentation to President Xanana
Gusmao on 31 October 2005 - after only five years of
work - of the final report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which was
responsible for considering violations of human rights
in Timor-Leste between 1974 and 1999. That report, a
copy of which was transmitted to the Secretary-
General last Friday, will, we hope, make it possible to
establish the truth of that grim chapter of the history of
Timor-Leste in order to assist with national
reconciliation while ensuring that the perpetrators of
atrocities are punished and that reparation is granted to
the victims.

Moreover, the preparation of legislation
concerning veterans - which would, among other
things, determine who could claim the status of former
combatant and what rights and benefits would be given
to veterans - together with its current consideration
by a special national parliamentary commission, also
reflects the resolve to settle the accounts of the past.
My delegation therefore is anxious to see the final
adoption of that legislation.

My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
improvement in the good neighbourly relations
between Timor-Leste and its neighbours Indonesia and
Australia. The settlement of the border dispute with
Indonesia is most welcome. However, my delegation
would urge the two parties to complete negotiations on
the demarcation on the one per cent of the border that
is unresolved so that a final agreement can be reached.

We note the commencement in August 2005 of
the Commission for Truth and Friendship set up by
those two countries, and we expect that Commission to
resolve the outstanding disputes of the past in order to
strengthen the ties of friendship and cooperation. To
that end, a basis for trust must be established between
the two countries. For that reason, we stress that the
incident of 6 January 2006 - on a border that can
rightly be considered sensitive - which caused the
deaths of three persons, should be investigated
promptly. We understand the difficulties on the ground
involving control in a young nation, but we encourage
the Timorese Government to see that the investigation
is rapidly concluded.

My delegation also welcomes the signing on
12 January 2006 of an agreement between Timor-Leste
and Australia on the sharing of revenues derived from
the exploitation of natural resources in the Timor Sea.

All of the progress has been made possible
through the resolve of the local authorities, thanks to
the determined support of the United Nations and the
effective work of the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL) in carrying out the three programmes
mandated by the Security Council. Those programmes
involve support for the establishment of essential State
institutions, for the development of the police force
and strengthening the Border Patrol Unit, and for
respect for the rules of democratic governance and
human rights.

My delegation believes that much has been
achieved in the country, thanks to the support of the
international community. But we must not flag in those
efforts because, like a child taking its first steps,
Timor-Leste still needs the support of the international
community. It is thus the responsibility of the United
Nations and other bilateral and multilateral partners to
continue to support Timor-Leste in all areas so that it
may commit itself with determination to the path
towards progress.

Timor-Leste still faces some challenges,
including the holding in 2007 of presidential and
parliamentary elections, for the first time in the country
since independence. My delegation thus calls for the
United Nations and various bilateral and multilateral
partners with proven experience in the preparation and
conduct of elections to provide support to help the
country build on its achievements, some of which still
remain somewhat fragile.

Another challenge is strengthening capacity in all
areas aimed at sustainable development, which will
enable the country to lay a firm basis for political,
economic and social stability, not forgetting the
establishment of a genuine democracy concerned with
human rights.

We believe that great progress has been made in
Timor-Leste, but there is still a need to build on those
achievements. The problem that arises today, in light of
what we have heard, is not whether the international
community is doing enough, but how to continue to act
to greater effect.

Congo therefore hopes that the Council will
consider the best way to respond to the expectations of
the Timorese people and that it will continue to be
attentive to their requests, including for a continued
United Nations presence after the expiry of UNOTIL's
mandate at the end of May 2006 through the presence
of a special political office, as has been noted here
today.

