Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you and the Jordanian presidency
for convening this important debate on countering
Violent extremism.

Today, the number of foreign terrorist fighters is
higher than ever in history. The fact that a significant
proportion of these individuals are young people, some
barely 15 years old, is a particularly alarming trend.
One of the most pressing security challenges we face
today is preventing these young people from falling into
the grip of violent extremism. Yet the difficult reality
is that there is no single, one-size-fits-all solution to
this multifaceted problem. The motivation behind
youth radicalization varies by society, and diverse
factors are involved, ranging from extremist ideology
to socioeconomic factors and personal grievances.
Preventing radicalization will therefore require an
equally diverse and multidimensional approach. I
would like to share a few thoughts in this regard.
First, we need to more effectively counter extremist
narratives and propaganda that prey on the minds of
young people. Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant promote and propagate distorted
Views and interpretations of religion, history and
the world through the Internet and social media. To
prevent the radicalization of youth, we need first to
have a clear understanding of why these messages
have such an appeal to so many young people across
different societies. Simply shutting down websites
and suspending Facebook accounts will not yield the
results we hoped for. We must develop and disseminate
effective, persuasive messages that will convince these
young people that the ideologies promoted by extremist
propaganda are just false and empty promises. Our
winning point should be free and diverse societies
that offer the right path to true dignity, opportunities
and happiness for all. Schools, families and religious
communities should play a central role in telling young
people that they will not find any opportunities or
future in extremism.

Secondly, community engagement is of particular
importance in preventing youth radicalization, as
stressed by resolution 2178 (2014). Disaffected youths in
each society are easily targeted by extremist recruiters,

who lure them with promises of a new community
and collective identity. It is the home communities
themselves that are best placed to protect their youths
from such vulnerability, by providing them with a sense
of belonging, identity andjob opportunities.

Thirdly, from a broader perspective, we should
delve deeper and address the social gaps and ills that
allow violent extremism to take root. Good governance,
the protection of human rights and development are all
essential elements in addressing the grievances and
hopelessness that breed Violent extremism. Of crucial
importance, too, is the role of education that teaches
our future generations universal values such as human
dignity, diversity and tolerance, as emphasized in the
concept of global citizenship education.

As Secretary General Ban Ki-moon stressed at
the Washington, D.C., Summit on countering violent
extremism last February, preventing violent extremism
may be the greatest test that our human family faces in
the twenty-first century. It is time for us to join hands
and pull together our wisdom in order to tackle this
formidable challenge.

