Mr. Mantica (Italy) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to express to you, Mr. President, my
heartfelt thanks for giving me the opportunity to speak
today on a subject - the protection of civilians in
armed conflict - that could easily be described as
historic, given its importance and timeliness in the
context of the contemporary human rights system.

The suppression of human rights violations
caused by domestic and international conflicts is one of
the main aspects of Italy's efforts and of the European
Union to defend and promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms throughout the world. After the
adoption of resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, we
have encountered difficulties and made limited
progress in protecting civilian populations affected by
conflict situations, as indicated by the conclusions of
the Security Council presidency in June 2005. Given
those conclusions, Italy is deeply convinced of the
urgent need to guarantee the physical safety of
displaced populations and other more vulnerable
groups - particularly women and children - who are
too often the objects of atrocious forms of abuse and
violence. Therefore, helping to create a safe
environment for endangered populations and groups,
particularly in the most high-risk areas, must be a
fundamental objective of peacekeeping operations.
This is an issue that Italy has followed closely for a
long time.

Thus there is a need for another Security Council
resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict that takes into account, inter alia, the outcome
of the recent United Nations summit with respect to the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, which Italy fully concurs with and supports
resolutely.

My country is committed to making an effective
and well-thought-out contribution to the protection and
promotion of human rights, in particular in the tragic
and complex situations created by armed conflict.
Allow me to recall that Italy worked resolutely to
include in its priorities, during its European Union
presidency in 2003, the question of the protection of
vulnerable groups in domestic conflicts. Indeed, we
were well aware of the magnitude of that phenomenon,
which, as stressed in the latest report of the Secretary-
General of November 2005, involves nearly 25 million
displaced persons within countries in conflict.

Given its concern in that respect, Italy focused its
attention primarily on acquiring greater knowledge
about the phenomenon and on training peacekeeping
forces, so as to meet the need to safeguard the
fundamental rights of civilian populations involved in
situations of war and conflict.

My country's efforts were also focused on the
tragic situation of the millions of children involved in
armed conflict. The rights and fundamental freedoms
of those millions of small victims continue to be
systematically violated. Italy has historically been
one of the countries in the forefront of efforts to
eradicate the phenomenon of child soldiers and their
recruitment. During its presidency of the European
Union in 2003 in particular, Italy devoted its efforts to
the elaboration and adoption of the European Union
Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflict in the
framework of the understanding with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Olara Otunnu;
with UNICEF; and with the principal non-
governmental organizations in that sector.

Moreover, Italy is engaged in active and ongoing
cooperation with UNICEF in the context of
collaborative projects aimed at improving the situation
of such children by helping countries needing such
assistance in the process of rehabilitating those
smallest Victims and reintegrating them into society.

Given my country's long history of working for
the protection and promotion, pure and simple, of
human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the
world, I cannot but reiterate here Italy's resolute
support for the draft resolution under discussion and
express the sincere hope that it will be adopted today.
The achievement of our common goal - to devise
effective international means to ensure the protection
of vulnerable populations and categories which are
facing grave threats in the context of domestic and
international conflicts - is near at hand, and our joint
efforts must focus on limiting, mitigating and
combating all forms of abuse and violence afflicting
civilians in modern-day armed conflicts.

