The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara
(Sierra Leone), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
letter dated 17 May 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/2000/446.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2000/449, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following other documents:
S/2000/433, letter dated 15 May 2000 from Sierra
Leone, transmitting the text of a government statement
on the third meeting of the Joint Implementation
Committee on the Lome Peace Agreement;
S/2000/434, letter dated 15 May 2000 from Sierra
Leone, transmitting the text of a broadcast message to
the nation by the President of Sierra Leone; and
S/2000/44l, letter dated 9 May 2000 from Mali
addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2000/449) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.
In favour:

Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1299 (2000).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 10.55 a.rn.

