Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): The United Nations has the
fundamental responsibility to maintain and strengthen
international peace and security in conformity with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
fitting that the Council should highlight the centrality
of the rule oflaw at a time when the world is facing ever
increasing threats to international peace in the form of
transnational organized crime, terrorism, piracy and
climate degradation. The many organs and agencies of
the United Nations must play a role in contributing to
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law at
the international level.

Strengthening the rule of law is essential in order
not only to maintain peace but also to enable sustained
economic progress. The flashpoints of future conflicts
may well lie in access to critical resources, such as
water and energy. Grievances based on violations of
economic and social rights have the capacity to spark
violent conflict that could spill over borders. The
United Nations has a vital role in promoting dialogue
on the realization of economic and social rights for all
peoples.

The Charter of the United Nations sets out the
framework for the development of a rules-based
international order. It enshrines the principle of
sovereign equality, which continues to be intrinsic to
the international legal order and must be respected as
international rules are made and implemented. It is a
principle that protects all States, especially the small
and the weak.

Upholding the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of Member States, especially in
situations that do not pose a threat to international
peace and security, is also fundamental. Specific
circumstances may call for involvement, which should
be based on the agreement of all States. Unilateral and
selective applications of the principles of international
law must be avoided. In particular, Sri Lanka urges
an end to unilateral and selective coercive measures,
including economic embargoes against sovereign States
that hinder the freedom of trade.

Disputes in the international arena that continue to
occur must be settled in accordance with the principles
developed to settle disputes peacefully. Justice should
not always be reduced to retribution or to resorting to
force. Negotiations, arbitration, mediation and other
peaceful means must be the first essential recourse.

Close cooperation in the application of laws at
the national, regional and international levels is vital
in addressing the growing problems of transnational
organized crime and terrorism, which threaten
international peace and good order. States have
concluded a wide range of treaties on mutual assistance
that facilitate such cooperation.
The rule of law must also be understood in
the context of ensuring the economic progress of
individuals and societies, particularly with regard to
the right to development. An equitable and democratic
international financial structure is necessary in order
to fully protect the rule of law at the international
level. In maintaining a balance among economic
progress, development, environmental sustainability
and the utilization of natural resources, the scope of
the rule of law can be broadened at both the national
and the international levels. As the rule of law at the
international level evolves, the responsibility to make
a contribution should not rest with a handful of States
nor should its implementation be selective. Selective
implementation would cause doubts to arise with regard
to credibility.

A key aspect of the rule of law at the international
level is the codification of international law. The
United Nations has been undertaking such work
since its inception. In addition, the multilateral treaty
framework, developed mainly under the auspices of the
United Nations, has played a seminal role in advancing
the international rule of law. The Secretary-General is
the depositary of more than 530 multilateral treaties,
which cover almost all aspects of human interaction.
Domestic compliance with treaty obligations, which is
an obligation under the Vienna Convention on the Law
of the Treaties, is an area where the United Nations can
play a crucial and helpful role, particularly in assisting
States with capacity-building.

Conflict and post-conflict settings are complex
environments with many competing priorities.
Therefore, we must recognize the tensions and
difficulties that emerge, while trying to balance
national security interests and the maintenance of civil
rights under such trying local circumstances. Countries
with strong legal foundations have the resilience and
the capacity to restore democratic institutions. There is
a need to give countries such as those the much needed
space to begin that restorative process so as to reach an
even keel. The United Nations must provide leadership
in capacity-building efforts to address the gaps by also
factoring in local sensitivities.

Sri Lanka reiterates its willingness to engage with
the United Nations in order to promote the rule of law
on the basis of constructive, fair, non-selective and
objective assessments.

