Mr. Taalas (Finland): Finland aligns itselfwith the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank Foreign Minister Rassoul and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jan
Kubis for their statements.

The pledges made at the Tokyo Conference
demonstrated the sustained commitment of the
international community to supporting Afghanistan.
They were a sign that Afghanistan will not be
abandoned after 2014. The Afghan Government and
the international community need to concentrate on
implementing the outcomes of the Tokyo Conference,
with a special reference to mutual accountability. The
finalization of national priority programmes is equally
important.

Finland has consistently supported Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is one of our largest development partners.
Our total official development assistance from 2012
to 2016 will be more than 125 million euros. A major
part of that aid will be channeled through the United
Nations system and the World Bank.

The Tokyo Conference highlighted two priorities
for Afghanistan's future development: good governance
and human rights. It is crucial for the consolidation
of democracy that the presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2014 and 2015 be credible and transparent.
In this regard, the passage of the electoral law and
the duties and structure of the Independent Election
Commission should be secured within the first quarter
of 2013. Every effort should be made to enable the
elections to be free and fair. The full and effective
participation of all citizens-women and men alike-is
essential.

Good governance, democracy and the rule of law
are priorities in Finland's cooperation with Afghanistan.
The Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund has been a key
financing channel for our aid.

Human rights, particularly women's rights, were
another priority in Tokyo. Although remarkable gains
have been made, the progress achieved in fulfilling
Afghanistan's human rights obligations has not been
sufficient. Today, Afghan women still face insecurity
in public spaces and at home as well as lack of access
to an unbiased justice system and legal representation.
The full and equal participation of women at all levels
of society is a prerequisite to development, economic
success and social stability. We should ensure that
human rights, including women and children's rights,
remain at the heart of our common strategy for
Afghanistan.

In 2010, Finland started a twinning cooperation
with Afghanistan on the implementation of the
Council's resolutions on women, peace and security.
Trilateral cooperation between Finland, Afghanistan
and UN-Women is under way, with the Afghan National
Action Plan for Women in Afghanistan as a goal.

An active civil society plays a central role in
developing society. In Afghanistan, civil society can
offer valuable support to the Government's efforts to
improve the well-being of all Afghans and in fighting
corruption.

Finally, I would like reiterate our full support
for the dedicated work of the United Nations and its
agencies in Afghanistan. In particular, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has a
central role in providing good offices to the peace
process, promoting and protecting human rights and
coordinating international aid efforts.

