Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for providing this opportunity for
a candid and constructive discussion with our Force
Commanders, whom I thank for their briefings earlier
and whom I am putting on notice that I intend to ask
them many questions. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for everything that he has had to say,
as well as for his leadership on those issues. I think it
is very important that our Force Commanders are able
to be here in the Security Council to speak truth to us
and to be as clear as they need to be. I hope they will
be candid.

Before I go into some of those questions, though,
I would like to recall the visit that some of us on the
Council made to Mali in November 2017. We had the
great honour of participating in the dedication of a
memorial to all who lost their lives serving in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. I think it is important that we take a
moment to pay tribute to all the peacekeepers who have
given their lives in service of the United Nations, and
to all the brave women and men who are serving now in
support of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I would like to offer the United Kingdom's thanks for
their service and for the service and leadership of the
Force Commanders who are here today.

Peacekeeping is one of our Organization's greatest

achievements. It is an integral part of what our peoples
around the world think of when they think of the United
Nations, and this year we are celebrating the seventieth
anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping. As we
strive for reform in the wider United Nations system,
so we must work to make peacekeeping more effective
and efficient through better mission planning, more
pledges of troops and capabilities and stronger mission
performance. We therefore welcome the report on
improving peacekeepers' safety and security by the
former United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, the United
Nations action plan and the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative that has resulted from that.
We see three key priorities. First, the Security Council
should take a longer-term view of conflicts and set
more strategic and sequenced mandates. Secondly,
peacekeeping should be better coordinated with other
United Nations activities, such as peacebuilding and
development. Thirdly, peacekeeping performance
should be improved, including accountability where
performance is not up to standards.
Here is my first question for our Force Commanders.
How is the action plan being implemented in their
missions? Major General Deconinck mentioned
the importance of intelligence in peacekeeping and
situational awareness, that is, sending our peacekeepers
out with knowledge of what is going on around them.
What improvements have been made in the use of
peacekeeping intelligence and how can we in New York
further support those efforts? In the context of efforts
to further improve peacekeepers' performance, I know
that the Secretariat has been tasked with developing an
integrative performance policy framework. What is the
Force Commanders' view of what such a performance
framework should contain? How can we incentivize
better performance in missions?

I have a few specific questions on some of the
missions. I appreciated what the Force Commander of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur had to say about the reconfiguration work.
I would like to ask Lieutenant General Ngondi what he
thinks the next step in the Mission's reconfiguration
should be. In particular, are any challenges being
faced in delivering changes alongside the mandate to
protect civilians?

Again, I thought that the statement on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) was very helpful. We
know, of course, that MINUSMA is working in the
same space as the Joint Task Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel. How well are the military actors
working together to ensure that they are contributing
to the common objective in their defined ways? How
is the link with development and humanitarian work
doing? Is there a coordinated plan that brings together
the various military actors, and the development actors
behind them, to make the most of all the tools we have
at our disposal in Mali?

Finally, regarding the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan - and this is something we talked about
yesterday in the Council (see S/PV.8249) - I would
like to say how impressed we have been by some of the
swift and decisive action taken recently in response to
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. That is obviously
still a big problem in some missions. It would be helpful
to have some examples of best practices used in South
Sudan that might help other missions learn and respond
effectively if that happens to them. I will conclude
there, in the spirit of interactiveness, and would like to
reiterate my sincere gratitude to all of those serving in
blue for the good of all of us.
