Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Swedish presidency for organizing this open debate,
which enables the United Nations membership to renew
its collective commitment to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. We are reassured by the Secretary-
General's statement that his overriding priority is the
pursuit ofpeace in a holistic, cross-sectoral manner. His
words of wisdom remind us of the hard work involved
and the importance of conflict prevention as a value, in
itself, without undue external political pressure. From
our national perspective, we wish, in that connection,
to underline five points.
First of all, we consider conflict prevention to be,
first and foremost, a national responsibility supported by
responsive and functioning institutions, the promotion
of human rights and the rule of law and, most important,
sustainable development. The active participation of all
segments of society, including women and youth, is
fundamental to efforts to mitigate the potential drivers
of conflict, as well as elements with a propensity to act
as spoilers.

Secondly, the United Nations has a critical role to
play in facilitating and monitoring the implementation
of internationally agreed commitments to support
Member States in achieving those conditions in response
to their needs and at their request. The United Nations
analytical capacity should help identify any structural
or systemic drivers of conflict, including the growing
challenges posed by violent extremism, climate change,
irregular migration and organized crime, among others.

Thirdly, the ability to objectively decipher the early
warning signs of conflict - usually manifest in hatred
or intolerance, socioeconomic exclusion, systematic
discrimination and persecution on ethnic or religious
grounds - should give the United Nations an edge
in devising context-specific engagement strategies.
The range of tools available at its disposal for the
pacific settlement of disputes needs to be deployed
with sensitivity to the realities on the ground and in
consultation with the relevant national, civil society
and humanitarian actors.

Fourthly, as highlighted by the 2015 review of the
United Nations peace and security architecture, the
Organization's conflict-response strategies need to
be situated within the broader framework of political
solutions to conflicts. As a contributor to increasingly
complex United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Bangladesh recognizes the need on all sides to manage
expectations through a comprehensive, nationally
owned and internationally backed approach to
sustaining peace.

Fifthly, the current fragmentation in the United
Nations response strategies needs to be remedied
through incremental work in clarifying the various
conceptual and mandate-related issues, the fostering of
regular consultations across the principal organs and
the mobilization of enhanced and adequate resources,
thereby avoiding unnecessary competition and
duplication. Meaningful cooperation with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations must be pursued
jointly and strategically.
It is worth remembering that the most effective
bulwark against conflict, hostility, war and the
illegitimate use of force is one constructed within the
minds of men and women through the promotion of an
enduring culture of peace. In this year for peace and
beyond, Bangladesh will continue to work towards
realizing our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's vision for
regional and international peace.

