Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for his
customary detailed and moving account of the situation
in Syria. I assure him that Ukraine fully supports his
urgent call for 48-hour humanitarian pauses in that
country.

Before going directly to the subject, I would like
condemn in the strongest terms the recent terrorist
attack in Gaziantep and to express Ukraine's sincere
condolences and solidarity with the people and the
Government of Turkey.

The latest report (S/2016/714) of the Secretary-
General on today's subject does not, as usual, leave
much room for optimism. We continue to see the same
parade of horrors and breaches of commitment. The
image of Omran Daqneesh, a little boy in Aleppo who
managed to escape death despite the raining down on
him of shelling and bombs reportedly launched by the
combined Syrian and Russian forces, is going to haunt
us all as a sign of our collective failure to bring peace to
Syria and prevent the unfolding tragedy in Aleppo - or,
in the words of Under-Secretary-General O'Brien, as a
sign of humanitarian shame upon us all.

According to independent non-governmental
organizations present on the ground, 233 civilians,
including 142 children, were killed in indiscriminate
exchanges of fire between the rebels and Government
forces in the first two weeks of August alone. It is
impossible to comprehend that the Syrian Government
continues to bomb its citizens. Mr. Al-Assad is still
keeping the Syrian people hostage to his own and his
allies' plans to change the equation on the ground. How
long can we allow the Syrian regime to kill its own
people in the name of fighting terrorists?

The deteriorating security environment in
Syria continues to have a negative impact on the
humanitarian situation. Military activities, air strikes
and shelling go unabated on all active fronts of the
Syrian battlefield - Aleppo, Idlib, Homs and Hama,
among other places. It all results in a further increase
in the number of people living in besieged and hard-to-
reach areas. We therefore welcome all efforts exerted to
alleviate the situation, particularly the resumption and
due functioning of the Al-Ramtha border crossing on
the Jordanian-Syrian border.

Like the delegation of the United Kingdom, we are
increasingly alarmed by accounts of the extensive use
of incendiary weapons by Russia. Especially revealing
was the report published by Human Rights Watch on
16 August, mentioned previously, according to which
these devastating weapons were used at least 18 times
over the past nine weeks, including recent attacks on the
opposition-held areas in Aleppo and Idlib on 7 August.
There is no shortage of data with regard to the use of
such weapons in Syria, and we repeat our call on the
Secretariat to follow up on this matter and to present its
findings to the Security Council.

It is equally extremely alarming that the Russian
Federation is moving a new types of arms- and
bomb-carriers to bases in closer proximity to Syria.
This positioning can hardly be interpreted as the
confidence-building measure needed to bring the
parties back to the negotiating table.

We are also concerned about the cruise-missile
strikes carried out by the Russian Black Sea Fleet
warships from the waters of the Mediterranean at
targets near Aleppo on 20 August. The efficiency of
those air strikes is doubtful, since it is not yet known
whether militants from the Jabat Fateh Al-Sham
or those who are considered to be members of the
moderate opposition were targeted. We look forward to
the Russian Federation providing the Security Council
with all the necessary information in that respect.

Finally, we join the United Nations and our
colleagues in calling on all the parties to the conflict
to immediately provide unconditional, unimpeded and
sustained access to the people in besieged and hard-to-
reach areas across Syria. As I already mentioned, we
support the United Nations-led efforts to impose a 48-
hour pause in fighting in Aleppo province. It needs to
be stressed that this pause should not be a window of
opportunity for the regime and its allies to regroup their
forces, but rather a vital chance and opportunity for
humanitarian relief to reach the population of Aleppo.
The decision of Special Envoy De Mistura to adjourn
the International Syria Support Group Humanitarian
Task Force in Geneva on 18 August is a strong sign of
concern in that respect.

