Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): It is my honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Slovenia.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
priority of the Human Security Network. We highly
welcome the Security Council's attention to this key
issue. While the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579) highlights several challenges to the
implementation of the concept - including the need to
enhance humanitarian access and protection by United
Nations peacekeeping and relevant missions - in all
brevity, we would like to reflect on three main points
with regard to the issue of accountability, which we
understand to be the central sub-theme of today's
discussion.

First, respect for international humanitarian and
human rights law and accountability for its violations
are not only indispensable to the protection of
civilians, but are key ingredients in achieving
sustainable peace and thus preventing relapse into
violence. The protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot be achieved without promoting respect for and
observance by States of their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law, first
and foremost with a view to ensuring accountability in
the event of grave violations. Special attention should
also be given to those in vulnerable situations, such as
women and children, who face great and multiple risks
during conflicts.
Secondly, the Security Council plays a crucial
role in helping to ensure accountability, including
individual criminal accountability. On the one hand,
experience shows that the use of fact-finding missions
helps to strengthen the credibility of United Nations
actions in response to allegations of violations of the

11-5866]
rules of international law on the protection of civilians,
and that they pave the way to establishing individual
responsibility for perpetrators of violations. Fact-
finding missions ought to be used within the Security
Council's respective mandates with greater regularity
and frequency, while ensuring a consistent approach.

On the other hand, while it is the States' primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, the
International Criminal Court today stands at the centre
of the system of international criminal justice to ensure
justice and accountability where national judicial
systems have failed. The Security Council has a key
role to play in preventing impunity by referring
situations to the Prosecutor of the Court. In doing so, it
must be consistent. It must be able to say which cases
are referred to the Court and which are not. And once it
has referred a case, it must provide its full support to
the Court in fulfilling its mandate.

Thirdly, the Human Security Network would like
to draw the Council's attention to the recent creation
by the Human Rights Council of a mandate for a
special rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence. The new
mandate was created by a consensus of all regional
groups. We welcome that creation as a clear
acknowledgement of the insight that accountability -
along with truth-seeking processes, reparations to
victims and institutional reforms designed to guarantee
that past abuses do not reoccur 4 must be an integral
part of a more holistic and people-centred approach of
United Nation strategies, including on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

As reaffirmed in its declaration of 23 September,
the Human Security Network encourages promotion by
the United Nations of a comprehensive approach to
fostering truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of
non-recurrence after gross human rights violations and
serious violations of international humanitarian law
have occurred, especially in the strategic and
operational planning of peace operations and in the
domain of donor coordination. We view the Security
Council as uniquely placed to bring this to bear in the
field. In that regard, we commend the World
Development Report 2011 on conflict, security and
development and the recently released report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies
(S/2011/634).
