I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your friendly country, South Africa, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are confident that you will be able to successfully manage the work of the Council. I would also like to thank you for convening this open meeting. I have listened attentively to the statements by my colleagues today. I would once again like to express our gratitude to those Member States that uphold international law and the Charter of the United Nations and that have condemned the use of chemical weapons and other weapons of mass destruction anytime, anywhere and in any circumstances. I would like to emphasize that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is a technical organization. However, in relation to the Syrian chemical-weapon issue, it has been transformed from a technical organization with noble goals into a pawn in a geopolitical game controlled by the United States of America and its allies. Instead of being a faithful custodian of the Chemical Weapons Convention and ensuring that it is implemented without politicization or polarization, the OPCW has become a tool that is being used to pressure and target a State party to the Convention with a view to advancing hostile agendas directed against the Syrian State. Since acceding to the Convention in 2013, Syria has made every effort and strived with the utmost earnestness and diligence to implement all its treaty-based obligations in a credible and transparent manner, despite the strict timetables established by the OPCW and the extremely difficult conditions that Syria was dealing with at the time. Syria nevertheless did everything that was asked of it and cooperated fully with the OPCW's Technical Secretariat and teams, to which the OPCW and its Director-General have attested. A few days ago, we cooperated with and provided all of the required assistance to the Declaration Assessment Team, which visited Syria recently, as well as to another team that departed Syria on 24 November. In its documented reports, the Technical Secretariat has acknowledged that all Syrian chemical weapons and declared production facilities were destroyed. Ms. Sigrid Kaag, who is currently a Minister in the Government of the Netherlands, said in her briefing to the Council in June 2014 that Syria had fulfilled all of its obligations. At the time, she was the Special Coordinator of the OPC W-United Nations Joint Mission, a post she held in 2013 and 2014. Syria has fulfilled all of its commitments, while Western countries and the United States have broken their promises by using the OPCW as a tool to pursue their political agendas. The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that it has not used chemical weapons and that it remains committed to cooperating with the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat and the Declaration Assessment Team in order to resolve all outstanding issues and enable the matter to be closed once and for all as soon as possible, ensuring that it will no longer be part of a political game or used as fodder for media disinformation. On 15 November, Syria submitted to the OPCW Technical Secretariat its eighty-fourth monthly report on activities related to the destruction of chemical weapons and production facilities in the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic for the period from 16 October to 15 November. In that report, the Syrian National Committee for the Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention reaffirmed its readiness to continue holding technical meetings and consultations with the Technical Secretariat in order to resolve all outstanding issues, as had been previously agreed. It also reaffirmed that Syria remains completely committed to cooperating with the Technical Secretariat through structured dialogue aimed at resolving all of those issues. Such dialogue has led to significant progress on many of those issues, which can now be closed. In the light of the ongoing cooperation between the Syrian Government and the OPCW, the Syrian Arab Republic hosted an OPCW inspection team that carried out a seventh round of inspections at the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre facilities in Barzah and Jamrayah. We also hosted an OPCW team tasked with removing remote monitoring equipment, in accordance with the decision adopted by the Executive Council on 24 July 2014, which provides that such equipment must be removed five years after installation. From 8 to 14 November, the inspection team conducted a seventh round of inspections at the Scientific Studies and Research Centre. The Syrian National Committee provided all assistance to and cooperated fully with that team so as to enable it to complete its mission in full. During the final meeting, the head of the inspection team acknowledged that the team had been able to conduct all of the visits it had requested and thanked Syria for the cooperation and support it had provided during the visit. Despite the Syrian Government's cooperation with the OPCW and its teams, certain Western countries continue to cast doubts on the declaration made by Syria and question Syria's cooperation with the Technical Secretariat. In doing that, they are misrepresenting the cooperation of Syria with the Declaration Assessment Team and deliberately overlooking the progress made so far in order to perpetuate the issue. My Government regrets that certain members of the Security Council have not addressed this issue in an objective and professional manner or complied with the rules and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations during the discussions that take place in the course of the monthly briefings on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). As part of the role-swapping game that the United States is playing with certain Western countries, France has formally submitted to the OPCW Technical Secretariat a draft decision prepared by the United States that had already been distributed secretly by the United States to missions accredited to the OPCW in The Hague. Moreover, the Netherlands has submitted to the General Assembly a highly politicized draft resolution entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, directed at a specific State, my country, which figures in four of the nine paragraphs in the draft resolution. In that connection, I would like to draw attention to the involvement of the Netherlands in the scandal related to supporting terrorist organizations in Syria that played out before the eyes of the international public. Mark Rutte, the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, recently admitted that he had personally intervened to obstruct parliamentary investigations into his Government providing millions of dollars to some 22 terrorist groups, including the Levant Front, which even Dutch institutions have designated a terrorist group. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Stef Blok, previously called for the investigation to be halted, saying that it would lead to major problems, including the revelation of top-secret matters, and embarrass allies, which would necessarily be impacted by the investigation. It should be noted that after Belgium, the Netherlands is the European country that accounts for the largest number of terrorists, estimated to be in the hundreds, fighting with terrorist organizations in Syria and Iraq. Moreover, in February 2017, the intelligence agency of the Netherlands acknowledged that it was dealing with dozens of Dutch children who had travelled with or without their parents to areas in Syria and Iraq where the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant was present and had received military training from that extremist group. In September 2018, the Dutch broadcasting service NOS also confirmed that the Government of the Netherlands was supporting the Levant Front group, which it had designated as a terrorist organization, and had provided equipment and logistical assistance to that group between 2015 and 2018. Those actions reveal that the Netherlands and the West are pursuing blatantly hypocritical policies with regard to counter-terrorism and the protection of human rights. The Government of the Netherlands fears that those scandals will be uncovered. That is why it has made new claims and allegations about Syria and recently attempted to submit the aforementioned draft resolution, which is directed against my country in particular, to the General Assembly, with a view to covering up its involvement in and support for terrorism. It is also not surprising that Western countries, which continue to falsely claim that they care for the Syrian people, should continue to support and protect the terrorist organizations and groups that are responsible for inflicting suffering on the Syrian people and violating their rights. The German magazine Der Spiegel has revealed that Khalid Al-Saleh, the leader of the so-called White Helmets terrorist group, and his family were deported from Jordan and sent to Germany, where they were received with open arms by the German Government. Two years ago, the German Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution, during its review of the request made by the leader of that terrorist group, concluded that he remained committed to his radical and extremist beliefs and that he had links to terrorists. The terrorist materials and contacts with terrorist groups that were found in his telephone left no doubt in the minds of the German authorities that his arrival in Germany would be fraught with risk and could threaten German national security. The German Foreign Office nonetheless decided to host him in Germany, ignoring the warnings about him. He was not found acceptable by any of the security agencies of either the United States or Jordan. In conclusion, my country's Government once again calls on all States members of the OPCW to reject attempts to politicize what is by nature a technical organization. We also call on them to address the politicization and serious flaws that have crept into the work of the OPCW and are undermining its status and credibility.
