Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Having had the opportunity to listen to more than 40
preceding speakers, the great concern of the international
community over the current and future situation in Africa
is quite obvious.

However, it is also clear that beyond the rhetoric and
the generally well-developed reports, there is a lack of
practical action and of the necessary political will on the
part of industrialized countries to find ways to resolve the
mounting and pressing problems of an entire continent.
Those problems are not limited to internal conflicts or
conflicts between States, but rather relate primarily to the
poverty, marginalization and underdevelopment in which
African nations are mired. We observe with concern that
the measures that are announced are weak and poorly
structured, while the African continent urgently requires
massive and multifaceted assistance.

As a result, the continuous and systematic attention
to the complexities of the situation in Africa goes well
beyond the purview of the Security Council. While not
disregarding the merits of this debate, we are convinced
that it is up to the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and other bodies to act as coordinating
centres for designing and implementing long-term
measures that would guarantee the security, stability and,
above all, the economic and social development of Africa,
all of which are inextricably linked.

The inescapable reality is that there are currently
more armed conflicts taking place in Africa than in any
other continent. More than one third of the African
countries are now or have recently been in conflict
situations. If we really want to find effective and lasting
solutions we cannot overlook the fact that the roots of the
current problems are found in the centuries of colonial
exploitation during which African economies were looted
and distorted in order to turn them into providers of
natural resources, raw materials and cheap manpower at
the cost of the annihilation and enslavement of tens of
millions of people.

Nor can we overlook the fact that the current unjust
and unsustainable international economic order continues
to treat Africa as an economically undeveloped source of
natural wealth, that serves the unsustainable consumption

 

patterns of industrialized countries, among which are
included the former colonizers.

Official development assistance currently represents
only 0.23 per cent of the gross national product of
developed countries, which is well below the already
insufficient 0.7 per cent that they had promised. This
affects African countries in particular.

In 1998, Africa received less than $5 billion in foreign
direct investment, representing only 3 per cent of the world
total. From a level of $4.9 billion in 1997, Africa's current
account deficit rose to the dizzying height of $16 billion in
1998. Forty-four per cent of the African population, and
more than 50 per cent of the population in sub-Saharan
Africa, lives in conditions of absolute poverty. The debt
burden of African countries rose to $350 billion in 1998,
which is more than 300 per cent of the total value of goods
and services exported from that continent.

We cannot hope to stop the cycle of violence in Africa
without developing and implementing solutions to help
achieve the sustainable development of its economies. This
is particularly so in this era of neo-liberal globalization in
which the marginalization of developing economies and of
the most vulnerable populations and the gap between the
underdeveloped South and the industrialized North continue
to grow.

Not only are the financial and material resources
devoted by the international community and the
international financial institutions to combat the real causes
of conflicts in Africa completely inadequate, but there is
also insufficient emergency financial aid being devoted to
the needs of the African continent.

To illustrate the humanitarian crises in many African
countries, most of which are the result of conflicts, we
simply need to point out that in 1998 more than 8 million
of the approximately 22 million refugees in the world were
to be found in Africa. While the media have covered
Kosovo to the point of saturation, the serious conflicts in
Africa have gone almost un-noticed. Similarly, while the
Security Council acts expeditiously in certain situations
because of the interests of some members, in the case of
many African conflicts they simply issue sporadic
statements, even as its own resolutions continue to be
flagrantly violated. The case of Angola and UNITA's
violations constitute the clearest example of this.

Such unequal attention is also reflected in the
insufficient response to Africa's resource needs, a response
that is much lower than in the case of other continents. It
is therefore necessary for us to devote the necessary
resources to this undertaking, which, as the Secretary-
General says in his report, is both "reasonable and
doable". (S/l999/1008, para. 103)

Very little coverage has been given to the silent but
alarming crisis of malaria and AIDS in Africa. The
continent does not have the minimal resources to deal
with the 23 million cases of AIDS that have already been
reported and that grow exponentially every day. Two out
of every three people infected by HIV live in Africa.
More than $250 billion would be required in order for
every patient in Africa to receive the necessary treatment
that victims in rich countries already receive. Where are
those resources to come from if today African countries
can barely afford to devote $10 per capita per year from
their meagre budgets to health expenditures? It is for this
reason that 9 out of 10 people in the world who die of
AIDS are from the African continent.

For Cuba - a country with deep African roots and
a profound vocation of solidarity - it is an unshirkable
duty to continue to contribute, despite its economic
difficulties and meagre resources, to the development of
the brotherly peoples of Africa. Almost 1,400 Cuban
workers are currently providing assistance in Africa in
various important sectors. The integral health plan that
Cuba is developing in Central America and the Caribbean
has been extended and will continue to be extended to
African countries without any economic benefit for our
country. Roughly 200 Cuban doctors are now providing
their services completely free of charge in a number of
African countries, a figure that should grow in the
immediate future and that does not include those who
work under contract - among whom over 400 are to be
found in villages in southern Africa. No fewer than 3,000
Cuban doctors are at the disposal of this tormented and
exploited region of the world as part of the new
programme of completely free services that we are
developing in the poorest countries of Africa that have the
most difficult health conditions. We urge the
industrialized countries to cooperate by contributing
medicine. The life of a child can very often be saved by
administering in a timely way a vaccine that costs only
pennies.
Similarly, we will promote the creation of free
medical schools with Cuban doctors in order to ensure
that health workers in the field are adequately trained.
Hundreds of African students are taking courses in Cuba
at various levels and about 24,000 African professionals

 

and technicians have graduated from our centres and we
have trained more than 5,000 students; these people now
contribute directly to the economic development of their
countries. Up to 1998, more than 1,100 African students
had graduated in Cuba in the health sector alone.

Furthermore, in recent years more than 80,000 Cuban
civilian workers have lent their services in Africa, including
almost 25,000 doctors, dentists, nurses and general health
workers.

Cuba is ready to contribute valuable human resources
to any comprehensive and urgent health campaign in
Africa.

Africa urgently needs the international community; but
the international community also needs a stable, strong and
prosperous Africa.

