Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The Security Council
has long recognized that the situation in Yemen
threatens international peace and security. It has
caused the world's largest humanitarian crisis, which
gets worse by the day. The conflict creates ungoverned
spaces in which terrorists can operate, poses security
threats to countries in the region and international
shipping, and fuels regional tensions.

While international attention is rightly focused on
the horror that continues to unfold in Syria, the Council
must not ignore the appalling situation in Yemen. We
have a duty to respond, using all the tools at our disposal.
We must show unity of effort and purpose to put an end
to this terrible and destabilizing conflict. That is why
we have submitted draft resolution S/2018/156, which
is before us today.

The United Nations sanctions regime is a critical
tool that we must use to pressurize the individuals
and organizations bent on undermining peace and
security in Yemen. We welcome the work of the Panel
of Experts, which has played a key role in supporting
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014) in carrying out its mandate,
including through the provision of recommendations
regarding the implementation of measures decided
upon in resolutions 2140 (2014) and 2216 (2015). It is
vital that the Panel's work continue.

Furthermore, we in the Council must not ignore
the growing ballistic-missile threat emanating from
Yemen, which gravely threatens international peace
and security. Attacks such as those launched on 22 July,
4 November and 19 December against civilian targets
in Saudi Arabia are unacceptable. They undermine
the prospects for peace, prolong the conflict and put
civilian lives at risk. The Council must speak out with
a united voice against such attacks. We can do this by
voting in favour of the draft resolution before us today,
which strongly condemns these attacks.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
fact that Iran failed to take the necessary measures to
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer
of short-range ballistic missiles, missile propellant and
unmanned aerial vehicles to what was then the Houthi-
Saleh alliance, as reported by the Panel of Experts. We
agree with the Panel's assessment that in the light of
that, Iran is in non-compliance with paragraph 14 of
resolution 2216 (2015). Iran, and other States that violate
Security Council resolutions, must be held accountable
for it. The Council must stand firm in the face of
non-compliance by States and send a clear message
that it will not be tolerated. That is what the Charter of
the United Nations demands from us - respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law.

We are also deeply concerned about the growing
humanitarian crisis in Yemen. A record 22.2 million
people are now in need ofassistance, which is 3.4 million
more than last year. Last year's United Nations
humanitarian appeal was only 70 per cent funded, and
this year's appeal stands at $2.96 billion. We encourage
all Member States to respond fully to it. Restrictions on
vital humanitarian access continue to be imposed by all
the parties to the conflict. The United Nations Panel of
Experts has made the impact of access restrictions on
the people of Yemen clear. Draft resolution S/20l8/156,
which the members of the Council have before them,
therefore calls for full and unfettered access for
humanitarian and commercial cargo through all of
Yemen's ports, including Hudaydah and Salif, and for
supplies to be increased beyond pre-November levels.

This is an important year. With a new United
Nations Special Envoy in place, it is vital that the
international community redouble its efforts to achieve
a political solution to the conflict. We call on all the
parties to the conflict to resolve their differences
through dialogue and consultation, and to refrain from
provocation. Until an enduring political settlement is
reached, we must maintain the sanctions regime in
order to deter those who would otherwise use violence
to achieve their political aims.

The United Kingdom has worked hard with all
Council members in order to reach consensus on a draft
resolution that responds to our concern about all the
ongoing political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges in Yemen, and the threats arising from the
illicit transfer and misuse of weapons. Today we spent
more than five hours in detailed talks with delegations,
and we have proposed a number of compromises. I am
personally grateful for the patience that everyone has
showed today. We have tried to agree on a text that
provides a balanced and impartial assessment of the
situation in Yemen but that does not shy away from
calling out those whose actions undermine international
peace and security.

Today we must ShOW that we in the Council are
united against a threat to Yemen's future. We must also
send a clear message that we support the independence
and integrity of the Panel of Experts. We in the Council
rely on those independent expert international panels.
We may not always like all of their reports, and we
may find their conclusions politically inconvenient, but
if we want the United Nations to function, we should
support them in their work.

Those who do not vote in favour of the draft
resolution today are preventing us from sending a clear
message to those who seek to undermine peace and
security in Yemen and the region beyond. They are also
failing in their duty to do all they can to uphold the
international rules-based system and hold States that
violate resolutions agreed on by the Council to account.
With that in mind, I strongly urge everyone here to vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

