Mr. Theron (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and on arranging this important
meeting. My delegation also wishes to commend
Ambassador Chowdhury for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council in June.
My delegation is grateful for the presence of the
Secretary-General this morning and for his important
statement. I also wish to thank Ambassador Kamel
Morjane for his excellent briefing regarding the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation welcomes the detailed information
from Ambassador Morjane about the general situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the fact
that the ceasefire has been holding. We also note the
progress made so far in the disengagement and
redeployment of forces, as well as the overall progress
in the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The information has provided the Council with
an excellent opportunity to evaluate the matter and
reflect on future strategies. My delegation wishes to
make use of this opportunity to reaffirm its
commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the
Kampala plan and the Harare sub-plans on the
disengagement and redeployment of forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as to
Security Council resolutions on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Furthermore, we welcome the progress in the
preparation for the inter-Congolese dialogue and note
that the preparatory meeting was postponed until 20
August due to organizational difficulties. We note with
appreciation the Congolese Government's support for
the dialogue and its efforts to facilitate the dialogue.
My delegation reiterates its position that the dialogue
should take place on Congolese soil and be conducted
without foreign interference.

However, we note with deep concern that some
parties still continue to frustrate the peace process, in
violation of agreements and Security Council
resolutions. In this regard, we are particularly
concerned that the city of Kisangani and its
surroundings are still not demilitarized, as demanded
by resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000 and
resolution 1355 (2001). My delegation therefore calls
on the Security Council to enforce its decision on this
matter by invoking measures envisaged under
paragraph 28 of its resolution 1355 (2001).
Specifically, in that paragraph, the Council expressed
its readiness to consider possible measures that could
be imposed in accordance with its responsibilities and
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations in
case the parties fail to comply fully with resolution
1355 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.

My delegation remains deeply concerned about
the acute humanitarian situation facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this regard, we reiterate our
previous call to the international community for
assistance to the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also strongly support the projects
initiated by the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
urge that they be expanded. Such projects, together
with the opening of the Congolese river network, apart
from their economic benefits, can also assist
confidence-building in the country.

As stated at the time of the decision, my
delegation welcomes the extension of the mandate of
MONUC until 15 June 2002. However, we express the
hope that the Security Council will, in considering the
mandate and size of MONUC in its phase III
deployment, take fully into account the demands and
requirements of the peacekeeping operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to extend its
profound gratitude to Ambassador Kamel Morjane for
the outstanding service he has rendered to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. His
diplomatic skills and personal commitment have
contributed significantly to the progress achieved thus
far in the peace process. My delegation wishes him
well in his future endeavours.

