Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would also like to add
my voice to those of all who thanked all the briefers.

I want to start by underlining what my French
colleague said, which is that the elections represent
a historic moment for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I also want to echo Ms. Zerrougui's point
about the fact that the elections truly expressed the
will of a majority of the Congolese people and that
we must commend the patience they showed during
the postponement of the elections and the delay in
announcing the results.

We take note of the provisional results as published
by the Commission electorale nationale independante.
We recognize that the results have been contested by the
opposition and by members of civil society. Right now,
I want to echo what everyone has said, that what is most
important is ensuring that the situation remains calm.
We therefore call on all sides to refrain from violence.

The electoral process has not ended. As others and
our Belgian colleague have said, what is most important
is full transparency. To that end, Internet access must
be restored. The Electoral Commission must then
release detailed election results from polling stations
and especially from the compilation centres. After we
see the published results from the Commission and
those arrived at by civil society, we must ensure that
the challenges are handled as has been described. First,
the appropriate legal procedures must be followed
and, as the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) have requested,
there must be a political dialogue. We urge the African
Union and SADC to continue to be engaged in a
political dialogue and in the process for publishing the
results. What is most important is that a dialogue be
held and work to create real trust among the parties in
the country.

I want to end by echoing Ms. Mohammed's words
when she said that calm, peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are very important
not just for the country but for the entire region and
for all of Africa. I also support the call by my French
colleague for a press statement in which the Security
Council also demonstrates its unity on the issue.

