Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great pleasure to address the
Council again today and to inform it about key political
developments that have taken place in Kosovo over the
past three months. Today, I would like to brief the Council
on the following issues: the state of the implementation
of the normalization agreement between the Republics
of Kosovo and Serbia, the landmark progress made
towards European Union integration, and stability and
achievements on a number of domestic issues.

Let me start by expressing our sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his support
of peace and stability in Kosovo and the region. We
welcome his efforts to understand the situation on the
ground and to present a more realistic overview of the
progress in Kosovo.

In the past three months, Kosovo has engaged
proactively in implementing the obligations arising
from the first agreement governing the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. There is a new
political dynamic in Kosovo, where we have achieved
substantial results. However, serious challenges remain,
which can be overcome only with political commitment,
flexibility and visionary dedication. In my View,
reaching inter-State agreement is a good basis for the
normalization of relations and mutual acceptance by
both countries, but that should also serve as a basis for
reconciliation and recognition.

Since 19 April, 15 joint meetings between Prime
Ministers Ivica Daeie and Hashim Thaci have been
held in Brussels, thanks to the excellent mediation of
Baroness Ashton on behalf of the European Union. In
line with the provisions of the implementation plan,
the main issues discussed in those meetings were:
dismantling illegal and parallel Serb security and
judicial structures; the formation of a Serb municipality
association; the organization of local elections; and
discussions on energy and telecommunication. I can
confirm here today that there has been some progress
in the integration of a police force, establishing an
association and finalizing preparations for local
elections. At the same time, there has been no significant
progress on the integration of justice structures and in
the areas of energy and telecommunication.

On 26 June, the Assembly of Kosovo ratified an
inter-State agreement between Kosovo and Serbia by a
more than two-third majority, namely, 84 votes, which
included support by the opposition. After that, our
Government submitted a number of amendments to the
Assembly regarding the law on local self-governance,
the rights of communities and the budget. Those
legislative changes will facilitate the implementation
of the agreement and will enable Kosovo's institutions
to extend their democratic and legal authority into the
northern municipalities.

On 11 July, after a long society-wide debate, the
Assembly of Kosovo approved a law on amnesty.
The law aims to facilitate the integration of former
employees from Serb parallel structures into Kosovo's
institutional system. The generous list of exemptions
from criminal prosecution and punishment for criminal
offences is a huge compromise for our side. It is a
political act taken for the sake of the normalization
of inter-State relations and in support of peace and
reconciliation.

The amnesty law has led to a political reaction
from an opposition faction in Kosovo. Therefore, the
law is currently under review by our Constitutional
Court. As a democratic country, we fully respect the
independence of the justice system. However, we
remain hopeful that the Court will confirm that the
amnesty law is in accordance with our Constitution.

In accordance with the normalization agreement and
the implementation plan, we have had a breakthrough
regarding the establishment of the association of Serb
municipalities. A preparation team has been established,
consisting of representatives from the four northern
municipalities. The team will prepare a statute for the
future association of the Serb municipalities, based
on the statute of the existing Association of Kosovo
Municipalities and in accordance with Kosovo law.

Another area of progress is the integration of the
former Serb police into Kosovo's law enforcement
institutions. Some concrete steps have taken place
already in this area. The Kosovo police has established
a regional police department for the northern
municipalities. It has also appointed a provisional
regional director ofpolice, who is working in accordance
with Kosovo law. There is a clear legal framework and
a timetable. The upcoming months will be critical for
the integration of former Serb police into the Kosovo
police system. This will be important in order to restore
the rule of law and public order in that part of Kosovo.

The next local elections will be held on 3 November
throughout Kosovo. In the northern municipalities,
local elections will be organized under the leadership
of Kosovo's Central Election Commission and with
the support of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The local elections in
the northern municipalities will be organized in line
with Kosovo law, and the role ofthe OSCE is to facilitate
that in a number of technical aspects. These will be the
first municipal elections that will establish democratic
institutions in the three northern municipalities.
Therefore, we invite the local population to participate
in this crucial electoral process. The elections represent
an opportunity to build a joint commitment and new
civic obligations towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

The participation of different parties is essential
to ensure political competition and respect for the
freedom of political association. To that end, Kosovo
institutions are working to create a comprehensive list
of voters in the northern municipalities, including those
who are currently living outside Kosovo. However,
Belgrade has a critical role to play by encouraging the
participation of local Serb populations.

During the reporting period, we observed some
progress on the implementation of the agreements
reached thus far. But, at the same time, there are some
clear tendencies in Belgrade to deviate from the original
obligations deriving from the normalization agreement.
On positive moves, we also welcome the closure of the
Serb police offices in the northern municipalities. At
the same time, there is evidence that members of Serb
security structures continue to operate from private
settings, remaining on standby to destabilize that part
of Kosovo.

In the area of justice, there is no progress yet on
the implementation of provisions, and that is due to a
lack of political will in Belgrade. On the issue of the
integration of justice personnel, there is no progress
at all. We have offered the most advanced options to
integrate those structures into Kosovo's constitutional
system, but Belgrade has consistently tried to change
the substance of the normalization agreement. The
agreement foresees a unique system of police, justice
and local governance throughout Kosovo, and Belgrade
should stick to the deal.

On integrated border management, some progress
has been noted in finalizing the construction of five
permanent joint border points, which also sets the
inter-State border line between Kosovo and Serbia.
However, there are obstacles from Belgrade, which is
not allowing Kosovo's citizens to travel through Serbia
with Kosovo documents. That is a violation of the
agreement on the freedom of movement. Serbia is also
undermining the agreement on customs by collecting
custom tariffs from Kosovo citizens who cross Serbia's
territory to enter Kosovo as their final destination.
In addition, Belgrade's failure this week to accept
the agreement on energy and telecommunication,
which has been pending for the past two years, is the
best testimony of the lack of political will to resolve
outstanding inter-State issues. However, we welcome
the opening of the Kosovo Liaison Office in Belgrade
and are rotating our Ambassador from Zagreb to
Belgrade to start the mission.

In the past three months, Kosovo marked a
milestone on its path to European Union membership.
On 28 June, the Council of the European Union took
a decision to authorize the European Commission to
negotiate a stabilization and association agreement
between the European Union and Kosovo. That
decision represents an acknowledgement of our
progress regarding democratic governance and the
normalization of relations with Serbia. It opens, for
the first time, a clear perspective for establishing
contractual relations between the Republic of Kosovo
and the European Union. By signing a stabilization and
association agreement, Kosovo will undergo the same
processes as all States in the region before joining the
European Union.

We continue to trust that the stabilization and
association agreement will contain all the essential
elements to enable Kosovo to achieve the conditions
necessary to be able to submit an application for
membership. That will offer a strategic framework
for social, economic and political modernization
and transformation. It represents a legal framework
that offers stability and security for foreign direct
investments, economic growth and job creation. We
have already formed a negotiating team and begun
preparations for negotiating the provisions of the
stabilization and association agreement. Based on
the commitment of the European Union, we expect
to finalize the agreement during spring 2014. Let me
reiterate that Kosovo's European agenda remains a
national priority for all political forces in the country.

Regarding visa liberalization, we have approved
a package of laws that regulate a number of critical
security-related issues, such as the status of foreigners,
asylum, citizenship, the prevention of trafficking and
integrated border management. That package of laws
has now also been passed by the Kosovo Assembly. We
expect new dynamics that will enable our citizens to
travel visa-free to Europe, as most of the benchmarks
are already met.

Over the past three months, Kosovo has
strengthened its international position and increased
its interaction with multilateral organizations. In June
we welcomed the recognition of our independence by
important countries such as Egypt, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Yemen, Guyana and El Salvador. More
than 100 Member States have recognized Kosovo thus
far, and we have established diplomatic relations with
nearly 60 States. After achieving membership in the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
we recently became a member of the Council of Europe
Development Bank.

In this reporting period, the political, economic
and security situation continued to be stable. Kosovo
has the most stable political landscape in the region.
Despite the global financial crisis, we have managed
to maintain macro-economic stability and to have an
annual growth of 5 per cent.

Inter-ethnic relations have also been very good and
without any significant incidents except in the north of
the country. Similarly, interfaith relations have been
a positive example of peaceful coexistence for the
entire region. A special multi-ethnic task force for the
protection of cultural and religious heritage has been
established within the Kosovo police. It consists of 202
officers who provide security for 23 monuments and
sites of Serb heritage in Kosovo. The task force will
also soon take responsibility for the security of the
Patriarchate of Peje.

The security situation throughout Kosovo has
improved, mainly as a result of the normalization
agreement with Serbia. Such improvement is essential
to promoting economic development and job creation.
The Kosovo police, in cooperation with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), has continued to display effective leadership in
maintaining security throughout the country. However,
in the past three months Serb security structures have
caused a number of incidents, preventing displaced
Albanians from returning and damaging citizens'
private and public property.

The Government has continued its institutional,
financial and political support for the return and
reintegration of Kosovo communities. Since March,
258 persons have returned to communities around the
country. We have launched various activities aimed at
fostering the reintegration of community returnees.
We have constructed 26 new houses and implemented
infrastructure and community-based projects.

On 9 July, the North Atlantic Council announced
that the Kosovo Security Force had reached operational
capability in line with NATO standards and principles.
As a multi-ethnic force and a source of stability, the
Kosovo Security Force has now strengthened its capacity
to deal with disaster management and humanitarian
assistance. The announcement marks an important
moment in the expansion of relations between Kosovo
and NATO and confirms that Kosovo is an example
of a country with democratic, civilian oversight of the
security sector. As ever, we express our gratitude to
KFOR for its assistance to us in maintaining security
and peace in Kosovo. Kosovo hopes to join NATO's
Partnership for Peace programme in the near future and
to become an equal member of NATO alongside other
countries of the region.

Our institutions have continued to promote
the protection of human rights and to strengthen
institutional mechanisms for human rights. With the
United Nations Human Rights Commissioner's visit to
Kosovo in June, we gave further confirmation of our
commitment to protecting and observing international
human-rights standards. We will continue to invest
in protecting and promoting the political, economic
and socio-cultural rights of all communities living in
Kosovo.

The fate of missing persons is an issue that
continues to haunt our society; it requires continued
genuine commitment and cooperation from Belgrade
and the support of the international community. The
sooner it is resolved, the greater will be the chances
for inter-ethnic and inter-State reconciliation between
Kosovo and Serbia. We have already raised this issue
several times at our meetings in Brussels. We need to
do our utmost to uncover the truth about the fate of
those missing. In that regard, I think the United Nations
can and should play a more important role.

Kosovo is grateful to the United Nations for its
role in building State institutions and consolidating
peace. We are all aware that State- and peacebuilding
can result in long-term success only when they
promote and enable democratic national ownership and
include timely exit strategies. Fourteen years after the
establishment of an international civilian and military
presence, in June 1999, it is now time for the Council
to consider removing Kosovo from its agenda. The
moment has come to adopt a new resolution recognizing
the progress that has been made on the ground and that
we have been reporting on a regular basis for many
years now.

While there is no doubt that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
played an active role in stabilizing Kosovo between
1999 and 2007, it is now important to acknowledge
that it no longer has a role to play in Kosovo. It is time
for the Council to consider transforming UNMIK
into a United Nations political office for coordinating
all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
In that regard, the most important function for the
United Nations in Kosovo would be to support us in
our preparation for admission to the United Nations.
We understand that, in order to achieve that, what
is needed is political will and unity on the part of
Council members. We call on the Security Council to
take concrete, speedy and definitive action in order to
enable Kosovo to take its rightful place in the family of
free and democratic nations.

Let me conclude by reiterating the strong
commitment of our Government and people to
continuing to make Kosovo a successful and prosperous
country, while leaving the legacies of the past behind
and advancing our integration into the international
democratic community. We remain strongly committed
to fully implementing the normalization agreement
with Serbia, and we take seriously all the obligations
necessary for ensuring the northern municipalities'
peaceful integration into Kosovo institutions. However,
the full normalization of inter-State relations will
be achieved only when Serbia recognizes Kosovo's
independence. Similarly, the international community's
contribution will come to fruition when Kosovo
becomes a full and equal Member ofthe United Nations.

We remain deeply grateful to the Council,
our European and NATO partners and the wider
international community for helping Kosovo to become
a multi-ethnic, democratic and cohesive State.

