Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
Middle East.

Uganda welcomes the briefing by Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
which we believe presents an opportunity for United
Nations Members to gauge overall progress and help
focus on the way forward. We note from the briefing
that limited progress has been recorded since the
briefing given in January 2009 (see S/PV.6077).

The relative peace and quiet that has
characterized the last few weeks is encouraging. The
regrettable incidents reported by Mr. Pascoe are a
reminder to us all that the momentum for peace must
be sustained and consolidated in order to find a lasting
solution to the problem of the Middle East. We
commend Egypt and other partners for the role they
have played and continue to play in mediating
ceasefire talks between Israel and Hamas. Uganda
welcomes the appointment of a number of special
envoys to the Middle East and is encouraged that most
of them have already started their work in the region.

However, the situation still remains fragile. We
are concerned about the reports of intermittent
hostilities that continue to disrupt the peace. There is
need for a durable and fully respected ceasefire as
envisioned in resolution 1860 (2009). But that
ceasefire will always remain temporary if it is not
accompanied by sustained efforts to find a political
settlement in the Middle East.

Uganda is convinced that a durable solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be achieved only
through negotiations among the parties concerned. It is
of concern that the divisions that exist among the
Palestinian groups continue to weaken the negotiation
efforts. We therefore commend efforts by Egypt and
others for the work done to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation.

As we have heard, the situation in Gaza remains
precarious. The humanitarian situation and
reconstruction demands following the disastrous war
early this year still pose a huge challenge. Because of
the blockade, the overall levels of humanitarian
assistance getting into Gaza remain below what is
urgently required. The socio-economic infrastructure
remains in shambles. We note from the briefing that
during the violence many lives were lost and much
property destroyed and that the war has caused
enormous suffering that is still being experienced even
today.

Uganda therefore welcomes the outcome of the
international aid conference for Gaza and its
reconstruction that was held in Sharm el-Sheikh, in
Egypt, where $4.5 billion was pledged. We call on all
those countries and organizations that made pledges to
honour them.

However, even with the pledged money coming
in, dealing with the humanitarian situation and the
reconstruction efforts will require that Israel
completely lift the blockade in order to facilitate easier
humanitarian access. Furthermore, all Palestinians will
have to work together to implement the recovery and
reconstruction plans.

With regard to Lebanon, we note that the security
situation in south Lebanon has been relatively calm in
recent months. We welcome the progress made in the
normalization of relations between Lebanon and its
neighbours. We also welcome the proposed 7 June
parliamentary elections in Lebanon and call on all
parties to ensure calm and stability during the electoral
period.

Despite the limited progress, we are concerned
that the ceasefire is not fully implemented, in
contravention of resolution 1701 (2006). In this
connection, we call upon Israel and Lebanon to respect
the ceasefire. Uganda commends the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and all
humanitarian agencies that, despite the very difficult
circumstances, continue to provide relief assistance to
the people caught in this conflict.

Finally, Uganda will continue to support all the
parties in the Middle East in their efforts to achieve
comprehensive peace based on the vision of a region
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live
side by side in peace within secure and recognized
borders, as envisaged in Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) and other relevant Council resolutions.

