Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Security Council. I
congratulate you once again on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month and congratulate
the new members that have joined the Council this year.

Allow me also to thank the delegation of the United
States for having coordinated Council resolution 2455
(2019), just adopted by consensus, and also to express
appreciation for the positive attitude of Council
members. We also thank all members of the Council
for the time that they have afforded me and the expert
members of my delegation in connection with an
exchange of views on the paragraphs of the resolution.

After the Council adopted resolution 1591 (2005)
14 years ago, we witnessed periods of calm and periods
of escalation until 2011, when the parties put an end to
the conflict through a peaceful settlement negotiated
under the auspices of the United Nations, the African
Union and the League of Arab States. Since then, as
stated in all reports of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the Panel
of Experts, Darfur has throughout the years witnessed
steady and continued improvement. The Council's
deliberations have confirmed this improvement, which
has brought Darfur from the peacekeeping stage to a
phase of stability, development and peacebuilding. We
are very pleased with this result.

I do not think, therefore, that anyone could deny
that resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1591 (2005), adopted
15 and 14 years ago, respectively, are now outdated and
do not reflect the realities on the ground. Nor do they
reflect the situation today or the fact that the reasons for
the imposition of sanctions 15 years ago are no longer
valid. In fact, the situation has shifted completely,
requiring the Council to expeditiously revisit the issue
of the sanctions regime.

The security gains achieved on the ground have
given rise to security and stability in the states of
Darfur, which is allowing for a continued reduction in
the number of UNAMID troops of up to nearly 75 per
cent. Peacekeeping activities are now limited to the
Jebel Marra area. In addition, the Government and the
security forces of the Sudan are active in combating
transnational organized crime, human trafficking
and illegal migration, as well as the illicit arms trade
and arms trafficking, along with many other regional
tasks that support security and stability in the world
as a whole, not just in the Sudan. The Council must
therefore undertake immediate measures to lift the
arms embargo so as to allow the armed forces of the
Sudan to carry out their responsibilities completely and
effectively. We hope that in the coming period practical
measures will be taken in this regard.
The Government of the Sudan is continuing to
extend its authority in conflict-affected areas. The
Government, through its various agencies, has launched
a weapons-collection campaign under the supervision
of the Vice-President. The campaign has largely been
successful and has created an environment that is
conducive to peace and stability.

The Government is also making efforts to strengthen
the presence of police and judicial institutions in all
areas of Darfur so as to address the repercussions of the
conflict. There has been constructive and successful
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
aimed at putting in place practical measures allowing
the Government to ensure that the Sudan is removed
from the list of violating States.

The Government of the Sudan has also sought to
promote cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and we arranged for a visit by the
Special Representative that was the first of its kind.
However, subsequent reports were not in keeping with
reality, as they relied primarily on past events. This has
given rise to frustration on the part of the Sudanese
authorities, an issue that we hope to be able to address
and overcome in the coming period.

I should like to focus here on three extremely
important points.

First, eradicating sexual violence in conflict is
an issue on which the international community is in
agreement; there can be no tolerance therefor. This
primarily means that the United Nations must be
committed, through the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, to abiding by the established
facts and professional ethics, which prohibit the use
of unreliable and incorrect information promoted by
those who carry arms and who refuse to abide by the
understandings reached by the international community
and to join the peace process unconditionally and
without delay. Neither we nor the Council can accept a
recycling of the events that took place eight years ago,
on which the Council adopted specific resolutions at
the time.

Secondly, eradicating and combating sexual
violence is one single issue that cannot be fragmented.
The United Nations must decisively determine the
responsibility of any particular person for any specific
crime, without exception, including the date on which
the crime was committed. Any allegation that is not
substantiated according to the due process of law is
one whose aim is to achieve goals that are unrelated to
fighting violence in conflicts.

Thirdly, the United Nations, in this case through
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and within the framework of the aforementioned
principles, must allow the relevant Sudanese authorities
enough time to investigate any violations committed
by the parties in Darfur - not as set out, for example,
in the most recent memo dated 5 February, which we
received today, 7 February, giving seven days only,
two of which have already passed since we received
the memo. This is a strange situation. The work of the
United Nations is based on cooperation between the
Organization and the States concerned. No one could
deny that is impossible for cooperation to take place in
such an arbitrary manner.

In conclusion, my country's delegation welcomes
the Panel of Experts, and we would emphasize that
we are ready to cooperate with the Panel and to fully
facilitate its work. Previous years have confirmed the
serious commitment of the Government of the Sudan
to full cooperation with the Panel of Experts and to the
creation of an environment conducive to the fulfilment
of its mandate. That would allow it to collect information
from reliable sources on the ground through repeated
visits by its members to the Sudan.

The Sudan hopes that in return the Panel of Experts
will be committed to its mandate and rely on credible
sources while ignoring information from hostile sources.
Its reports should accurately reflect the situation on
the ground in Darfur and support the completion of
the peace process in Darfur. Based on the relationship
between the Panel and the Sudanese authorities, we are
certain that this cooperation will continue.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
