Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First, I wish to welcome the presence of the President
of the Republic of Serbia and the Secretary-General.

Once again, we are called on to debate Kosovo.
This proves the great importance and, above all, the
complexity of the problem, and its urgency as well,
because of the events that have been taking place
quickly since yesterday. After so much time in lengthy
talks and negotiations on all fronts, we thought the
management of this issue would lead to a satisfactory
outcome - that is, understanding among the parties,
who would then have maintained the unity of Serbia
and sealed the peaceful coexistence between Serbs and
Kosovars. Such an outcome would also have been a
victory for the international community and a victory
for peace. That is the action that my country advocated,
convinced that in any conflict situation everything
must be tried to make the advantages of dialogue
prevail.

Unfortunately, that is not what happened because
of the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo. We regret, once again, that Serbs and
Kosovars, who, whatever one might say, have
coexisted for a long time, were not able to overcome
their contradictions and preserve the tolerance on the
basis of which they might have built a strong and
viable State. My delegation also regrets the fact that all
the efforts that the United Nations invested in that
cause, through action by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, have not been
fruitful.

Obviously, Burkina Faso can only take note of
the new situation. We still feel that we have to fear the
consequences, and that is why we call on the sense of
responsibility of all to avoid any violence in order to
preserve peace and security, as well as the basic rights
of all communities.

It would seem that we are already seeing some
actions that are somewhat violent. We hope they will
not spread and that they will be quickly reined in so
that a conflagration can be avoided. Above all, it is our
common responsibility to prevent any threat to peace
that might lead to such a situation.

