Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
the particularly incisive stocktaking that he has just
shared with us after 10 years of managing the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, but also for his unremitting
commitment to dealing with that critical issue.

Unfortunately, we cannot contest his assessment
about the inexorable marginalization of the two-State
solution, which is still the only one that responds to
the legitimate aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis
to live in peace. While the climate that has paralysed
the peace process for the past two years is a shared
responsibility, it is undeniable that the ongoing Israeli
settlements are the main challenge to implementing
a two-State solution. The settlement enterprise is the
product of a deliberate policy, one that is more and more
obvious, and that is carving up the territory of a future
Palestinian State. We can see that in various ways:
the de facto annexation of Zone C and of its natural
resources, transfers of populations, the obstruction of
the movement of populations, the demolition of homes
and humanitarian infrastructure and a plan to legalize
illegal outposts. It is our responsibility to firmly
and collectively condemn that policy because we are
convinced that it is leading to disaster, for not just the
Palestinians, but also for Israel.

Secondly, the radicalization of people, acts of
violence and terrorism and incitement to violence are
also ongoing threats that can cause a rapid degeneration
into an uncontrollable conflagration. We have seen
that on too many occasions, with three wars Gaza in
September and the violence that culminated between
October in 2015 and April 2016. That violence severely
undermines the prospect of two States, a Palestinian
State and an Israeli State, living side by side in peace
and security.

Finally, progress in the Palestinian reconciliation is
also indispensable.

For several years now, the so-called status quo
in the Middle East has really constituted a state of
regression - daily regression for the people and for
peace. With every day that passes, we see further
threats to the two-State solution, and yet, more than
ever, that should be our sole common compass. Given
that assessment and will, France, under the leadership
of the President of the Republic, Mr. Francois Hollande,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc
Ayrault, presented an imitative last spring aimed at
finding a way out of the current impasse. Though the
peace process was partially eclipsed by the serious
crises elsewhere in the Middle East, our primary
objective was and continues to be to place this conflict
back at the heart of the political priorities of the
international community.

Since the beginning and at every stage, our approach
has been transparent vis-a-vis the parties, inclusive and
dovetailed with existing efforts, especially those of the
Quartet and our Arab partners. The ministerial meeting
that was held on 3 June in Paris marked the first
essential phase of international mobilization to save
and make the two-State solution concrete. Following
that meeting, in-depth work began with all partners
wishing to contribute to developing a comprehensive
incentive package, one that shows that both parties can
only benefit from peace, and that the current situation
has a cost - a cost to Israeli and Palestinian economic
development, a cost to building a Viable Palestinian
State and a cost to the stability and prosperity of the
region as a whole. As a result of that work, which has
been going on for about a year, France will organize an
international conference in January, brining together
all partner States that advocate for peace. Our goal
is to present the contributions of the international
community to relaunching the negotiating process and
to concluding the implementation ofa peace agreement.

First, in collectively reaffirming our support for
a two-State solution in a context where the situation
continues to deteriorate, we are determined to recall
that it is the only possible solution to the conflict and
to recreate a political climate that can actually reverse
the negative spiral we are seeing on the ground and
to recreate positive momentum. Secondly, our goal is
achievable by promoting international engagement
based on a coherent mechanism for concrete support
and incentives towards relaunching dialogue between
the two parties. We all know that only the Israelis and
Palestinians can achieve peace directly. However, we
must also acknowledge that the conditions today are not
conducive to resuming such negotiations.

Therefore, our initiative seeks to promote a
convergence of efforts in the same direction with a View
to recreating an enabling environment for dialogue and
negotiations, showing the parties just how much they
stand to gain by bringing about peace. If we do not take
resolute action in that direction, the two-State solution
will continue to erode and disappear, like a mirage in
the desert. There is no other valid alternative that can
actually meet the legitimate aspirations of both parties.
We therefore must do everything within our power,
while we still have time, to prevent such a drift. I will
state once again that such a drift will never lead to a
just, enduring solution to the conflict and will continue
to threaten balance in the region.

That is the sense of efforts of France, along with all
our partners, working towards a favourable momentum
based on a two-State solution. We particularly call for
the support of the members of the Security Council,
to shoulder together the historic responsibility that is
incumbent on us to achieve peace in the Middle East.

