Mr. Brattskar (Norway): The Government of
Norway is pleased to note the continued progress in
East Timor over recent months, especially in the areas
of physical reconstruction and the development of
government structures. Both the speed and scope of
projects implemented are steadily growing.

Norway has taken due note of the recent review
of the humanitarian programme in East and West
Timor. We appreciate the critical remarks made, and at
the same time we recognize the enormous tasks that
have been undertaken so far. Norway will support the
revised UN consolidated inter-agency appeals for West
and East Timor with approximately $600,000.

The critical humanitarian crisis in East Timor is
now mostly behind us, but the challenges ahead are
enormous. The primary goal for the international
community - as we stated in this forum two months
ago - must now be to further assist the East Timorese
in their nation-building efforts, to create an
independent, democratic and prosperous State.

Norway has provided strong support for East
Timor since long before the crisis of last year, and we
will continue to do so in the future. In 1999 we
disbursed approximately 6 million dollars, primarily in
humanitarian assistance. Our support will remain at
this level but will now be directed more towards
longer-term needs for sustainable development and
good governance.

We fully support the work of UNTAET and its
partners in these formidable tasks. One of the most
important challenges at this stage is to ensure greater
participation in the building of the future State. In that
context, we especially welcome the initiative to
transform the National Consultative Council into a
National Council, which is a broader and more
representative body.

Norway attaches great importance to international
crisis management and peacekeeping. This has been
reflected in our engagement in East Timor in the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) and the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), and
in our support for UNTAET, as well as in our
contributions to the establishment of the police
academy and the secondment of members of the
investigation unit on human rights abuses.

Norway continues to be seriously concerned
about the security situation on the border with
Indonesia and in the refugee camps in West Timor.
That situation led to the suspension of activities by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in West Timor. We call on the
Indonesian authorities to prevent militia activities in
and around the refugee camps and on the border. The
Government of Norway fully supports the process of
investigating last year's human rights violations and
breaches of humanitarian law in East Timor. We urge
the Indonesian Government to continue its efforts to
address these issues in accordance with its
responsibilities, and in cooperation with the United
Nations and with the international community.

