Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his informative briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan. His analysis helps us all to better
support Afghanistan during this critical period ahead
of the presidential elections. I was fortunate to have
received a more detailed briefing from the members of
the Group of Friends of Afghanistan, which was very
useful.

Let me also express our sincere thanks to the entire
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their ongoing commitment and work in
the country. I would like to thank Ms. Sima Samar for
her briefing. I also welcome and thank Her Excellency
Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for sharing the views of her Government.

Today I will address two important and long-
standing issues for Canada: first, the upcoming
presidential elections and, secondly, the inclusion of
women in the peace process.

First, with regard to the upcoming presidential
elections, the holding of transparent and fair elections in
September is essential for building on the gains already
made. We welcome the decision of the Independent
Election Commission to postpone the Ghazni provincial
council and parliamentary elections in order to focus on
the presidential elections. Furthermore, we welcome the
fact that Afghan electoral authorities are applying the
lessons learned from the October 2018 parliamentary
elections, in particular with respect to the use of
biometrics. Canada supports the continuation of the
constitutional Government until elections are held and
encourages all parties involved to show restraint ahead
of the elections.

(spoke in English)

We are concerned about the increased number of
attacks on Afghan schools as a result of their being
used as polling centres. Education is not a privilege; it
is a right. Schools should be places where all students,
regardless of where they live, can learn and thrive in
peace. To minimize the negative impact of the elections
on education and children, we urge the Government
of Afghanistan to seek alternative venues for polling
stations, when possible. We underline the importance
of providing security to voters as a prerequisite to
ensuring that women are able to safely and meaningfully
participate. Both the elections and the peace process
will be flawed if women are not effectively engaged at
each step.

That brings me to my second point. The research
is clear - when women are involved in peacebuilding,
peace negotiations and peace talks, outcomes are better
and last longer. Nearly 30 per cent ofparticipants at last
month's consultative loya jirga for peace were women,
and although that is an important step, more work is
needed to ensure that women's voices are not just heard
but listened to. An agreement that does not bring peace
to all members of society is not peace. Men need to
stand in solidarity with women to reach a settlement
that benefits all Afghans.

Afghan women are not willing to sacrifice the hard-
earned gains in their rights for a political settlement with
the Taliban. To ensure that women's rights, democracy
and the Constitution are not only preserved throughout
the peace process, but also extended to women and
girls living in Taliban-controlled areas, women must
play a substantive role in all peace negotiations. That
is why Canada is working with partners to equip
women's organizations with the skills they need to
negotiate effectively and advocate for their seat at
the table. Through our support to the International
Civil Action Network, Canada is providing grants to
women's organizations to build women's capacity to be
more involved in local and national peace processes,
forming youth peace circles and helping to reintegrate
former fighters.

We have also contributed $8.4 million to the
Women's Voice and Leadership project in Afghanistan.
That initiative supports the empowerment of women
and girls through capacity-building, advocacy and
the strengthening of networks among women's rights
organizations. We are delighted to hear about the new
initiative undertaken by the Afghan and United Kingdom
Governments and look forward to learning more.

At the same time, we remain acutely aware that
the challenges faced by Afghan women are not limited
to civic life. The rates of violence against women are
among the highest in the world and justice for victims
remains utterly inadequate, despite the efforts of the
Government to curb that practice. Canada opposes the
use ofmediation in cases of violence against women and
encourages the Government to demonstrate greater due
diligence in ensuring gender equality before the law.

Canada continues to support Afghan-led efforts

towards peace and democracy and will continue to
advocate for the inclusion of women and girls in both of
those endeavours.

