Ms. Sellassie (spoke in French): I am honoured
to brief the Security Council on the progress towards
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. As the Council knows, I assumed
my functions very recently, and I would like to take
this opportunity to share my first impressions and some
views on the future direction of the United Nations
efforts in the Sahel region.

Since the endorsement of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel by the Council last
year, the United Nations system in the region has jointly
initiated a number of regional activities in the areas of
governance, security and resilience, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/397).

In the area of governance, we have given priority
to activities that promote political inclusion and
seek to build consensus among the population on
the basis of national and regional priorities. We have
also underscored capacity-building activities for
the improved delivery of essential services. While
continuing to focus on those important priorities, we
need to do more to reach the people of the Sahel and
to place them at the centre of efforts to address the
challenges of governance.

In the area of security, we have initiated activities
that seek to promote the common management of the
borders and to prevent the spread of violent ideology
through confidence-building and capacity-building
measures. Those activities need to be scaled up, while
more attention and resources must be paid to fighting
youth unemployment.

In the area of resilience, we will continue to link
humanitarian interventions and development activities,
including by promoting legitimate cross-border
economic activity.

(spoke in English)

In the short time that I have been in office, I have
been struck by the deterioration of the political and
security situation in the region, notably in Libya, the
enduring political and security challenges in Mali, and
the persistent terrorist attacks throughout the region, in
particular those carried out by Boko Haram in Nigeria,
all of which continue to have negative consequences
on civilians and local economies. The humanitarian
situation remains extremely fragile in 2014. At least
20 million people remain at risk of food insecurity and
nearly 5 million children are at risk of acute malnutrition.
Meanwhile, the high levels of youth unemployment in
the Sahel increase the appeal of violent ideology.

As the Council is aware, the implementation of
the United Nations integrated strategy requires both
the sustained political will of the Governments of the
countries of the Sahel and, more broadly, a profound
political, economic and social transformation in the
region. One of the key lessons that we learned from
the crisis in Mali is that democratization processes,
which translate into internationally sanctioned
elections and efforts towards decentralization, need
to be complemented by efforts to strengthen State
institutions and to better integrate and manage diverse
societies. At every level, the quality of governance
is crucial to creating an environment that effectively
reduces the risk of identity-based conflict, the religious
radicalization of society, the youth in particular, and
their recruitment to terrorist groups or any kind of
criminal network.

The formulation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel has raised very high expectations
among the people of the region, requiring tangible
benefits for the populations as quickly as possible. That
is why, in implementing the integrated strategy, the
United Nations system will prioritise the inclusion of
civil society, tribal and religious leaders, and research
institutions.

The dramatic surge in the terrorist acts of Boko
Haram in northern and central Nigeria since 2013
is now also threatening Cameroon, the Niger and
Chad. Moreover, the conflict and state collapse in the
Central African Republic have led to higher instability
in Central Africa and thereby increased the risk of
new connections between terrorist groups based in
the Sahara/Sahel region, Nigeria, the Horn and East
Africa. The reality on the ground is that North, West
and Central Africa form a contiguous geopolitical
region where short-term as well as mid- and long-term
multidimensional responses to various threats to peace
and security need to be implemented collectively.

That is why efforts to address security challenges
in the Sahel within the framework of the United
Nations strategy cannot ignore the interactions
between core Sahel countries and North Africa or
between core Sahel and other countries of West and
Central Africa. Responding to the threats of insecurity
in the Sahel in a sustainable manner requires a well-
coordinated approach encompassing North, West and
Central African countries and a flexible, issue-based,
geographical definition of the borders of the Sahel
region. The successful implementation of the strategy
therefore requires that the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and for Central
Africa and the Special Envoy for the Sahel work closely
together in diplomatic and political action, taking into
account also United Nations political initiatives in
North African countries, especially Libya.

In November 2013, the Ministers of the region
established a coordination platform for the Sahel,
entrusted with the overall coordination of the initiatives
on the Sahel with a rotating chairmanship, currently
held by Mali. The broad membership of the platform,
from Cape Verde to the Sudan and from Cameroun to
Tunisia, reflects the adoption of a flexible geographical
definition of the region, which is necessary for the
successful implementation of the strategy. It can also
generate the much needed interregional cooperation
I mentioned earlier, and improve relations among the
countries concerned, beyond the boundaries of the
individual economic communities.

Since its establishment, the members of the
platform have met twice, endorsing the road map of
the current chairmanship and agreeing to take concrete
steps to improve coordination. Despite these efforts,
the platform has faced challenges in promoting regional
cooperation in the Sahel, largely due to the emergence of
competing interventions and strategies that may delay
progress towards long-term stability and development
in the region.

Moving forward, it is important to support
the rotating chairmanship in order to strengthen
coordination and cooperation among all the concerned
regional and international actors. This cannot be
achieved by simply exchanging information. There is a
need to leverage the comparative strengths of national
Governments, subregional economic communities,
the African Union and other concerned multilateral
organizations and financial institutions in order to
harmonize the multiple strategies.

I am fully committed to supporting the effective
functioning of the platform. In this task, I have joined
hands with the African Union High Representative
for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Pierre Buyoya. Within the
framework of our respective mandates, he and I are
co-chairing the technical secretariat, which is tasked
to support the work and implement the decisions of
the coordination platform, under the guidance of the
rotating chairmanship.

Although the United Nations has significantly
improved internal coordination and promoted a more
coherent response, more needs to be done if the
coordinated support of the international community
is to effectively respond to the persisting challenges
in the Sahel region. When the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the
President of the World Bank Group, the President of
the African Development Bank and the European
Commissioner for Development visited the region in
November last year, they committed to breaking down
institutional barriers and ensuring better targeted and
coordinated support based on complementary areas
of strength. I intend to honour that commitment as a
matter of priority. If the international community does
not improve coordination, then the limited resources
that have been made available so far will not have
the desired impact. Acting fast and in a coordinated
manner is necessary to overcome the current pattern of
recurrent crises and move towards a future of stability
and development in the region.

My predecessor, Mr. Romano Prodi, oversaw
the development of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa, Mr. Said
Djinnit, has helped set up coordination mechanisms
within the United Nations system for the effective
implementation of the strategy. I will build on these
important efforts, while continuing to consult with all
concerned Member States and civil society, as well as
regional and international partners for the successful
implementation of the integrated strategy for the Sahel.

(spoke in French)

The countries ofthe region need assistance in laying
the foundations of stability and sustainable development.
Strengthening cooperation among national, regional
and international partners is a precondition for the
delivery of the needed assistance. The United Nations
priority during the coming year will be to amplifyjoint
action by harmonizing and aligning political, security,
development and humanitarian efforts throughout the
region. However, if we are to succeed, we will need
the support and involvement of the Security Council
in promoting joint action on the part of all actors
working for the well-being of the peoples of the Sahel
and, above all, the commitment and political will of the
Governments of the countries of the region to undertake
without further delay the structural reforms necessary
to the prosperity of the region.

