Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
United States believes that both Israelis and
Palestinians must do all they can to end the violence in
the Middle East and create an environment in which
progress towards peace and security for all is possible.
President Bush has set forth our goal of a future where
two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in
peace, within secure and recognized borders. The
Security Council endorsed this vision in resolution
1397 (2002), which passed with nearly unanimous
support earlier this year. And President Bush believes
that with intensive effort on security and reform by all,
this goal could be reached within three years.

This meeting has been called to discuss the Israeli
action of 23 July. However, we must also address the
actions of Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and other
Palestinian terrorist groups which seek to destroy the
prospects for Palestinians achieving their goal of an
independent State. Their attacks against Israeli
civilians included two deadly attacks just last week.
Those attacks are morally repugnant, and are rightfully
of serious concern to the entire international
community. We should question why they are not more
often a focus of Council attention.

We should also be mindful of the responsibility of
each and every United Nations Member State,
particularly those on the Security Council, to cease
providing safe haven to Palestinian groups that,
"finance, plan, support, or commit terrorist acts"
(resolution 1373 (2001), para. 2). We call for
immediate and full compliance with the Security
Council's decision in resolution 1373 (2001) in that
regard.

The United States is concerned about some Israeli
tactics and actions, including targeted killings and
actions that endanger innocent civilians. We have urged
Israel to consider the consequences of actions such as
these. President Bush made clear that the heavy-handed
action Israel took on 23 July did not serve the cause of
peace. He further expressed his concern about the
strike's toll on civilian lives. We have made his
concerns known directly to the Israeli Government.

I would like to review efforts currently under way
by the United States, in partnership with the Secretary-
General and others in the international community, to
improve the situation. We are currently working hard to
advance the plans of action on Palestinian civil reform
and security, to address the critical humanitarian
situation in Palestinian areas, and to restore a political
dialogue. Our meeting, last week, with the "quartet"
and Arab Foreign Ministers were very useful in this
regard. We will continue to consult closely with the
parties, the "quartet" and Arab leaders regarding how
best to move forward.

Both sides need to work to end violence and
terrorist attacks. The United States is leading efforts,
with the active involvement of key Arab States, to
restructure Palestinian security services and restore
security cooperation. Regarding Palestinian civil
reform, we have welcomed and encouraged the already
strong Palestinian support for reform, including the
Palestinians' own 100-day reform programme. The
International Task Force is working to develop a
comprehensive plan for civil reform. We look forward
to its next meeting in late August.

We are extremely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation faced by the Palestinians. The
United States has contributed more than $180 million
in assistance this year through the United States
Agency for International Development and through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Movement on civil reform
and security would allow the international donor
community to do even more.

Israel has an important role to play in taking steps
to facilitate access for humanitarian relief. We are also
urging Israel to take steps to try to restore economic
activity in the Palestinian areas. As we move forward
on civil and security reform, Israeli steps, such as
easing closures and releasing frozen tax revenues, in
addition to facilitating movement of humanitarian
goods and services, will be critical to creating an
environment in which progress is possible.

The Security Council has provided clear direction
regarding the road ahead to an Israeli-Palestinian
settlement, most notably in resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002). It has called unambiguously
for a cessation of all acts of violence. It has welcomed
the efforts of the "quartet" and has endorsed two joint
statements by the "quartet" members.
We share the view expressed here this evening by
other delegations that resolutions and statements
already adopted by the Security Council form a more
than adequate basis to guide efforts to achieve a
negotiated solution to the Middle East question. We
believe that the international community's focus at this
time should be on constructive diplomatic efforts,
working directly with the two parties on the ground to
realize the two-State solution that we all seek.

