Mr. Wittig (Germany): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving my country the
opportunity to participate in this important debate.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.

Every day, hundreds of people suffer from the
consequences of the proliferation of illicit arms.
Implications for economic development are obvious.
Illicit arms trafficking is all too often one of the causes
of humanitarian tragedies.

Germany has long been committed to a
comprehensive approach to combat the destabilizing
accumulation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, as well as their ammunition. My country
attaches high importance to fully implementing and
further developing the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. It supports the Fourth Biennial Meeting of
States in New York in June 2010, which will mark an
important step in the implementation of the Programme
of Action.

For more than 10 years, Germany has chaired the
so-called Group of Interested States in New York. This
Group has offered a platform to the disarmament
community based in New York to exchange views on
how to cope with the scourge of small arms and light
weapons.

In recent years, my country has paid particular
attention to the issue of the security and thorough
management of national stockpiles of conventional
arms and ammunition. Under German chairmanship, a
group of governmental experts drew up
recommendations on the proper management of
stockpiles. My Government is contributing to the
ongoing United Nations-steered process leading to the
development of technical guidelines for the
management of stockpiles of conventional ammunition.
My country remains committed to reducing and
ultimately ending the illegal global trade in small arms
and light weapons. Therefore we continue to attach the
utmost importance to the ongoing process towards the
development of a comprehensive and legally binding
arms trade treaty on the highest possible common
international standards for the transfer of conventional
arms. We stand ready to engage actively and to
cooperate constructively in the process leading to the
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty
in 2012.

I should like to provide a few examples of my
country's cooperation. In 2006, my Government began
to support the East African Community (EAC) by
implementing a project on non-proliferation of small
arms and light weapons in the EAC. As a result,
networks were created that paved the way for the
engagement of the EAC in maintaining peace and
security. The EAC has worked closely with the
Regional Centre for Small Arms and Light Weapons,
based in Nairobi, thus reaching out to countries in the
Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa.

The African Union (AU) has been mandated by
its member States to establish an African Peace and
Security Architecture. Germany is assisting the Peace
and Security Department of the African Union
Commission in setting up the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

One of the priority areas of cooperation in Africa
is the establishment of a continental early warning
system. The system will enable the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to identify the rise of a
potential crisis scenario. My Government is assisting
the AU in designing such an early warning system. It is
also supporting the development of the police
component of the African Standby Force. The project
aims at providing a minimum level of civilian security
in fragile post-conflict situations and at raising public
confidence in the security forces.

That leads me to my last point. From the very
start, Germany has supported the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). By helping
societies emerging from conflict and laying the
foundations for sustainable peace and development, the
PBC is entrusted with a crucial contribution to
international peace and security. It should therefore
play a central role in fostering cohesion among
political, security, development and humanitarian
10-2813]
actors. In that context, my Government is of the view
that the PBC should strive for close cooperation with
the United Nations Security Council to focus on small
arms trafficking and to curb the harmful effects of
these weapons.

