Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): Let me first
thank Special Representative Tanin for his briefing. I
also thank the representatives from Serbia and Kosovo.

There is always more progress to make, but the
conditions in Kosovo have changed markedly since
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo was established, in 1999. And it has changed
for the better. That is work which we should be proud
of, and it is work that the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia
must now seek to build upon. As my colleagues know,
peacekeeping reform has been a focus of my work on
the Security Council. Central to that reform agenda
is the support for political solutions on the ground,
which include the parties themselves. Without the
political buy-in of the various parties, no real progress
can be achieved. What we end up with is an artificial,
subsidized peace that is imposed from the outside.
But what we want is real peace, which is created by
the people who must nurture and sustain it. As Kosovo
approaches the tenth anniversary of its independence,
we believe that the opportunity is at hand for such a
genuine peace. The people of Kosovo are establishing
the institutions of self-government.

Last year, a new Administration was formed
following free, fair and peaceful democratic elections.
A functioning multi-ethnic democracy continues to be
strengthened in Kosovo - one that respects the rule
of law and the human rights of all. The United Nations
Mission in Kosovo has been an important part of that
achievement, but now it is time for leaders in Kosovo
and Serbia to take their future into their own hands.
Both nations' leaders must come together to reach
an agreement on the normalization of Kosovo-Serbia
relations as soon as possible. Much work has been done,
but more progress is needed on crucial issues, such as
ending corruption, strengthening the rule of law and
laying the foundation for economic growth. For Kosovo
and Serbia, normalization is a win-win proposition.
Both nations will benefit from expanded ties with one
another and with the wider European community.

To facilitate that, the United States reiterates its
support for the Brussels dialogue. We appreciate and
thank the European Union for its leadership in that
effort. Its support and guidance has helped create the
opportunity for both sides to make progress towards
normalization and lasting peace. In the strongest terms,
we urge the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia to take this
opportunity. The coming months will be crucial. The
stage is set. The benefits are clear. All that is needed is
the political will to come together to create a just and
lasting peace between Kosovo and Serbia.

A good indication of whether or not Kosovo and
Serbia can come together to normalize relations will
be how both nations respond to last month's murder of
Kosovo-Serb politician Oliver Ivanovie. The United
States has condemned that killing in the strongest
terms. We have offered our support for a full and
impartial investigation by Kosovo's police and judicial
institutions. The world will be watching to see if
that investigation results in accountability for those
responsible. We trust that Kosovo's institutions are
capable of handling that professionally and impartially
to hold those responsible to account without external
interference. We call on all parties to avoid dangerous
rhetoric at this sensitive time.

Another pillar of our peacekeeping reform
agenda is to know what success looks like and, once
it is achieved, to set the countries on a path to operate
independently of the peacekeeping mission. We believe
that we have achieved that measure of success with the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo. It is long past time
to wind down the Mission to preserve scarce United
Nations resources. Significant changes are needed in
the role of the United Nations in Kosovo. I urge the
Council to waste no time in making those changes.

Lastly, we continue to strongly support Kosovo's
membership in all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations and INTERPOL. Much
has changed during the 19 years since the Council
authorized the establishment of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo. The time has come for the leaders
of Kosovo and Serbia to do what the Mission cannot
and what it was never intended to do: to independently
and cooperatively build a future of mutual security,
prosperity and peace for all the peoples in the region.

