Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I also thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for their informative
briefings and reports.

This debate is timely, especially in View of the
upcoming elections for the roster of judges of the
Residual Mechanism. Brazil takes this opportunity to
reaffirm its understanding that committed judges are
the pillars of any tribunal. We also commend the
Presidents and the Prosecutors efforts towards the
fulfilment of the remaining judicial functions of their
institutions in a timely manner. Both reports (see S/2011716 and S/2011/73l) address issues that are
relevant to the current activities of the Tribunals and to
the legacy that those institutions will leave to the
international justice system. I would like to touch on
some of those issues today.

It is remarkable that, with the arrests of Ratko
Mladie and Goran Hadzie, there are no outstanding
fugitives from the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. The nine fugitives from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who
remain at large remind us of the importance of
effective cooperation with Member States as a
cornerstone of the fulfilment of the Tribunals' mandate.
Brazil emphasizes the fundamental value of a close
institutional relationship between the Tribunals and
national judicial systems.

The issue of staff retention should be dealt with
as a matter of priority by all relevant United Nations
bodies in the context of the ongoing completion
strategies. As the Tribunals approach the end of their
judicial activities, retaining adequate levels of staff
will have a positive impact both on the institutions'
productivity and in the wake of the judgements to be
delivered. Brazil follows with interest the measures
that the Tribunals are taking in implementing their
completion strategies. A smooth transition to a lean and
efficient residual mechanism is a fundamental element
in the fight against impunity and in the quest for
judicial accountability - two of the most important
contributions the Tribunals have made to international
justice.

We all know that judicial decisions alone cannot
bring peace and reconciliation to a region.
Accountability and the prevalence of the rule of law
must be part of the social equation that can ensure
national unity and progress. Such a scenario cannot be
attained from Arusha or The Hague alone. It is
particularly important to bring the Tribunals closer to
the communities involved in the events they are
mandated to investigate. Brazil commends the efforts
of both Tribunals in improving awareness of their work
among students, international and local researchers,
legal professionals, journalists and others. It is crucial
to emphasize capacity-building activities with legal
professionals in the areas affected by these crimes. We
strongly believe that the cooperation both Tribunals
provide in capacity-building and the training
professionals of national judicial systems constitutes an
important part of their legacy and therefore of their
contribution to lasting peace.
