The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Cambodia, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zimbabwe to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, President of the Tunisian
Confederation of Industry, Trade and Handicrafts
and Nobel Peace Prize laureate 2015 for the Tunisian
National Dialogue Quartet.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Christian
Leffler, Deputy Secretary-General for Global and
Economic Issues of the European External Action
Service of the European Union, and His Excellency
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Head of Delegation and Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/730, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations and conflict
prevention.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/845, which contains
a letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

