Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I wish to thank you, Madam, for being here to lead
our debate. I would also like to recognize the presence
of various Ministers and State Secretaries here today
from various Member States of the United Nations.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the President of the
Council for having organized this open debate, as well
as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his informative
briefing.

The theme "Respect for the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations as a key element for
the maintenance of international peace and security"
is particularly relevant for my country, considering its
long tradition of upholding international law and its
firm conviction of the need for an effective multilateral
system capable of addressing global issues. As a
founding Member of the United Nations, Uruguay has
always called for the full observance of the purposes
and principles enshrined in the San Francisco Charter,
which we view as a complex framework of fundamental
rights and obligations. They should be maintained, as
they are essential to the achievement of international
peace and security. Uruguay believes that all of those
purposes and principles remain fully valid today, and that
they are fundamental pillars on which the international
system stands. Respect for the purposes and principles
is conveyed through peaceful coexistence and good
relations between States, and must be addressed as a
whole, in particular as their interpretation or partial
use may lead to results that constitute a departure from
the Organization's objective to maintain international
peace and security.

Legal principles such as the sovereign equality
of States, the fulfilment in good faith of international
obligations, territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States and the non-use of force are binding and must be
observed in their entirety. That is essential to fulfilling
one of the purposes of the Organization, that is, to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. We
have been firm and consistent defenders of each and
every one of those principles, and have called for them
to be respected whenever they have been challenged.
A traditional aspect of my country's foreign policy
is the rejection of the threat and the use of force, and
the search for peaceful means to resolve conflicts that
threaten international peace and security. For that
reason, Uruguay has generously offered to join the
Organization's peacekeeping operations where such
was necessary to maintain international peace and
security, in accordance with the mandate of the Charter.

We have also reaffirmed the right to self-
determination of peoples in all decolonization
processes, including those that have not yet been
concluded. We have called for full respect for State
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States when State actions were not conducted in
accordance with United Nations standards, in particular
those that regulate the powers of the Security Council.
For Uruguay, respect for international law and the rule
of law, at both the national and international levels, is a
fundamental guarantee. But they are only meaningful
when their benefits reach the inhabitants of each State.
Those individuals have rights, not only by virtue oftheir
nationality, but first and foremost by virtue of the simple
fact that they are human. One of the purposes enshrined
in the Charter is the promotion and encouragement of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all. The United Nations therefore, and the Security
Council in particular, is called upon to play a key role
while placing human rights and the dignity of persons
at the centre of the Organization's actions.

The increasing number of violations of those
rights, which we witness every day in different parts of
the world, as well as recurring widespread attacks on
civilians in armed conflict, undermine the fulfilment of
the purposes and principles on which the Organization
is based. It is for that reason that the reaffirmation of
those principles, which were established at the end
of the Second World War, should certainly take into
consideration the evolution of international realities
as well as the evolution of the United Nations system,
international treaties and State practices.

We believe that it would be a mistake to pretend
that a broad interpretation of the principles of State
sovereignty and non-intervention could serve as
justification for any action taken by a State within its
borders that violate other principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Non-interference in the internal
affairs of States is a valid and necessary principle in
relations among States. However, that principle might
become an exception of domestic jurisdiction that
releases the State from the obligation to comply with its
international obligations.
The area of human rights could serve as the
paradigm for the evolution of the multilateral system
as the role of the international community grows in
importance in terms of protection. Obviously, States
continue to shoulder the main responsibility for
ensuring observance of the fundamental rights of their
citizens. But the international community has gradually
established an international system to promote and
protect human rights through the development of
norms, standards of conventional international law,
multilateral bodies and special procedures to which
the Member States of the United Nations are subject.
That development has taken place in accordance with
Charter principles when it comes to the mandates of
the United Nations, in particular the provisions of
Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter. The establishment
of the Human Rights Council, empowered to examine
any human rights violation, even when the countries
concerned disagree, is an illustration of that healthy
development.

Therefore, without attempting to erode in the
slightest the original meaning of the principle of
non-intervention, Uruguay has always defended,
both in this forum as well as in Latin America, its
understanding that the principle cannot be used
to undermine the moral and legal duty to protect
people, in particular from massive atrocities such as
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or
ethnic cleansing. In that connection, it is essential to
end impunity for those who commit such atrocities. In
such cases, an extreme interpretation of sovereignty
transforms it into impunity and thus puts our most
essential values and human rights at risk. The concept
of sovereignty implies responsibilities as well as rights.
And one of sovereignty's most essential obligations is
the protection of the people.

We recognize that it is States that bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their peoples. However,
when they do not protect them, and when the threat of
atrocities is imminent, the international community
must abandon non-intervention and become involved.
It cannot stand by and has a duty to act to defend the
greater good. The Security Council has a particular
responsibility in that regard and must be ready to resort
to every instrument that the Charter has put it at its
disposal. But we must also underscore the fact that it
is the Council's responsibility to act in a concerted
fashion in cases of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing.

As a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, Uruguay therefore believes that it
is vital that all States Members of the United Nations
agree to a code of conduct that limits the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities. Similarly, given the
indivisible and interdependent nature of human rights,
we believe their protection and promotion are directly
linked to people's integral development and potential
for development.

Uruguay reiterates its belief in the importance of
continuing to work to build an effective multilateral
United Nations system capable of responding rapidly
and consistently to today's challenges - a system that
provides the guarantees needed to ensure that individual
human rights are respected and that millions do not die
each year in armed conflict or from a lack of food or
basic services; a system that does not foster poverty or
put the interests of the strong above those of the weak.

Uruguay attaches particular importance to the
principle, enshrined in the Charter, that international
disputes should be resolved by peaceful means based
on international law. In that context, we reaffirm the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the mechanisms based on it designed to tackle the
chief threats to international peace and security. It is
those mechanisms, which include activities aimed at
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts, that will
enable us to achieve sustainable and lasting peace.

We believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in that
regard. While we acknowledge the primary role
that the Charter assigns to the Security Council the
difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security, we are also aware of the complementary
role in that area that it gives to such organizations
as the Organization of American States, of which
Uruguay is a founding member, as well as of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Union of South American Nations and the
Southern Common Market, organizations in which
cooperation and political consultation have played a
major role in preventing conflict peacefully resolving
disputes. Regional and subregional organizations
are well positioned to understand the challenges and
dynamics to which countries in their regions, with their
geographical, cultural and historical proximity, are
exposed. Within their mandates, they can make a very
effective contribution to the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.

Uruguay reaffirms its strong and unequivocal
commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter drawn up in San Francisco. We intend
to work in close and constructive cooperation with
the other members of the Council in our efforts to
consistently defend the purposes and principles of
the Charter and preserve its integrity, with the aim of
building a more peaceful, just and equitable world.

