We thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their enlightening and detailed briefings. We must congratulate President Agius, Prosecutor Brammertz and their entire team for their efforts to ensure the continuity of the work of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals during these extraordinarily difficult times. Their resilience has been crucial and outstanding, as reflected in the briefings. We also welcome Registrar Tambadou and congratulate him on his appointment. We trust that the Secretary-General has chosen an excellent professional whose contributions will be of great value to the work of the Mechanism. The Dominican Republic welcomes the considerable progress made in judicial activities during the reporting period, in particular in the Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic, Prosecutor v. Stanisie and Simatovic, Prosecutor v. Felicien Kabuga and Prosecutor v. Augustin Bizimana cases. We urge the Mechanism to continue its work to meet the deadlines for the completion of those cases. Justice for the victims of the cases being handled by the Mechanism should not be delayed further. The foreign policy of the Dominican Republic is based on fundamental principles that prioritize the protection of human rights. In that regard, we note with regret that the issue of relocating individuals who have been acquitted and released has not been resolved. We call on the international community to cooperate with the Mechanism and find the best solution to the situation. In the same regard and after listening to Prosecutor Brammertz, we underscore the importance of cooperation. As Members of the United Nations, and in particular as members of the Security Council, we must bear in mind and honour our obligation to cooperate with the Mechanism so that it can fulfil the mandates given by the Council. The reprehensible crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda continue to haunt not only the survivors and their families but everyone who knows what happened there. Completing the work of the tribunals that have provided justice for the thousands of victims is critical for demonstrating the Council's commitment to combating impunity. As today's meeting will be the last for the Dominican Republic with Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, I would like to wish them all the best in the recent extension of their mandates. We urge the other members of the Council, as well as the incoming members, to strengthen the cooperation between the Mechanism and States - all united by the common goal of dispensing justice.
