The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/362, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l7/307, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2351 (2017).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States of America.

Ambassador Haley would have liked to have been
here for this important adoption - an adoption during
our presidency in which we emphasized one of our key
peacekeeping principles, that peacekeeping missions
should support political solutions. Our postponement
of the adoption was key to allowing the United Nations
and the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) to close out the past
year's chapter in the Western Sahara, illustrating in real
time the value of the United Nations and of the Mission.

I should like to take a moment now to recognize the
Personal Envoy to the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Chris Ross, for his eight years of service.
The United States is grateful for his tireless efforts
to support a political process for Western Sahara. We
look forward to the appointment of a new envoy and
his travel to the region as quickly as possible. We also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Western Sahara, Kim Bolduc, for all her
work managing the peacekeeping mission.

The United States is pleased with the adoption of
today's mandate renewal for two reasons.

First, resolution 2351 (2017) helps put the Council's
attention back where it belongs, supporting a political
process to resolve the conflict in Western Sahara. For
years, the United Nations and the Council have been
bogged down. On the ground, peacekeepers have faced
an almost endless series of frustrating obstructions,
which often require months or even years of high-level
engagement to sort out. Here in the Council, we often end
up in debates about hyperspecific operational problems.

This situation needs to change. Of course, the
parties need to let the Mission do its job without
interference, and they need to respect all existing
agreements. That is the bare minimum of what we
must expect, but the Council also has to look at the big
picture on Western Sahara. The big picture is that we
have not seen significant political progress for years.
That is the fundamental problem we need to address
in the months to come. The United States therefore
fully supports the Secretary-General's call to relaunch
negotiations with a new dynamic and a new spirit. The
resolution reinforces the fact that the Security Council
shares the Secretary-General's goals. It shows that we
expect the parties to work with the United Nations to
come back to the table. As the resolution demands, the
Secretary-General will now be reporting on whether
we have seen progress. The Council will be watching
what the parties do closely.

Secondly, the resolution sets a new standard for the
performance of the Mission. We are asking the United
Nations to set clear and measurable benchmarks for
what the Mission and its staffwill achieve. The Mission
needs to be able to hire staff with the right skills to
be as effective as possible and to adjust components
that are not working as well as they could be. That may
sound like common sense, but we do not always see
it happening on the ground. We look forward to the
United Nations reporting back to the Council on how
the Mission does.
Making sure that peacekeeping missions have an
impact is a top priority for the United States. With
today's resolution, we take another step towards that
goal. The United States will be watching closely to see
what progress is being made on the ground. MINURSO
must be part of a broader effort to achieve a mutually
acceptable resolution of the conflict in Western Sahara.
Returning to negotiations will, of course, be a difficult
task, but the United States is committed to doing what
we can to facilitate the United Nations work. Let us
not be distracted from our goal of finding a mutually
acceptable political solution to the conflict that will
provide for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara.

We continue to view Morocco's autonomy plan as
serious, credible and realistic, and it represents one
potential approach to satisfying the aspirations of the
people in Western Sahara to run their own affairs in
peace and dignity. Again, we expect the parties to work
with the United Nations to come back to the table and
we call on all members ofthe Council to focus on fnding
an enduring peace for a conflict that has continued for
far too long.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.


