Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Amos, Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovie for sharing their thoughts with the
Council today.

Civilian protection has taken on a new
significance in recent months as worrying security
situations and reports of human rights abuses in a
number of countries continue to attract worldwide
attention. Such situations warrant decisive action by
the United Nations and the wider international
community. In time, thorough investigations of abuses
should take place and all those responsible must be
held accountable for their actions.

Many of the concerns raised during the course of
today's briefings are shared by the United Kingdom.
On Libya, the case for taking action to protect the
civilian population remains compelling. Al-Qadafi's
regime is still inflicting severe violence on Libya's
civilian population. The United Kingdom has been
consistently clear that the action being undertaken by
the coalition forces is to protect the civilian population
on the ground in Libya. Security Council resolution
1973 (2011) provided a legal basis for that action,
expressly authorizing the use of force to protect
civilians. We are ensuring carefully that our actions
accord with the Security Council resolutions and our
other international obligations and that they are
designed precisely to protect civilians and to minimize
civilian casualties.

This year, the United Kingdom supported
resolutions of the United Nations Human Rights
Council on both Libya and Cote d'Ivoire, which
established commissions of inquiry into alleged human
rights abuses in the two countries. In both cases, we
believe that all abuses of human rights should be
thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators held
accountable.

All parties to a conflict have obligations to
respect international humanitarian law and to permit
humanitarian organizations access to affected civilians.
In cote d'Ivoire, the United Kingdom strongly

supports the robust posture of the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and its approach
in implementing its mandate to prevent the use of
heavy weapons and to protect civilians during the
recent crisis. We believe that UNOCI took a pioneering
step in increasing its level of responsibility for civilian
protection, and, of course, it did so with the
authorization and support of this Council.

Despite the best efforts of the Syrian Government
to suppress media coverage, we have witnessed the
repeated and deliberate targeting of civilians and the
use of tanks and other heavy weaponry against
peaceful protesters. The United Kingdom utterly
condemns the violence perpetrated by the Syrian
security forces against civilians who are expressing
their views in peaceful protests. We welcome the
resolution passed by the Human Rights Council during
its sixteenth special session, which unequivocally
condemned the use of lethal violence on peaceful
protesters by the Syrian authorities.

Allow me to take a few moments to consider
some topics that no longer feature as prominently
under the spotlight of the world's media.

We welcome the report of the United Nations
Panel of Experts on Sri Lanka and its comprehensive
investigation into allegations of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law by
both sides during the military conflict, which ended in
May 2009. We hope that the Government of Sri Lanka
will respond constructively to the recommendations in
the report, given the suffering of civilians during the
conflict and the need for a process of national
reconciliation.

In Burma, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about reported attacks on civilians by the
Burmese army in ethnic minority areas. We call upon
the Burmese army and ethnic militia to make every
effort to protect the civilian population and to bring to
account those responsible for human rights abuses
against them.

We need to redouble our efforts to ensure that
humanitarian access is not impeded. We know that
restrictions on access and attacks against aid workers
are two of the biggest challenges in delivering
humanitarian aid in the twenty-first century.
Unfortunately, from Libya to the Sudan and from Syria
to Cote d'Ivoire, access by humanitarian agencies to
the most vulnerable has been hindered, and lives have
been lost as a result.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
work of the United Nations peacekeepers, whose job is
to help protect vulnerable civilians around the world. I
am sure that all of us here today will want to express
our thanks for their continuing efforts.

