Mr. Dunn (United States of America): We would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and
his leadership of the Committee. We appreciate his
efforts and those of the Committee to ensure that the
Committee remains active in carrying out its important
mandate.

The Council meets at a time when P5+1 talks on
Iran's nuclear programme are taking place. I would
like to touch briefly on those talks and discuss the
importance of sanctions implementation in the recent
seizure of arms aboard the vessel Klos C. The P5+1
countries remain united in their determination to
resolve the concerns of the international community
with regard to the Iranian nuclear programme and to
bring Iran into compliance with Security Council
resolutions. The P5+1 is now in an active and intense
diplomatic phase in its efforts to reach a settlement
with Iran. Such an outcome must achieve our goals of
preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and
ensuring that Iran's nuclear programme is entirely
peaceful.

But for now in the absence of such an agreement,
all sanctions imposed by the Security Council remain
fully in effect. The mandates of the Security Council's
Iran Sanctions Committee and the Panel of Experts
remain unchanged. During this period of negotiations,
the work of the Committee and the Panel has played
and will continue to play a role supporting international
diplomatic efforts. We therefore urge the Committee
to continue carrying out its important functions. The
Committee should be continuously taking steps to
improve enforcement of United Nations sanctions and
respond effectively to violations.

In that vein, the United States welcomes the
2014 final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). We encourage all States Members of the United
Nations to carefully review the final report, which has
just been posted on the Committee's website. We urge
the Committee to take prompt action to implement
the Panel's recommendations to improve sanctions
implementation. Implementing those recommendations
could help States better understand and carry out their
obligations to enforce those sanctions. The United
States has long encouraged the Committee to improve
its response to wilful violations of the sanctions.

That leads me to my last point, on the most
egregious sanctions violation uncovered this year: the
seizure of arms aboard the Klos C vessel in March.
After an exhaustive investigation, the Panel of Experts
documented the discovery, on board the vessel, of 40
M-302 rockets, 181 mortar shells and approximately
400,000 pieces of ammunition. Based on information
from the Panel, we know that the shipment originated
in Iran, and therefore constituted a clear violation of
resolution 1747 (2006). The Klos C incident is another
example of Iranian attempts to smuggle arms to
extremists. Those repeated and intentional violations of
resolution 1747 (2004) are extremely troubling, as they
undermine both regional security and the credibility of
the Council. We look forward to working with other
Committee members to respond to the incident and to
work continuously to improve the enforcement of the
Council resolutions.

