Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau): I thank you,
Madam President, for inviting my delegation to the
Security Council. I wish to congratulate you on Nigeria's
presidency of the Council for the month of August and
to wish the Council successful deliberations. It is an
honour to see you presiding at this important meeting
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, a country in which
Nigeria is very much present and engaged.

Allow me to express my special thanks to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his
report on Guinea-Bissau (S/2015/626) and for his
personal engagement on the latest developments in
my country. The work of his Special Representative,
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau team and of all
United Nations offices and agencies in Guinea-Bissau
are also very much appreciated.

IwouldalsoliketothankHisExcellencyAmbassador
Antonio de Aguiar Pariota, Permanent Representative
of Brazil, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Her Excellency Ambassador Sofia Mesquita Borges,
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries;
and His Excellency Ambassador Fode Seck, Permanent
Representative of Senegal, on behalf of the Chair of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for their briefings and for their engagement
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

After a short period on a relatively successful path
towards peace and development in the country, once
again Guinea-Bissau is confronted with a political
crisis. The misunderstanding between His Excellency
Mr. Jose' Mario Vaz, President of the Republic, and
His Excellency Mr. Domingos Simoes Pereira, Prime
Minister, unfortunately ended with the dismissal of
the Prime Minister, on 12 August, and the nomination
of His Excellency Mr. Baciro Dja as the new Prime
Minister, on 20 August.
Despite that situation, the calm and civility that
has been demonstrated by the population so far on the
decision ofthe National Assembly to seek the necessary
legal guidance of the Supreme Court - which also
rules on the constitutionality of decisions in the
absence of a constitutional court in the country - as to
the constitutionality of the nomination of a new Prime
Minister by the President is to be congratulated. That
democratic method for finding a solution to the existing
differences within the highest levels of the country, in
our View, offers assurances that, although difficult,
there will be a way out of the political crisis through
constitutional and legal procedures. The neutral
position of the military so far in the political crisis
is very much appreciated, and we hope that they will
maintain a position of noninterference.

In that context, we understand the resulting
frustration of our partners and all the friends of
Guinea-Bissau who have worked so hard to help us
to consolidate our democracy and to sustain long-
lasting peace and development. However, on behalf of
the peaceful people of Guinea-Bissau, who time and
time again have demonstrated their commitment to
the goals of peace and development, we are counting
on the hope that the Council and all our partners will
remain engaged with the country. Do not give up on the
people of Guinea-Bissau. The dreams and aspirations
of youth, and of women as mothers, for a better future
for their children are at risk. They have high hopes
and expectations on the programmes proposed by the
Government that led to the successful donor round
table on Guinea-Bissau held in Brussels in March, and
they are counting on all of the pledges made by all our
partners and friends.

We are aware that we Bissau-Guineans bear the
primary responsibility for resolving our internal
differences, avoiding instability and promoting
sustainable development. But without continued and
strong engagement on the part of the international
communityandcloseandeffectivemonitoringstrategies,
all of the efforts made risk being compromised. To
that end, the support of the international community
towards a peaceful resolution of the current situation
is very important. It will help restore confidence in
Guinea-Bissau and promote an environment conducive
to the disbursement ofthe funds that have been pledged,
thereby leading to the implementation of the reforms
and strategic development programmes that have been
proposed by the national authorities.

It has been repeated many times in the Council that
the instability in Guinea-Bissau will not end with the
elections, and the current situation is such an example.
The international community should do more to help
consolidate stronger institutions. And it should remain
alert and work more closely in terms of guidance,
through open and frank dialogue with the national
authorities and all political stakeholders, as a way to
prevent situations such as the one we are facing today.

It is our hope that the country will overcome this
crisis and that the relevant political stakeholders,
the National Assembly and civil society will remain
engaged in constructive dialogue for the good of
Guinea-Bissau and its people.

Before concluding, I would like to express our
gratitude for the engagement of the international
community in following the political situation in our
country. I also wish to commend the continued support
of the Secretary-General, the head of ECOWAS,
namely, the President of Senegal as its current Chair,
the President of the Republic of Guinea, the President
of Nigeria and all our partners and friends who have
tried their best, and are still trying, to mediate and help
Guinea-Bissau resolve the current political crisis and
regain its course towards the consolidation ofpeace and
achievement of sustainable development.

