Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. Foreign Minister, the Chinese delegation welcomes
your presence here in the Security Council to preside
over this important meeting. We welcome also the
presence of Mr. Simeon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Haiti, and we wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Valdes for his briefing to the
Council.

The presence of foreign ministers and high-level
officials from many countries and that of the Acting
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States (OAS) is a reflection of the international
community's deep concern and firm commitment vis-a-
vis Haiti as it moves towards peace and stability. We
are deeply appreciative of that fact.

We are pleased to have witnessed some positive
changes in the situation in Haiti recently. In the more
than seven months since the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) was first
deployed, 90 per cent of the peacekeepers and 95 per
cent of the police are already on the ground,
successfully implementing the mandate entrusted to
them by the Security Council. They have basically
stabilized the security situation in Haiti.

Secondly, in the area of disarmament, the
restoration of the rule of law and the promotion of
national reconciliation, the Transitional Government of
Haiti has successively adopted positive and proactive
measures, which have already begun to take effect. The
Transitional Government's unremitting efforts deserve
full acknowledgement.

Thirdly, confidence in Haiti from all sides has
been mounting and inputs have increased, resulting in
favourable conditions for a comprehensive settlement
of the question of Haiti. The World Bank's recent
release of $73 million in assistance to Haiti in
particular is an encouraging sign.

Considering the complex and difficult nature of
the situation in Haiti, we believe that these
achievements are indeed hard-won. I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Transitional Government
and the people of Haiti and to pay tribute to Mr. Valdes
and to MINUSTAH for their tireless efforts.
Achieving national reconciliation, improving the
security situation and promoting economic
development are the three pillars of the settlement of
the issue of Haiti and the basic guarantee for such a
settlement. They must be given simultaneous attention.
None should be emphasized to the detriment of
another.

We hope that the Transitional Government will
swiftly launch a national dialogue and reconciliation
process, strive for consensus among all domestic
parties and create a favourable environment for the
successful holding of the election. We hope that it will
speedily establish a national commission on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and promote the collection of weapons from civilians
in the context of the DDR programme, create more
employment opportunities, effectively improve
people's living conditions, and increase the
population's confidence in the future of the nation.

At the same time, I wish to emphasize that the
peace, stability and development of Haiti as a least
developed country will not be possible without the
vigorous support and assistance of the international
community, including the United Nations, as well as
the active support and participation of countries and
organizations of the region.

In that connection, lessons should be drawn from
the past. The attention given to Haiti and the inputs
made must be kept up in a sustainable manner. We
therefore are in favour of keeping the question of Haiti
under constant consideration in the Security Council
and believe that MINUSTAH's presence in Haiti must
be considered on the basis of need. We support a
continued major role by relevant departments of the
United Nations, the OAS and other international
agencies in the process of achieving peace and stability
in Haiti. We appeal to donor countries and to the
international financial institutions concerned to
expeditiously deliver on their pledge commitments. We
are in favour of the issuing of a presidential statement,
as drafted by Argentina, following this debate.

Although there are no diplomatic relations
between China and Haiti, the Chinese people have
always had friendly feelings towards the Haitian
people and have been following developments in the
situation in that country. We have already provided,
and will continue to provide, assistance in good faith to
the peace and stability process in Haiti. We are firmly
convinced that the Haitian people, who, through their
heroic struggles, were the first in Latin America to
achieve independence, will certainly achieve durable
peace and sustainable development with the assistance
of the international community and through their own
unremitting efforts.

Haiti, the pearl of the Antilles, will without a
doubt overcome its difficult circumstances and shine in
all its gleaming splendour.

