Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, let me
start by reviewing the progress that has been made
since the last Security Council meeting on small arms,
held in October 2002. I believe that two areas warrant
special mention. The first is the holding of the First
Biennial Meeting on small arms, and the second is the
unanimous adoption of the General Assembly
resolution entitled "The illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects".

At the Biennial Meeting on small arms - which
was chaired by Ambassador Kuniko Inoguchi, the
Japanese Ambassador to the Conference on
Disarmament - it was clearly recognized that the
illicit proliferation of small arms and its negative
consequences are problems of a global dimension, and
multilateralism was set forth as a guiding principle in
coping with such problems. In particular, thanks to the
consensus-based proceedings, it was very meaningful
that the countries participating in the meeting -
including those suffering from the proliferation of
small arms - shared the feeling that they were able to
advance the process of disarmament in the area of
small arms through their individual ownership.

Moreover, it is of crucial importance that, since
the Chairman's summary outlined the tasks which must
be given priority, the meeting garnered wide support
for the need for international cooperation in resolving
the problems and - with regard to the respective tasks
to be addressed - the need for domestic laws, the
advancement of international cooperation, the training
of those who are expected to engage in the relevant
activities, and financial assistance to developing
countries in this area.

We are pleased at the success of the First Biennial
Meeting and, as the country which chaired the meeting,
wish to thank once again all participating States for
their cooperation. At the same time, in anticipation of
the Second Biennial Meeting in 2005 and,
subsequently, the Second United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, scheduled to be held in 2006, we
believe it essential to add to the momentum that is now
being generated on this issue.

Although we have witnessed the aforementioned
successes in the area of small arms, as rightly indicated
in the Secretary-General's report, a number of issues
remain that we have to address seriously. They must be
addressed both from the supply side and the demand
side. Let me elaborate on some of them.

As I mentioned earlier, the General Assembly
resolution on this issue, which Japan submitted as one
of the sponsors, was unanimously adopted. That was
particularly significant, because the resolution decided
to establish an open-ended working group to negotiate
an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace illicit small arms and light weapons. Tracing
is an important method in detecting and criminalizing
the illicit transfer of small arms. The creation of an
international instrument on tracing is particularly
important in tackling the issue of small arms from the
supply side. Japan considers that the area of tracing
needs to be given high priority. From that point of
view, we look forward to seeing concrete results
produced by that working group, which will begin its
activities this February.

Next, I would like to raise the issue of arms
embargoes as a method of controlling the spread of
small arms from the supply side. In order to implement
an arms embargo effectively, it is not enough simply to
adopt a Security Council resolution. It is also
necessary, after its adoption, that its implementation be
monitored, and, if violations are found, enforcement
measures be taken.

In the recently adopted Security Council
resolution authorizing the arms embargo in Somalia, a
monitoring group was established, and the compilation
of a violations list was requested. We welcome those
elements as a sign that the Security Council is well
aware of the importance of the monitoring of arms-
embargo implementation. The approach adopted in that
instance will serve as a valuable model when arms
embargo measures of the same kind are taken in other
areas of conflict.

On the other hand, control of small arms on the
demand side is equally important. This means that the
international community, in order to address the
problem of conflict in various parts of the world, must
also pursue measures to eliminate the demand for small
arms. In particular, it is absolutely critical, in order to
bring a conflict to an end and to create a stable society,
to promote the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former soldiers. In order to encourage
cooperation in weapons-collection efforts, reasonable
economic incentives must be provided, and it is also
essential that proper employment opportunities be
provided to induce them to give up their weapons, so
that they can start new lives.

Incidentally, as a member of the Economic and
Social Council ad hoc group on Burundi, I had the
opportunity to Visit that country at the end of last year.
I was very impressed to see that, now that a peace
agreement has been reached, the disarmament of
soldiers of rebel parties was being seriously pursued.
Disarmament efforts in Burundi are taking place in the
context of cantonment, so their success or failure will
depend, above all, on whether the former soldiers can
be persuaded to report to cantonment.

To achieve that goal, it is necessary to provide
assistance in the pre-cantonment phase as well.
However, I have learned that it has been the policy of
the World Bank that, in principle, no aid should be
provided to the military. I am of the view that,
assuming that pre-cantonment assistance for former
soldiers becomes a requirement for a successful DDR
programme, it might be necessary for the World Bank
to find an acceptable alternative to its aid policy with
regard to this point.

I have heard that, these days, 60 to 70 per cent of
the Security Council's deliberations - as far as official
meetings are concerned - are devoted to peacekeeping
operations and other United Nations peace activities in
Africa. Economic development in Africa depends
heavily on peace and stability, but the widespread
proliferation of small arms among the peoples of
regions in conflict makes conflicts in Africa all the
more devastating and renders their resolution much
harder. This means that the situation with respect to
small arms is particularly grave in Africa.

In that connection, let me commend the fact that
the problems of West and Central Africa were
vigorously debated last year in the Security Council. It
is particularly significant that Security Council
members fully recognized the importance of the efforts
made by subregional groups such as ECOWAS to
address the issue of small arms. Above all, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
soldiers, as a component of peace-building efforts
following a ceasefire, is essential not only for the
collection of weapons and to reduce the danger of the
resumption of conflict, but also to reduce the demand
for small arms.

As a concrete example of that approach, Japan
would like to share with other United Nations
Members, when appropriate, its experiences with, and
results achieved by, its DDR programme which is
currently being undertaken in Afghanistan. Japan has
long been implementing its "Weapons for
Development" projects, under which it provides
development assistance as compensation for the
surrender of small arms. We will continue to make such
efforts and intend to share the experience gained from
weapons-collection programmes in Cambodia to other
small-arms collection projects in the African, Latin
American and Middle East regions.

We hope that the Security Council will continue
to pay attention to this important issue. We would also
like to request that the Secretary-General continue to
provide us with progress reports as he deems necessary.

