Mr. Ward (Jamaica): Allow me, Mr. President, to
congratulate you for convening this informational
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This meeting is a logical follow-up to our last
comprehensive review in July and serves to measure
what progress has been achieved since then on all
aspects of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that regard, we thank
Mr. Annabi for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in the peace process, which covered all
aspects of the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Jamaica welcomes the positive developments in
the inter-Congolese dialogue and the plans to convene
the first round of talks in October in Addis Ababa.
Now that a date and a venue have been set for the
dialogue, we encourage all parties to cooperate fully
with the facilitator so that the political future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can be determined.
We are well aware that a national dialogue, especially
within the context of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, is by no means an easy undertaking. In that
regard, the spirit of compromise and unity must
pervade discussions if a successful outcome is to be
achieved.

We welcome agreement by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to begin the
dialogue for national reconciliation before the
withdrawal of armed groups. We are particularly
pleased that President Kabila, Mr. Bemba and the
leaders of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD) met on the margins of the Gaborone
meeting. Their subsequent statements are indeed
encouraging.

While we recognize the need for reconciliation at
the level of signatories and parties to the conflict, it
must be recognized that civil society, particularly
women, must have a key role in the dialogue. We look
forward to hearing Sir Ketumile Masire when he meets
with the Security Council later. I would like to hear
from Mr. Annabi whether there was a positive response
to the call for an increase in the number of women
delegates to the preparatory meeting.

The reports of the imminent demobilization and
disengagement of armed groups are also noted. The
Jamaica delegation encourages all armed groups in this
regard to cooperate with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in preparing and implementing
plans for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) and to cease all
forms of cooperation with the negative forces. The
DDRRR of the armed groups remain critical to a
lasting peace process in the Democratic Republic of the

Congo. We take note of the recent plans of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to take the first steps, and we urge the cooperation of
all the groups.

My delegation congratulates Namibia for keeping
its commitment to withdraw all its troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the end of
August. We commend Uganda for its continued
withdrawal.

We remain concerned, however, about the
distressing reports of recruitment of child soldiers and
demand that armed groups desist from such practices.
The humanitarian situation, especially in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, remains
worrying. The statistics indicate that the internally
displaced persons are increasing in large numbers and
that the humanitarian response to the humanitarian
need is woefully inadequate. While it is commendable
that some improvement has been made, the fact
remains that more needs to be done in this area. We
call upon the armed groups to cooperate fully with
humanitarian workers to allow access to populations in
need.

Also of great concern to my delegation are the
continued reports of gross human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law throughout
many parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including areas under the control of the Government.
As the reports indicate, perpetrators of these abuses
show scant regard for the civilian population and even
prevent the delivery of aid to relieve the suffering of
the people. This situation is deplorable and cannot be
tolerated.

As Mr. Annabi pointed out, military trials
continue, and the rights of the accused are not being
protected. I must remind all concerned that there can be
no peace without justice.

We share in the concerns expressed by others
before us of the lack of progress in the demilitarization
of Kisangani, and again we appeal to the RCD to
cooperate with MONUC. There are signs that the RCD
is beginning to cooperate, but there is a long way to go
to reach a level of satisfaction. We also call on the
RCD to investigate expeditiously the shooting of the
MONUC helicopter and to guarantee the safety of
MONUC personnel in areas under RCD control.

Finally, my delegation underscores that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot be resolved without taking into consideration
the regional context. In light of this, we again call for
the convening of a conference of the Great Lakes
region, which we believe is imperative to lasting peace
in the area. It is our hope that the spirit of unity, which
is beginning to manifest itself in the inter-Congolese
dialogue, will be translated at the regional level, thus
insuring peace and sustainable development throughout
the Great Lakes region.

