Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on bringing this important matter to the
Council in this open format. I would like also to
acknowledge the significance of the presence here today of
the Foreign Minister of Angola.

One of the key findings of the study entitled "The
Sanctions Decade", which was launched yesterday morning
by the International Peace Academy, is that the most
important element in the success of sanctions is the degree
to which they are enforced. My Government believes that
Ambassador Fowler, by his leadership and his energetic
chairing of the Angola sanctions Committee, and the Panel
of Experts, which has reported specifically on violations of
the Angola sanctions regime, have done the people of
Angola and the United Nations a tremendous service.

We cannot forget that an estimated 1 million people
have died in the fighting in Angola over the past 25 years.
That is despite successive United Nations peacekeeping and
mine-clearance operations to which my own country
contributed throughout much of the last decade. Nor can we
forget the callous shooting down of two United Nations
aircraft, in December 1998 and in January 1999; the
perpetrators of those acts have still to be brought to
justice.

The Panel's report casts some sunlight on the
subterranean world of sanctions-busting in diamonds,
arms and military equipment and other means of support
for UNITA's continued war against the legitimate
Government of Angola. That war continues to take the
lives of 200 persons each day. UNITA must be deprived
of the means to wage war. It is essential that all Member
States respect their obligation to comply fully with the
measures imposed against UNITA contained in
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998).

The Panel's report points the way towards the more
effective use of the sanctions tool by the Council in the
future. For sanctions to remain credible, the Council must
act when violations are brought to its attention, as they
have been in the case of Angola. We therefore strongly
endorse positive action on today's draft resolution, which
contains a comprehensive range of measures to ensure the
cessation of the violations identified in the report of the
Panel of Experts.

