Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his report on the work of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
contained in document S/2018/780.

I also thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
for his briefing on the latest political, economic and
security developments in my country. I also thank His
Excellency Ambassador Olof Skoog for his briefing
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

The latest bloody events in the suburbs of the
capital Tripoli, which have been condemned by my
Government and the international community, illustrate
the scale of the security problems in Libya. They have
undoubtedly demonstrated that local and international
parties harbour ill intentions. They seek to maintain
the status quo in Libya and to undermine any efforts to
achieve peace.

Whenever Libyans have felt that they are close to
finding a solution to their protracted crisis, they are
faced with contrived conflicts and problems leading to
armed violence that subjects civilian lives and property
to the most terrible dangers and damages. In that regard,
I would like to recall that the first Security Council
resolution pertaining to the Libyan issue, adopted in
2011 - resolution 1970 (2011) - was on the protection
of civilians, who unfortunately are still suffering from
the senseless and irresponsible use of all kinds of
weapons in densely populated areas by parties that seek
to obstruct the establishment of State institutions that
protect the nation and the citizens. In an environment
where the language of arms prevails, it is hard for any
Government in the world to undertake its tasks. Hence,
it is almost impossible for State institutions to function.
That is why the process of disarmament in my country
must be at the top of the priority list.

My Government stresses that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, must implement
serious, swift and robust programmes to disarm
lawless armed groups. Each case must be dealt with
separately through programmes and plans prepared
by specialized United Nations entities. Those entities
have made great achievements in many countries
experiencing through situations similar to the one in
my country. We ask the Council to call upon all the
Libyan parties to understand that any military action
to rule the country is unacceptable to Libyans and the
international community. They should be urged to step
up their efforts to overcome this crisis.

It is also important to complete the constitutional
process paving the way to holding free and fair general
elections that lead to the establishment of elected
constitutional institutions, while achieving stability,
development and prosperity for the Libyan people.
In that regard, my country's delegation would like to
thank UNSMIL for the efforts undertaken to tackle the
security problem that the city of Tripoli is suffering from
these days. Its efforts were successful, and a ceasefire
agreement was signed on Tuesday, 4 September. We
hope that all parties will observe it.

The dire economic situation in Libya is also a result
of the deteriorating security situation and the abhorrent
interference by some influential actors, corrupt people
and weapon users in the work of the State's economic
institutions, especially the banking sector. That
of course had a severe adverse effect on the living
conditions of the Libyan people. It was the reason for
low liquidity and lack of services.

The parties to the Libyan Political Agreement,
signed in Skhirat on 17 December 2015, have also
not fulfilled their commitments. They have continued
to use grotesque practices to avoid meeting those
commitments. That has also contributed considerably
to the deterioration of the economic situation. My
Government is trying to find solutions through clear
economic plans. However, we need legislation for
that. The Parliament must address the issue in order to
alleviate the hardship for the Libyan people.

Various United Nations reports and the Public
Prosecutor's office in Libya confirm that Libyans and
foreigners are subjected to human rights violations.
That is outrageous and unacceptable to all Libyans. We
highlight that, while many violations have taken place,
they will not stop and their perpetrators will continue to
enjoy impunity as long as the security situation does not
improve. Legislative bodies should be helped through
serious work and full international cooperation with my
country. Supporters in other countries of armed groups
in Libya must refrain from spreading their venom in
my country. International action is needed to achieve
stability. That is an absolute necessity for Libya and the
international community.

We would like to recall that a year has passed since
the adoption of the United Nation action plan on Libya
in the Security Council, on 20 September 2017. The
action plan has not yet been implemented, while various
parties are using different excuses and completely
disregarding the suffering of the Libyan people.

My country's delegation underscores that the
Security Councilmustbe united,bear its responsibilities,
call upon all parties to end the political crisis within a
set time frame, implement the United Nations action
plan and initiate the constitutional arrangements needed

for the holding of democratic elections - undertaken The Security Council needs to take decisive action and
and decided upon by Libyan voters. a serious stance to hold accountable all those who stand
In conclusion, my country's delegation would like
to note that statements and declarations issued here and
there will not silence the guns, stop the destruction of
public and private property, save the lives of teenagers
who are forced to fight or stop human rights violations.

in the way ofrestoring peace, security and tranquillity.
The Council must end the plight that has been going on
in my country for too long. It is high time to end it and
impose severe sanctions on the perpetrators.

The meeting we at 4.55 p.m.
