Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting: In the interests of time,
I would refer representatives to the written version of
my statement. I will deliver a shortened version.

(spoke in French)

I have the honour to take the floor on behalf the
European Union, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2014/617) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
briefing. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his presentation.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.

The strengthening ofdemocratic gains is essential to
ensuring stability andto meetingthe huge socioeconomic
and development challenges facing the vast majority of
the Haitian society. The European Union is determined
to act in line with the other partners to ensure that that
progress remains irreversible. For the past few months,
the European Union has pursued its contacts with the
various institutional actors to promote dialogue and to
find the necessary compromises to meet the electoral
timeline that was determioned by the decree signed
by President Martelly on 14 July. It is therefore with

regret and concern that we see continuing difficulties
in the implementation of the El Rancho Accord. That
impasse makes it unlikely that the elections can take
place before the end of the year on the basis ofa revised
electoral law.

The European Union believes that respect for
the time frame provided for by the Constitution and
the need to ensure the functioning of democratic
institutions should be a goal shared by all the political
forces in Haiti. Given the real risk of a legislative and
judicial vacuum from January 2015, the European
Union calls for a permanent solution to ensure the
continuity of the legislative mechanisms that would
enjoy the broadest possible consensus among the
relevant political and institutional actors. The dispatch
of an election observer mission to Haiti is not planned.
However, in addition to the contribution of €5 million
to the electoral fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme, the European Union could
consider sending an electoral expert group, as was done
during the 2011 elections.

The European Union welcomes the continuing
decrease in the number of displaced persons still
living in camps. Still, such families continue to live
in deplorable conditions. It is therefore crucial for the
Government of Haiti to redouble its efforts to ensure
adequate living conditions and the fundamental rights
of those affected. Cognizant of the persistent needs,
the European Union plans to continue its humanitarian
commitment in 2015.

The European Union has just signed a planning
instrument with the Government of Haiti for the period
2014 to 2020, with an allocation of €420 million.
That demonstrates the European Union's continued
commitment to supporting the Government in
its strategy for the country's development and
socioeconomic recovery.

The European Union also welcomes the significant
drop in the number of cholera cases recorded between
2013 and 2014, as noted in the Secretary-General's
report. A number of sectors covered by European
assistance for the period 2014 to 2020, such as urban
renewal, education and support for structural reforms
to State administration, could well contribute to the
United Nations plan for the eradication of cholera. The
European Union remains ready to explore concrete
possibilities for cooperation with the relevant United
Nations agencies.

We take note of the Secretary-General's
recommendations envisaging a substantial reduction
in the military component of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) by 2015,
with an additional decrease following the presidential
elections. Within the context of an overall improvement
in the security situation, we also note a 30 per cent
rise in demonstrations with a socioeconomic cast and
a two-fold increase in the number of demonstrations
accompanied by Violence, while the number of
demonstrations of a political nature has remained
stable. That leads to the conclusion that, rather than a
polarization of the political sphere, there continue to be
grave social and economic inequalities that represent
a real threat to Haiti's stability and security. In that
regard, the European Union would like to stress the
importance of continuing to work with determination
on the root causes that underlie those inequalities.
For its part, the European Union intends to pursue a
process of consideration and consultation with the Club
of Madrid aimed at a vast number of institutional and
civil society actors.

In conclusion, allow me to express the appreciation
of the European Union for MINUSTAH's important
contribution, 10 years on, to stabilizing the security
situation and consolidating democracy and the rule of
law in Haiti. The European Union remains determined
to support the Haitian authorities, the United Nations
and the international community in order to ensure a
better future for all of Haiti's people.

