Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank Uruguay
for convening today's important debate. I also offer my
special thanks to the briefers for their comprehensive

presentations and for their dedication and work in
the field.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
add some comments in my national capacity.

Violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law continue to have an enormous negative
impact on civilians in conflict zones in various parts of
the world. The response of the international community
is crucial to ending this situation. We must all work
together to deliver on our pledge to leave no one behind,
and while doing so, we should have three separate
conflict phases in mind, namely, before, during and
after a conflict.

Most civilian deaths and suffering could be avoided
if the fundamental norms of international humanitarian
and human rights law were respected. So we propose
that the following measures be undertaken.

First, in terms of preventive measures, Member
States should adhere to international treaties binding
parties to upholding international law and protecting
civilians in armed conflict, in particular the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 1977 and 2005. They should also reinforce
their national legislation related to the protection of
medical care in armed conflict and introduce guarantees
for medical personnel to allow them to act freely.

Secondly, during the conflict cycle, it is of
utmost importance to introduce safety measures like
mapping the location of medical personnel, medical
facilities and the equipment and to secure humanitarian
access for civilians to receive life-saving assistance
and protection.

Poland was among the sponsors of resolution 2286
(2016), on the protection of medical personnel in armed
conflict. We wish to reiterate what was stated in the
seventeenth preliminary paragraph of the resolution:
"attacks intentionally directed against buildings,
material, medical units and transport and personnel...
are war crimes". Perpetrators of these crimes must be
held accountable.

We would also like to use today's debate to endorse
the recommendation of the Secretary-General and the
International Committee of the Red Cross that States
and parties to conflict should avoid the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas. For
instance, as independent non-governmental research
showed, shelling in eastern Ukraine has directly
damaged hospitals, destroyed ambulances and killed
or injured health workers and their patients. It also
damaged infrastructure and created travel risks. As a
result, the availability and accessibility of health care
have drastically declined.

Thirdly, after a conflict, States should introduce
accountability measures and sanctions as mechanisms
for leveraging compliance from conflict parties
to conform with international human rights and
humanitarian law. Poland has experience with regard
to providing medical assistance to those in need in
conflict zones. For instance, in the years 2007-2015 we
maintained a field hospital in the Afghan province of
Ghazni. Apart from emergency medical care, patients
were provided with basic medications. A Polish medical
team also delivered medical care among children
and youth. In the framework of a Polish assistance
programme, we also provided a city hospital in Ghazni
with some medical equipment and supplies. In the last
two years, Poland assigned funds to rebuild and support
hospitals that deliver humanitarian assistance to war
victims in Syria.

In conclusion, let me join other delegations and
reiterate our strong support for all issues pertaining to
the protection of civilians agenda. We very much thank
Uruguay for taking up this topic during its presidency
in the Security Council.

