Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I join the representative of Cote d'Ivoire
in offering our condolences to the Government and
the people of Burkina Faso as well as to the victims'
families. We condemn the terrorist attack that took
place recently. We also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
his briefing.

I am going to touch on three aspects of today's
topic: synergy among partners, follow-up on reform,
and the role of the Security Council.

First, concerning synergy among partners,
peacekeeping is considered one of the United Nations
tools that comprises the largest number of partners,
stakeholders and decision-makers. It is a source of
strength, consensus and impetus that, if well handled,
could lead to development and reform, but if mishandled,
could become a burden.

The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
is the only Committee mandated to conduct a
comprehensive review of peacekeeping in all its
aspects. It reflects a basic consensus among Member
States regarding all peacekeeping concepts and
policies, supported by our agreement through the Fifth
Committee to translate our commitments into a budget
that supports such consensus. In that connection, the
Secretariat plays a pivotal role in providing Member
States with first-hand information, while troop-
contributing countries play a key role as a result of
their field expertise, which leads to policies that
support the work and priorities of peace operations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations is also gaining field relevance. The best
example is that of the ongoing peace operations in two
Arab countries, namely, the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Secondly, pertaining to the follow-up on reform,
I once again thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and his
team for their clear efforts to follow up on the reform
efforts of the Secretary-General and to achieve greater
progress, especially regarding the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and its correlation with the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We look forward to the result
of the follow-up by the Secretariat soon on reform
in peacekeeping.
Most of the eight areas of the Declaration have
resolutions or presidential statements supporting their
implementation. There are Security Council resolutions
on the protection of civilians and on women and peace
and security, as well as on performance, peacebuilding
and the safety of peacekeepers, in addition to conduct
and discipline. What remains are two areas where we
need to witness developments or resolutions, namely,
partnerships and policies. Regarding partnerships, we
have just touched upon their importance in Somalia
and the Sudan. As for policies, a point of reference
should be agreed by all Member States pertaining
to prioritizing political solutions in the missions of
peacekeeping operations.

The policy of the Secretariat on the representation
of women also deserves encouragement. It must be
supported in order to be reflected in all and not just
some peace operations.

Thirdly, regarding the role of the Security
Council, the Council should build on the previous
consensus reached by troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), with emphasis on the importance of the role
played by the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by cote d'Ivoire, in
coordinating the efforts of the Security Council, TCCs
and the Secretariat - as well as the peacebuilding
architecture ~ to ensure consensus.

Last July we put forward some proposals during
a meeting on triangular cooperation, some of which
relate to procedural matters and to the need for the
greater involvement of TCCs and countries hosting
peacekeeping operations, especially given that the latter
will need to focus on sustainable peace after the exit of
peacekeeping operations. We have consistently called
for assistance to those countries in the area of capacity-
building and in ensuring their national ownership.

We thank the United Kingdom delegation
for having taken the initiative to mainstream and
clarify the mandate of AMISOM. We hope that this
approach can be implemented with regard to other
Security Council resolutions. We also look forward to
predictable, sufficient and sustainable funding of the
peace operations undertaken by the African Union and
authorized by the Security Council.

In conclusion, we look forward to future
developments and count on our unity to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

