Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for having organized this briefing to share our
experiences as outgoing Chairs of the Security Council
subsidiary organs.

Afterjoining the Security Council in January 2016,
Ukraine assumed the chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003)
concerning Liberia, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) and recently
extended pursuant to resolution 2339 (2017) concerning
the Central African Republic. However, in May 2016
the Security Council adopted resolution 2288 (2016),
which terminated the arms embargo against Liberia and
dissolved the 1521 Sanctions Committee. During my
short tenure as the Chair of that Committee, I focused
on maintaining the positive momentum in its work,
created by my predecessors, particularly the former
Jordanian Permanent Representative Dina Kawar.

In January 2017, Ukraine began to chair the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan.

In my personal assessment, one of the main
tasks of a Chair is to deepen dialogue between the
Committee and the authorities of the government in
question. This is meant not only helping to strengthen
the implementation of sanctions regimes, but also
pushing forward the resolution of root causes of a
respective crisis or conflict, and to contribute to post-
conflict rehabilitation.

Bearing that in mind, during the past 24 months
I have dedicated myself, among other things, to
strengthening interaction between the Committees
that I chair, on the one side, and the Sudan and the
Central African Republic, on the other. Furthermore,
I also worked on enhancing the Committees' contacts
with other Security Council subsidiary bodies, relevant
neighbouring countries and other stakeholders,
considering the latter as key in ensuring proper
implementation of the sanctions regimes. My visits to
the Central African Republic in 2016 and the Sudan
in 2017 were of great importance in building up trust
between the parties concerned and the Committees.
While on those visits, I also tried to strengthen the
cooperation between the Committees and the United
Nations entities on the ground.

The most important lesson, therefore, that I learned
was the value of dialogue. It is my firm belief that if
ones wishes to be an effective chair of a sanctions
committee, one must engage in dialogue, build bridges
of trust and mutual understanding, speak frequently
with all relevant stakeholders and be ready to listen.
The time and effort invested in such endeavours will
ultimately determine one's success in achieving one's
goals as chair. Secondly, I tried to keep the Committees
as up-to-date as possible about the dynamics of conflict
resolution in the Central African Republic and the
Sudan. This allowed the Committees' members to
take better-informed decisions on how to ensure full
implementation of the respective sanctions regimes.

For this purpose, with the valuable support of the
Secretariat, in both Committees I convened meetings
with the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as informal meetings with
civil society representatives, who briefed members on
the areas of their expertise. Worth mentioning are also
briefings by the United Nations Mine Action Service and
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
for the 2127 Committee on weapons and ammunition
management in the Central African Republic.

No less important were interactions with the
Special Representative, Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and the Joint Special
Representative, Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. They in their
turn, and to the extent possible, kept the Committees
informed regarding the evolution of the security
situation and political process in the Central African
Republic and Darfur, respectively.

It is also difficult to overestimate the role of the
respective Panels ofExperts in keeping the Committees
informed about the current political and security
situation in the countries concerned as well as, most
importantly, the current status of the implementation of
sanctions measures. Such up-to-date information from
the ground was especially valuable for those Security
Council members who do not have their own diplomatic
missions in these countries. I strongly encourage
incoming Chairs to maintain close cooperation with the
Panels of Experts and support their challenging work in
collecting such information.

In September, I initiated an open briefing of the
Central African Committee Committee with the
participation not only of the delegations of regional
States, but also of the broader United Nations
membership to discuss that challenges that the
country and the region were facing, in particular in
the sphere of implementing the sanctions regime.
This event confirmed, among other things, the crucial
role of regional cooperation in ensuring the proper
implementation of the travel ban and in countering
illicit arms-trafficking and cross-border smuggling of
natural resources in the region.

In November, the Committee on the Sudan held
its first-ever joint informal consultations with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan to discuss the spread of Darfuri armed groups
into Libya and South Sudan and to develop a common
approach to addressing the issue. I am convinced
that the holding of such joint informal consultations
should be viewed as the start of a holistic approach to
addressing the threats posed by those armed groups.
Key here is the diversity of sources of expertise and
openness to broader United Nations membership and
different United Nations entities.

I advise incoming Chairs not to assume that
chairing a sanctions committee is an easy task. There
are many challenges down the road.

Despite all the positive developments that I have
noted above, much remains to be done in order to
advance the role of the chair. In many instances, a
committee can be paralysed by totally unavoidable
politicization of its work and the abuse of the consensus
rule. It is from such abuse that, for example, in recent
years the Sudan Committee was unable to present its
90-day report in an open format to the entire United
Nations membership. It was just yesterday that we
managed to break this negative trend and I was able
to brief the Council about my recent activities in this
Chamber. I hope that this practice of open briefings
will continue by default.

The same relates to decision-making. Given that
the Committee reaches all decisions by consensus,
sometimes the Chair finds himself lacking a certain
level of autonomy. Almost all Chair's actions must go
through a no-objection procedure. It starts with the
content of the Chair's communications and ends up
with a format of meetings that the Chair proposes to
convene. However, according to the existing guidelines,
decisions on convening "informal informal" meetings
and inviting participants are left to the discretion of the
Chair, and I tried to do my best to use this valuable
procedural opening to increase transparency.

I believe that the chair of a sanctions committee
should not be considered exclusively a troubleshooter.
He or she can play a much more relevant role,
particularly given the evolving nature of conflicts in
assigned countries and the need to ensure the full and
effective implementation of sanctions regimes.

Ukraine is among those countries that fully
recognize the importance of undertaking continuous
efforts, including periodic reviews, to further improve
the proper design, implementation, evaluation and
follow-up of sanctions regimes and to increase the
effectiveness oftargeted sanctions. To this end, we are in
favour of further endeavours aimed at the independent
review of crosscutting issues and trends in sanctions'
application, best practices and challenges in their
implementation as well as preparing recommendations,
including with regard to practical options to better
support Member States' capacities in this area. I want
to underline that serving as a committee chair is a
privilege and responsibility. Among other things, it
allows each individual Permanent Representative to
contribute to bringing peace to affected countries
and people.

Finally, I would like to thank the Secretariats ofthe
Committees I had the honor to chair for their dedication
and professionalism in supporting the Chair's work.
My special appreciation also goes to the interpreters:
without their help, our work would not be accomplished.

I wish the best of luck to Poland and C6te d'Ivoire
as the incoming Chairs of the Sudan and the Central
African Republic Sanctions Committees.

