Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
great pleasure and honour for the delegation of the
Sudan to see you, Sir, presiding over this important
Security Council meeting. We highly appreciate the
many contributions and activities of the Indonesian
presidency of the Council. We recall that your friendly
country was among the first to understand the problems
and concerns of the African continent when it hosted
the historic Bandung Conference more than 50 years
ago. That gathering sought to diagnose the problems of
the newly independent continent and to support its
march towards national unity, settlement of disputes
and reconstruction through cooperation and solidarity.

Therefore, your friendly country is particularly
qualified to preside over this meeting about peace in
Darfur and to guide it towards a result that will help
support the peace and stability we all desire.

Allow me also to send my greetings through you
to Mr. Jan Eliasson, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the political process in Darfur. I
also salute his counterpart, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim,
Special Envoy of the African Union. We always
appreciate their continuous efforts to guarantee the
success of the political process in reaching a
sustainable peace for all in Darfur. We also appreciate
the efforts of Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno in the question
of peacekeeping.

It is probably an auspicious sign that this meeting
coincides with the anniversary of the Addis Ababa
meeting, which took place on 16 November 2006. That
consultative, high-level meeting laid the foundation for
a strong and effective partnership based on dialogue
and transparency between the Government of the
Sudan and the African Union and the United Nations
regarding the question of Darfur. The understandings

reached there were based on full respect for the
sovereignty of the Sudan and its unity, territorial
integrity and political independence. That meeting was
successful, contrary to previous attempts that were
characterized by unilateralism and a lack of realism.

The Addis Ababa meeting drew a clear and
agreed road map for the various aspects of the question
of Darfur. Primary among the points of agreement was
to accord priority to a political settlement, protected
and supported by a hybrid peacekeeping operation with
an African character and also supported by
humanitarian assistance and support for those in need.
Additionally, the development and recovery track was
reaffirmed at the second high-level meeting on Darfur,
held in New York in the margins of the General
Assembly session, September 2007. That track covered
the same concepts that were also included in Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007). Our country has
reaffirmed its full commitment to that resolution.

All those elements - including the Addis Ababa
meeting and the subsequent meetings of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements - underscore that the problem of Darfur
can be resolved only through a political settlement. The
Darfur Peace Agreement was the foundation for that
settlement and no party can be allowed to abort that
Agreement or reopen it for negotiations. Those
elements have also stressed that the political settlement
must be guided by the United Nations and the African
Union, and that opposition to the Darfur Peace
Agreement cannot be a gateway to continued military
activities against the Agreement. They all also made it
clear that the international community was ready to
punish those who hinder the peace process.

Negotiations began on 27 October 2007 at Sirte,
Libya, hosted generously by the sisterly Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. The peace negotiations started with
valuable efforts and initiatives from the Special Envoys
of the United Nations and the African Union, Mr. Jan
Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim. We take this
opportunity to express our appreciation and gratitude to
Mr. Eliasson, who just briefed the Council about
developments on the question of peace in Darfur.

We also want to point out that my Government
takes the Sirte meetings very seriously. We sent a
complete high-level delegation chaired by Mr. Nafie
Ali Nafie, assistant to the President of the Sudanese

Republic. The Government's commitment towards the
negotiations was not limited to sending the high-level
delegation; it also announced a unilateral and
immediate ceasefire, which we still uphold. While we
hoped that the Tripoli meetings would achieve an
agreement to cease hostilities as one of the
requirements for confidence-building, we still hope
that priority will be granted towards reaching an
agreement to cease hostilities and to a ceasefire, and
that this priority would be within the current contacts
and activities carried out by the two envoys in order to
resume the peace negotiations.

A peaceful settlement and negotiation remain our
top priority and our firm choice. The peace process,
however, must not become a vicious circle and the
resumption of negotiations cannot be considered an
open-ended option without a timetable. This would
only serve the objectives of some renegade tribal
elements that refuse to negotiate and some parties that
seek to sabotage the entire peace process.

Therefore, we urge the two negotiators to present
a clear plan that defines a deadline for resuming
negotiations and finishing the current contacts in order
to unite the various movements and their negotiating
positions. The setting of this deadline for the
resumption of the negotiations is an urgent and vital
matter of interest to the international community,
which we hope and urge, will fulfil its special
commitments to punish those who sabotage the peace
process in the light of the resolutions and statements
issued by the Security Council in this respect. We
sincerely hope that the relevant international Powers
will show their commitment to achieve peace through
negotiations by doing whatever is necessary to exert
pressure to guarantee the participation of all rebel and
renegade movements in the negotiations. Otherwise,
this means leaving the matter in chaos, encouraging the
insurgent movements and sending them mixed and
wrong messages.

Therefore, we demand that international parties
be obliged to support the peace process. We also
particularly salute regional and neighbouring States for
their unceasing cooperative efforts in the resolution of
the Darfur problem. In this respect, we hope that the
upcoming Sharm el-Sheikh meeting, planned for the
first week of December 2007, will support efforts to
resume negotiations without any further delay.

Our country looks with the same seriousness to
the requirements of resolution 1769 (2007), which
calls, inter alia, for the deployment of the Hybrid
Operation. Our country has been making intense efforts
to fulfil its obligations, making it possible to fully
cooperate with the joint representatives of the African
Union and the United Nations, to carry out the main
aspects in the deployment of the Mission, such as
establishing the principal operational capacities in
El-Fashir, and to achieve progress towards putting in
place sector operations in the three Darfur states,
including the appointment of commanders, while
efforts continue to complete the status-of-forces
agreement.

We would like to explain to the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations that discussion of
the troop deployment agreement should take place in a
meeting among the three parties, not in the Security
Council.

My country has also carried out its part of the
commitments to provide land and necessary and
relevant services and logistics. Based on an initiative
by the Sudan, a tripartite meeting was held recently in
Addis Ababa to complete work on the question of troop
contributions, taking into consideration the earlier
international elements and Sudan's concerns, which
also need to be taken into consideration. The Sudan
also participated in the mission that visited Ethiopia
and Egypt last week in preparation for the deployment
of troops from these two States.

The Government has established a high-level
ministerial committee to facilitate and follow up on the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation and to deal with
various related matters. We hope that the Secretariat
will intensify its efforts in the coming months to
complete the deployment of the light and heavy
support packages, especially since the performance of
the Secretariat in this area has certainly been less
satisfactory than anticipated - and not because of any
problems stemming from the Government of the
Sudan. We ask the Secretariat why, after a year, it has
not carried out the deployment of the light and heavy
support packages. We also hope that the current
deliberations in the relevant General Assembly bodies,
will lead to provision of the financing and resources
necessary for the operation.
In respect of the humanitarian track, I would like
to inform the Council that the communique to facilitate
humanitarian operations, which was signed in the
Sudan on 28 March 2007 has achieved tremendous
success. It has been possible to improve and support
outreach capacities and to provide assistance to those
in need through the fast-track method that was adopted.

In this context, a follow-up mechanism was also
established, which includes the Government, the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and
other relevant parties. We trust that the second visit to
the Sudan of Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, which will take
place tomorrow, will achieve further success in
promoting the implementation of that communique and
facilitate the flow of humanitarian assistance. I would
like to reaffirm in this forum that the humanitarian
situation is undergoing great improvement, as reflected
in health and nutrition indices and in the absence of
epidemics in the three Darfur states.

Mr. Eliasson has indicated that the deterioration
in the humanitarian situation affects the peace
settlement. Rather, firm steps forward in the peace
settlement will have a positive effect on the
humanitarian dimension, not the other way around. The
failure of the negotiation team to achieve positive
results is what weakens public confidence and
undermines the humanitarian situation.

The development and recovery track that was
affirmed at the high-level international meeting held in
New York on 21 September 2007 is very important
because it deals with the roots of conflicts and sought
to combat environmental degradation and climate
change. We hope that concrete steps will be taken to
develop and rebuild Darfur, including increasing the
resources and promoting the activities of United
Nations agencies and programmes in the Sudan, as
reaffirmed in the joint statement issued in Khartoum at
the end of the Secretary-General's visit to the Sudan in
September 2007.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the full
commitment of the Government of the Sudan to a
peaceful political settlement of the Darfur question and
our unlimited support for the Special Envoys of the
United Nations and the African Union. We also affirm
our commitment to putting an end to hostilities and
implementing a ceasefire. We hope to see a prompt
resumption of the Sirte negotiations. We also hope that
the international community will fulfil its obligations
with respect to achieving this objective with total

seriousness. We hope also to see the inclusion of the
Abuja rejectionists in the peace process, while
avoiding any mixed messages that could negatively
affect the negotiations. I hope that intimidation will be
avoided and that the administrative problems will not
be exaggerated. I also hope that the failures of others
will not be laid at the Sudan's doorstep.

