Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their complete reports
on the work done and on the completion strategies of
their respective Tribunals. We also thank the President
and Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for his comprehensive reports
on the Mechanism's work.

Our country has supported the establishment of the
various International Criminal Tribunals and their work.
We underscore their contribution to the international
justice system and to international peace and security
and the rule of law. In that regard, we recognize and
support the work carried out by the ICTY and the ICTR
in accordance with our conviction that the most serious
crimes in the eyes of the international community must
not go unpunished.

Last year we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the establishment of the ICTY, and this
year we will commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the creation of ICTR. Experience has shown us
that the jurisprudence of the specialized Criminal
Tribunals, despite their ex-post-facto nature, serves as
a valuable contribution to the fight against impunity
and the ongoing development of international criminal
law. In that connection, we also support the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, which ultimately allows for the conclusion of
the proceedings initiated by the Tribunals and ensures
accountability for those responsible for the crimes that
led to the establishment of the ICTY and ICTR.

From my country's perspective and with our own
experience in recent history, we would like to underscore
the role played not only by the international criminal
Tribunals, but also by the cooperation and assistance
that can be provided by the international community in
creating mechanisms for victim reparations, which will
open space for reconciliation.

With regard to the ICTY, we underscore the
progress made in concluding the pending trials
and appeals, ensuring all the while respect for the
fundamental principles of due process, impartiality and
justice. Meanwhile, we underscore the importance role
that international judicial cooperation has played in
ensuring the Tribunal's proper functioning, which has
allowed, among other things, for the completion of the
trials of 141 of the 161 accused, and the important fact
that there are no fugitives at large. However, despite
the Tribunal's efforts, we see a delay in the processing
of some cases owing to a lack of logistical resources,
primarily with regard to the translation of many
documents. My country encourages Member States
to increase their cooperation in that area in order to
streamline the procedures so that justice can be served.

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, we underscore the fact that its trial work
has been completed and that there are only five appeals
at various stages of processing. Rulings are expected to
be handed down this year, except in the Butare case, the
decision for which is expected next year.

We wish to express our concern over the fact that
nine defendants remain fugitives, and we encourage
all States, especially those in which fugitives are
suspected to be situated, to redouble their efforts to
find them and have them brought before the Mechanism
for trial. The international community must cooperate
with international criminal justice to ensure that there
is no impunity.

With regard to the situation of acquitted persons
and those who have already served their sentences and
remain in Arusha under the custody of the Tribunal
without identification documents, migration status or
means to support themselves, it is essential that efforts
to find a final resettlement for them continue. Once
again, the international criminaljustice system depends
on the cooperation of the international community.

With regard to the Residual Mechanism, we
are pleased that it is fully operating and carrying
out intense judicial work and that the transfer of the
Tribunals' functions to the Mechanism has shown
concrete progress. We underscore the signing of
the agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Tanzania, on 5 February, which allows
for the construction of the facilities for the Mechanism
in Arusha. We thank the Government of Tanzania for
the generous donation of land on which those facilities
will be built. We also encourage the prompt signing
of an agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of the Netherlands on the functioning of

the branch at The Hague. The transfer of the archives
of both Tribunals to the Mechanism should be a priority
for those bodies. In that regard, we recognize the
progress made so far.

The Tribunals have achieved much progress in
fulfilling their mandates, and we recognize their efforts
to implement their completion strategies. Nevertheless,
we recognize the challenges that the Tribunals face in
retaining their qualified and experienced staff, who,
faced with losing their jobs with the conclusion of the
work of both Tribunals, are seeking other opportunities.
The international community must ensure that both
the Tribunals and the Mechanism have the necessary
human resources to carry out the work entrusted to
them by the Council.

The dual mandates of Judge Meron and Mr. Hocking,
as President and Registrar of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Residual
Mechanism, respectively, and of Prosecutor Jallow,
as Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the Mechanism, have facilitated the
effective and coordinated transfer of functions from
the Tribunals to the Mechanism. We recognize their
commendable work.

Chile is honoured to chair the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. As we have heard
from the Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, as well
as from the President and Prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism, they face numerous challenges in their
completion strategies and in the transfer of their
functions to the Mechanism. The Working Group
is in a unique position to contribute to the search for
joint solutions. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
a deepening of international cooperation so that the
mandate given to the Tribunals and the Mechanism by
the Council can be adequately fulfilled.

