Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their
comprehensive briefings and efforts to find a light at
the end of the tunnel.

We are delighted once again to have Special Envoy
Pedersen in our midst: I welcome him home. We have
always supported his work seeking a solution, including
on a credible, balanced and inclusive Syrian-led and
-owned process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). We hope that the constitutional committee will
be established soon.

My delegation shares the concerns expressed in the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/20l9/674)
regarding the continued escalation in north-west
Syria, which has resulted in over 500 civilians being
killed, hundreds injured and more than half a million
individuals displaced since April. We are not only
concerned by the continued escalation of violence
in north-west Syria but also deeply troubled by
the possibility of an offensive deeper into Idlib, as
mentioned by the Secretary-General in his statement of
20 August (SG/SM/19705), which could signal further
suffering for 3 million civilians, 76 per cent of whom,
as we all know, estimated to be women and children.
In that regard, Indonesia wishes to highlight three
pertinent points.

First, the attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure must end. We strongly urge all parties
to fully respect international humanitarian law,
strictly uphold the September 2018 memorandum of
understanding on Idlib and refrain from the destruction
of facilities on the de-confliction list and of United
Nations facilities.

Secondly, there is a need to ensure sustainable
humanitarian assistance and access to civilians in
need. The situation in Rukban camp remains dire. It is
important for the United Nations to facilitate and assist
those who have expressed their willingness to leave, as
well as to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.
We underline What Mr. Lowcock said regarding the need
for such to be voluntary, safe and dignified. We also
appreciate the approval given by the Syrian Government
in that regard and the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Syrian Red Crescent. Continued
dialogue and cooperation among all stakeholders are
urgently needed to ensure that humanitarian access is
being provided, including in Al-Hol camp.

Thirdly, we are pleased to hear encouraging
developments regarding the constitutional committee,
as reported by Special Envoy Pedersen earlier. At this
stage, we must appreciate any positive developments
that keep the process in motion. We sincerely hope that
the outstanding gaps and issues will immediately be
resolved, through further communication and peaceful
discussions. Again, strong and genuine commitment on
the part of all parties to making progress in this process
is critical.

Indonesia remains seriously concerned with the
possible impact of the ongoing escalation in the north-
west on efforts to advance the political process. We
cannot secure a credible political process without a
successful de-escalation in Idlib. It would be a tragedy,
for the Syrians, the region and the international
community, ifpeace were to be rejected and the ongoing
escalation of Violence were permitted to prevail in
north-west Syria.

In conclusion, I should like to end by quoting what
Geir recalled in his statement: "let us remember that
Syrian families face multipronged dangers". He also
mentioned that there is a sense of hopelessness. It is up
to us all in the Security Council to restore hope to the
children and families of Syria.

