Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See thanks the Peruvian presidency for
holding this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

The situation in the Middle East continues to be
a source of extreme concern in terms of its impact on
international peace and security. This is clear due to the
great space afforded to this issue by the Council during
our debates over the past year on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the Syrian crisis and other crises in the region.

The ongoing conflicts in the region have had
negative impacts that threaten the stability of the
region as a whole and entailed grave consequences
for international peace and security. The challenges
of governance; the youth bulge and high rates of
unemployment; the collapse of State institutions; the
violation of human rights and international humanitarian
law; sectarian strife; geopolitical rivalry; the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism; the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, including the use of
chemical weapons; a massive influx of refugees and
migrants; and humanitarian crises are just some of the
challenges faced by the region.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
marked by unparalleled suffering, destruction and
disregard for human life. As Pope Francis said last
week, "there is no good war or bad war". He appealed
to political and military leaders to choose another
path - that of negotiations, which is the only path that
can bring peace rather than death and destruction.

The lives of millions of Yemenis have been
devastated by what the Secretary-General has rightly
called a stupid war. The events in Yemen have been called
the world's largest humanitarian catastrophe - one that
is entirely man-made. The international community
must pay much greater attention to this conflict, where
civilians are paying a huge price in a senseless war that
has been overshadowed by other conflicts in the region.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
Holy See joins the great majority of the delegations
here today in reiterating its strong support for the two-
State solution as the only viable way of fulfilling the
aspirations for peaceful coexistence among Israelis and
Palestinians alike. Every Israeli and Palestinian has
the right to live in peace and security. What is needed
now is a renewed commitment to negotiations towards
a two-State solution. In order to have the best chance of
success, peace talks must take place in an environment
free from violence. The ongoing violence only
underlines how overdue a just and lasting resolution is.

Concerning Jerusalem, the Holy See would like to
recall once again the obligation of all nations to respect
the historical status quo of the Holy City, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. Only
an internationally guaranteed status can preserve
Jerusalem's unique character.

This bleak picture of the region leads my
delegation to reiterate the appeal of Pope Francis,
who, in considering the responsibility of the Security
Council to seek a unified and effective response for a
lasting peace in Syria and in other regions of the world,
encouraged all those with political responsibility to
ensure that justice and peace prevail. In this regard,
the Security Council remains a key actor in making
sure that all such efforts will be guided by the relevant
international law. The sheer range and scope of the
challenges that we face should galvanize all those who
value peace and human rights to resolute action so that
those most affected by conflict and insecurity will not
be left behind.

