Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Today the Security
Council has again failed the people of Syria. The
war there is now in its fourth year. The country has
been broken apart, possibly irretrievably. Almost half
its population of more than 20 million people have
fled or been displaced. One family flees Syria every
60 seconds. We face a regime whose military strategy
is based on the deliberate targeting of civilians through
sieges, the use of starvation as a weapon of war,
indiscriminate aerial bombardment, the targeted use of
barrel bombs on residential neighbourhoods, arbitrary
denial of humanitarian access and medical supplies,
the targeting of hospitals and medical personnel, mass
systematic torture, sexual violence and execution,
forced depopulation of towns and cities and denial of
humanitarian supplies to its own citizens not living in
Government-held areas.

The humanitarian crisis, the greatest in this century,
is spiralling downwards. There is no solution in sight.
All sides in the conflict, including the extremists and
terrorists who have sought to hijack the opposition,
are guilty of terrible crimes. There is a pervasive
culture of impunity. No one is held accountable. The
Independent International Commission of Inquiry for
Syria has documented extensive evidence over the
past three years against those who have committed
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
concluded that such crimes have been committed and
over the past three years and has consistently called
for referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In April, the Council itself was
shown the chilling photographic evidence, contained
in the Caesar report (S/20l4/244, annex), documenting
the widespread and systematic torture and execution
on an industrial scale of detainees held by the Syrian
regime. The Secretary-General has persistently called
for accountability for the crimes we are seeing in Syria.
The International Criminal Court was specifically
established to ensure that those most responsible for the
worst mass-atrocity crimes would be held to account,
particularly in cases where their national authorities
were unwilling or unable to do so domestically.

The Syrian authorities have not only failed
in that responsibility, they are themselves among
the perpetrators of such crimes. The international
community must therefore act. Australia was one of
58 United Nations States Members who wrote to the
Council 18 months ago seeking referral of the situation
in Syria to the ICC, and the situation has become so much
worse since then. The number of sponsors of today's
draft resolution (S/2014/348), 65, and the 13 votes in its
favour, should send an unmistakable message to those
responsible for these crimes. The draft resolution may
have been vetoed, but there is no statute of limitations
on the crimes being committed in Syria, and we will
continue to pursue justice for the victims.

The Security Council has a responsibility to
protect, a responsibility mandated by all our leaders
at their World Summit in 2005, and to prevent mass
atrocities where we can. The Council's role was
specifically recognized in the Rome Statute, because
accountability is central to protection and to the
Council's fundamental responsibilities relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
use of the veto to block a balanced draft resolution,
attempting to deliver accountability for the commission
of mass-atrocity crimes, comes at a great human cost.
The Council will, correctly, be judged harshly for that
failure. At the very least, today's failure underlines the
importance of voluntary restraint on the use of the veto
in situations where mass atrocities are so clear.

This is the fourth veto in the Council in three
years to prevent action in Syria. In implementing our
mandate on peace and security, the Council is now
engaged in authorizing some of the highest numbers
of peacekeepers ever and increasingly in robust
operations to protect civilians in many crises. We are
doing that by common agreement among all members,
as we should. But when we fail, as we have again on
Syria today, the consequences can be devastating. The
victims of conflict have a right to the support of the
Security Council and action on our part. The Council
has a responsibility to provide that support and to act.

