Mr. Briens (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his quarterly briefing and
welcome the outstanding work of the Colombian
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past two years.
I also wish to thank the Panel of Experts, whose
investigations and recommendations are highly useful
to the Committee and the Council.

The Chair's quarterly report and the midterm
report of the Panel of Experts that were just presented
to us demonstrate once again that Iran continues not
to comply with its international obligations and that
it is pursuing both its illicit nuclear activities and its
efforts to circumvent sanctions. Iran disseminates its
conventional weapons and its missiles at the risk of
destabilizing the entire region.

Despite six resolutions of the Council, Iran continues
to enrich its uranium to 20 per cent and 3.5 per cent,
while at the same time quantitatively and qualitatively
increasing its production capacity, although we can
identify no credible civilian purpose therefor. At the
same time, it pursues its heavy water-related activities
without providing access to the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as it must do.

Furthermore, it has been over a year since the
Agency's Board of Governors addressed a very clear
demand that Iran respond to its questions concerning the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
We all expect that the meeting to be held today in
Tehran between Iranian authorities and the IAEA will
allow the Agency to obtain the responses it requires,
but we are under no illusions. We have all been able
to follow for ourselves Iran's intensive activities in
Parchin since the Agency first requested access. The
IAEA recently deemed that those activities were of a
nature to compromise its capacity to conduct effective
verification when it eventually gains access.
I also wish to highlight Iran's repeated violations
of the arms embargo imposed by the Council. These
violations fuel the spiral of violence in the Near East
and Middle East. We have already expressed our
concern and firmly condemned the transfer of weapons
from the Islamic Republic of Iran to Syria - several
such cases were highlighted by the Panel of Experts in
their June report (see S/2012/395, annex).

As we mentioned in the previous debate
(see S/PV.6839), we would like the Committee to
designate Yas Air Cargo and SAD Import-Export
Company as soon as possible, as they have been
implicated in arms transfers to the regime in Damascus.
Since those revelations, we have learned that weapons
have also been transferred from Iran to Syria in aircraft
using Iraqi air space. Those activities not only violate
Security Council resolutions, but have allowed the
Damascus regime to continue to massacre its own
people.

We have also learned directly from Iranian officials
that Tehran had transferred weapons and ballistic
material to non-State groups in Gaza. A flagrant
example was the launch from Gaza of a Fajr-S missile
that originated from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The Panel of Experts, which has been requested to
investigate those issues, should shed light on the matter
so that the Committee is able to take all necessary
action. Those actions represent clear violations of the
arms embargo and should not remain unpunished.

I also would make note of our concern about the
Iranian ballistic programme, which has continued
despite bans agreed to by the Council. I recall that,
on 9 October, together with the United States, United
Kingdom and Germany, France notified the Committee
of the Shahab-3 missile tests carried out by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guards last summer. That was a clear
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) that
we must therefore sanction.

It is striking to note that the North Korean launch
was the object of unanimous condemnation by the
international community, with the near sole exception
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which welcomed it. The
latter is also conducting a space programme for no other
purpose than to validate military-use technologies.

Faced with the challenge of repeated violations
by the Islamic Republic of Iran of Security Council
resolutions, we must remain united and firm. Dialogue
will continue and we are committed to it. The many
meetings of the E3+3 Governments with Iran in 2012
bear witness to that.
But faced with our serious proposals, Tehran has not
been constructive and will not negotiate seriously with
us. As long as Iran does not abide by its obligations, we
must ensure the full application of the sanctions. They
have a genuine impact on the ground and we believe that
such pressure is likely to lead the Iranian authorities to
eventually resume serious negotiations.

Iran must clearly recognize that dialogue is in its
best interest, rather than isolation.

