Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation commends you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate,
which focuses on children as victims of non-State
armed groups. We commend the Secretary-General
also for his remarks and thank him for his unceasing
efforts to ensure that children are given protection in
situations of armed conflict. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Lelia
Zerrougui, for her commitment to this cause. She was
recently in Nigeria, where she engaged in discussions at
very high levels with Government officials, both at the
federal and state levels. The suggestions and advice she
gave were taken into consideration very carefully and
are being factored into Government policy, activities
and actions.

We listened very carefully to our briefers, namely,
Ms. Yoka Brandt from UNICEF, Ms. Julie Bodin
and Mr. Junior Nzita, whom we thank for their very
constructive marks, particularly with regard to the
impact on the psychology and physical trauma caused
by the hardship experienced by abducted children.

We also listened very carefully to the statements
of other representatives who have spoken before us.
We thank them for the concern they have shown with
respect to the plight of children in conflict areas in
north-eastern Nigeria.

We associate ourselves in advance with the
statement to be delivered on behealf fo the African
Union.

As the President of the Council has noted 4 and
as others have also said - the protection of children
is a core human rights issue. We also believe that
holding perpetrators of crimes and violations of the
rights of children responsible, wherever they may, be
is an obligation incumbent upon States Members of the
United Nations.

Conflict situations put children at great risk,
especially when non-State armed groups are involved.
Children risk getting abducted, maimed and even
killed, and are vulnerable in other ways as well. They
face sexual abuse, recruitment as soldiers, trafficking,
slavery and other atrocities committed by armed
groups. This situation underscores the need for States,
the United Nations, regional organizations and other
stakeholders to take urgent measures to enhance the
protection of children in conflict zones.

It is a sad fact that armed non-State actors are
active in many parts of the world today. They can be
found operating in the Sahel region, the Middle East,
the Great Lakes region, Central Africa, the Horn of
Africa and, regrettably, in my own country, Nigeria.
It is also becoming increasingly clear that they are
responsible for grave violations of human rights law
and international humanitarian law. Their activities
show that they indeed pose a serious threat to the well-
being of children.

Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms possible
the mass abductions of children by non-State armed
groups, including those carried by Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We call for the
immediate and unconditional release of all abducted
children. We demand that parties to armed conflicts
immediately cease unlawful attacks and threats of
attacks against schools, students and teachers. They
must also refrain from actions that impede children's
access to education, including the military use ofschools
in clear contravention of applicable international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. For our
part, we have launched a safe schools initiative that
aims to provide a safe and secure learning environment
for children all over Nigeria.

As we have heard this morning, regional and
subregional organizations have an important role to
play in addressing the plight of children affected by
armed conflict. In that regard, we welcome the growing
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union. This important partnership is anchored in the
September 2013 agreement between both institutions
aimed at taking measures to protect African children
from the impact of armed conflict. Nigeria urges both
institutions to continue to strengthen their win-win
collaboration on this important issue.

At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has shown a strong
commitment to promoting the well-being of children
affected by conflict through its Accra Declaration
on War-affected Children in West Africa, which was
adopted as far back as April 2000. The Declaration
commits ECOWAS member States to taking a broad
range of measures to protect and rehabilitate war-affected
children. In order to live up to their commitments under
the Declaration, ECOWAS member States must continue
to enhance their domestic competencies and capabilities
in order to respond effectively in a multidisciplinary
way to the varying needs and vulnerabilities of children
in conflict situations.

Nigeria is firmly committed to meeting its
obligations under the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflicts, as well
as the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child. These instruments have been incorporated
into our laws at both the national and state levels. They
contain extensive provisions against abusive practices
against children, and we are determined to enforce
them.

We are aware of allegations made by certain entities
about the purported enlistment and encouragement of
children and young persons by Nigerian authorities
to serve in neighbourhood watch groups, popularly
referred to as civilianjoint task forces. We wish to take
this opportunity to assure the Security Council and
the entire international community that the Nigerian
military remains a professional force that is conscious
of its domestic and international obligations. There has
never been an attempt to recruit underage children nor
use them in any other capacity in the prosecution of the
current war against Boko Haram. The neighbourhood
watch groups were created by youth in different
communities across north-eastern Nigeria to defend
themselves and their neighbourhoods against the deadly
attacks of Boko Haram. We would like to make it clear
that membership in these groups is voluntary and
without any form of assistance, inducement or coercion
by the Nigerian military or security forces.

Finally, Nigeria believes that the Council should
continue to pay attention to the issue of children
and armed conflict. It is a growing problem that
requires a collaborative approach involving multiple

stakeholders - States, international organizations,
regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations - in order for it to be addressed

effectively. We reaffirm our unwavering commitment
to the protection of the rights of children in conflict
situations. We are taking all the necessary measures
to meet the threat caused by Boko Haram to the
welfare of children. Together with our neighbours and
international partners, we are winning the war against
the terrorists and we are resolutely determined to bring
those captured alive to justice.

