Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): First of all, allow
me to thank the Japanese presidency for taking the
initiative to convene this open debate on the very
important topic of addressing complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.

The United Nations was established to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and
to promote better standards of life for people. Despite
remarkable progress over the decades, the Security
Council - with its primary responsibility to maintain
peace and security - is now facing great challenges in
responding to regional and global crises, preventing the
risk of the outbreak of conflicts and addressing critical
issues, including, inter alia, with regrd to nuclear
weapons, other weapons of mass destruction, nuclear
proliferation, inter-communal conflicts, territorial
disputes, arms races, massive flows of refugees and
migrants, terrorism and violent extremism.

Overcoming those challenges requires comprehensive
approaches, broader perspectives and new partnerships
at all levels. We acknowledge the broad support for the
Secretary-General's reform agenda, which reflects our
desire for an effective United Nations and its enhanced
role in promoting multilateralism in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law and
as a platform for delivering our common commitments.
In that context, my delegation welcomes this morning's
consensus adoption of General Assembly resolution
72/ 199, on restructuring the United Nations peace
and security pillar. Please allow me to make some
observations in that regard.

First, there is an urgent need for a human-
centred and whole-of-pillar approach to implement
a comprehensive and long-term strategy on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. For such a strategy
to work, we must make full use of the United Nations
existing tools on preventive diplomacy and mediation
and encourage the engagement of the entire United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council, and
other stakeholders. The United Nations should therefore
play its coordinating role in enhancing partnerships
with the regional and subregional organizations.

Secondly, the Security Council has a Vital role in
peacekeeping decisions. It is important to establish
clearly that any peacekeeping operation must be
deployed in conformity with the basic principles
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
within existing resources. Peacekeeping must also be
coupled with peacebuilding, with a view to achieving
sustainable peace, by ensuring smoother transitions
and better exit strategies to assist conflict-affected
States in addressing root causes, strengthening national
capacities and advancing socioeconomic development.

Thirdly, we stress the urgency of the need for
Security Council unity during the decision-making
process and collective action to security challenges. We
also believe firmly that reforming the Security Council
is a fundamental key to successful and meaningful
United Nations reform. We support a future Security
Council expanded in both categories and reformed in
its working methods, so as to make it more democratic,
transparent, effective, representative and accountable.

As in other regions, prosperity, stability and
security in the Asia-Pacific region are bound together
by traditional and emerging non-traditional security
challenges that are interlinked, while posing a serious
threat to international peace and security, hampering
economic and social development and negatively
affecting peoples' lives in the region. We have been
following the current escalation of tensions on the
Korean peninsula with grave concern. Viet Nam
advocates the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
by peaceful means and urges all the parties concerned
to exercise self-restraint and strictly abide by the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

As a responsible and proactive Member, has always
been committed to the maintenance and consolidation
of peace, security and stability in the region. The
situation in the East Sea - also known as the South
China Sea 4 is in our common interests and a matter
of concern. Together with countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, we call on all the parties
concerned to exercise self-restraint and settle disputes
in the East Sea by peaceful means and in accordance
with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, fully respect
diplomatic and legal processes and continuously
implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea. With the recent adoption of the
code ofconduct for the South China Sea, it is high time to
intensify further efforts to conclude the code of conduct
in a timely, substantive manner, in order to achieve an
effective, feasible and legally binding instrument.

Let me conclude by reiterating that, in these days
of complexity and uncertainty, we must learn from and
build on what we have achieved to overcome the threats
and challenges we face, to ensure that the Organization
has the structure and tools necessary to deliver on
its mandates. Achieving a sustainable, peaceful and
prosperous future for all will depend upon our collective
action and united determination - where there is a
will, there is a way.

