Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to
express my delegation's appreciation for the convening
of this important debate, where we are considering
what has become a central component of every United
Nations peacekeeping mission.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We wish to begin by commending the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2016/447) and the recommendations
contained therein. The report is crucial in monitoring
and reporting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The report paints a gloomy picture as it once
again highlights the fact that civilians continue to
suffer the most as a consequence or armed conflict. Not

only are civilians indiscriminately killed or injured, but
they face such severe hardships as Violations of their
basic human rights, including sexual violence and mass
displacement. We stress that the Secretary-General
should remain resolute regarding the identification of
perpetrators. The protection of civilians must remain
one of the core issues on the agenda of the Security
Council if we are to save succeeding generations form
the scourge of war.

We all recognize that States have the primary
responsibility to put an end to impunity and to
prosecute perpetrators responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including those relating to
sexual violence against women and girls. However,
the international community today is increasingly
being challenged by the changing nature of conflicts,
which requires us to adopt new, more holistic strategies
in protecting civilians. I wish to focus my remarks
today on three aspects in addressing our protection of
civilians imperative.

First, our action has to go beyond traditional
peacekeeping and the use of force. It must begin with
steps to prevent conflicts rather than respond to them
after the fact. Addressing the social and economic
development challenges facing civilians, as reflected in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) is also crucial in that regard.
The link between economic development and peace
requires that the United Nations principle organs
and development agencies, within their respective
mandates, address the root causes of conflict and
contribute towards the realization of the sustainable
development goals.

Furthermore, strengthening and investing greater
efforts in prevention and finding all-inclusive political
solutions to conflicts is necessary. Settling conflict
through pacific means should remain our priority,
including by ensuring that our efforts in this regard
are impartial and not selective. In this connection,
the failure of the Council to address long-standing
challenges in Palestine and Western Sahara will
continue to undermine its credibility.

Secondly, steps have to be taken to strengthen
accountability for crimes committed against civilians.
Ensuring accountability is vital to the credibility of
the protection of civilians and is key to delivering
global justice.

Thirdly, and coming to the key aspects of today's
debate, is ensuring that the peacekeeping operations
deployed by the Council are adequately equipped
and resourced to address their protection of civilians
mandates. The High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (S/2015/490) stress that all United Nations
peace operations have an obligation to protect civilians.
We welcome steps taken by the Secretariat to ensure
that peacekeeping operations develop strategies to
protect civilians. That includes the appointment of
protection of civilians advisers and the cooperation and
use of military, police and civilian elements in carrying
out this task. As the Secretary-General has noted,

"the credibility of United Nations peacekeepers
depends largely on their willingness and capability
to act when civilians are threatened" (S/2016/447, para. 58).

In order for the United Nations to be effective in
its peacekeeping operations when carrying out its
mandate to protect civilians, it should also, through
the use of Chapter VIII of the Charter, make use of
the comparative advantages of regional arrangements
in advancing the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, as demonstrated in Darfur and Somalia.
The African Union (AU) has shown itself to be willing
and able to take concrete steps to ensure peace and
stability on the African continent. However, the lack
of predictable, flexible and, increasingly, sustainable
financing for AU operations can undermine the AU's
efforts in this regard. The challenges faced by the
African Union Mission in Somalia are a case in point.

South Africa condemns sexual exploitation and
abuses committed during armed conflict. We believe
that protecting the most vulnerable populations - that
is, women, girls and children - is central to any
protection of civilians mandate. It is for that reason
that any acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers are particularly deplorable.
When the very people charged with protecting civilians
become the violators, the trust established between these
communities and United Nations missions is betrayed
and the credibility of the United Nations compromised.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that it is
important for the Council to periodically evaluate its
response to the protection of civilians, as the protection
of civilians from the scourge of conflict is at the core of
maintaining international peace and security.

