Mr. Kawamura (Japan): First of all, I should
like to join previous speakers in extending gratitude
to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
the Commanders on the ground for their effective and
informative briefings.

I should like to express my gratitude to all
peacekeepers for their service. I also convey my
condolences in connection with the six United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
peacekeepers who have lost their lives over the past two
weeks. Since the military component of each mission
comprises troops from various troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), the role of Force Commanders is
extremely important in ensuring a mission's unity,
effective command and control and a high standard of
conduct and discipline.

But in addition to the role ofForce Commanders, it is
crucial to improve TCC capabilities in order to enhance
the performance of each mission's military component.
Japan has been contributing to the capacity-building of
TCCs and plans to further strengthen these efforts.

I turn now to a few mission-specific issues.

First, with respect to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), we are concerned
by the situation in Kasai and are following it closely. We
take an interest in how the efficiency and performance
of MONUSCO have been enhanced since the adoption
of resolution 2348 (2017) and the transformation of the
force and in how MONUSCO can respond to the rising
violence in Kasai after the reduction of the force.

The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is fluid as we approach the elections, and

relations between MONUSCO and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are important.

On MINUSCA, we are deeply concerned by the
rising violence against the Mission and civilians in the
south-eastern part of the country. We call on all armed
groups to halt the violence and lay down their weapons.
We support MINUSCA's proactive and robust posture
throughout the Central African Republic, including in
Bambari and Banguassou. Regrettably, in Banguassou
both MINUSCA personnel and civilians have lost
their lives. Enhancing MINUSCA's capability to
fully implement its protection-of-civilians mandate is
therefore important.

We are closely following whether the pilot model in
Bambari for restoring State authority can be reproduced
in other areas, as well as how security-sector reform
is progressing.

Finally, on UNMIL, the upcoming elections and the
peaceful transfer of power will represent both the fruits
ofUNMIL's labour over the past 13 years and one ofthe
Mission's final tasks. To meet this challenge, UNMIL
and the United Nations country team will have to work
closely together to ensure that the key functions are
successfully transferred to the United Nations country
team before UNMIL's departure

