Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the members of the Council for
their condolences on the tragic loss of French soldiers
in Mali.
I am still moved by the poignant testimony of
Mr. Kachi, which reminds us of the importance of our
collective commitment. I sincerely thank him for his
briefing and express my deepest appreciation to him.
I also wish to thank the Special Adviser, Mr. Karim
Khan, for his briefing and I commend the work that
he has done. To date, some 100 people, more than
half of whom are women, have been recruited in
order to enable the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to
effectively implement its mandate. Lastly, I welcome
the presence of the Iraqi Ambassador here among us,
which shows that the international community and Iraq
are working hand in hand to fight impunity for crimes
committed by Da'esh in response to Iraq's request to
the Security Council.

First, I wish to return to the progress made by the
Investigative Team since its establishment. The Team is
now fully able to carry out the mandate entrusted to it
by the Council under resolution 2379 (2017), namely, to
collect, preserve and store evidence in Iraq of acts that
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. The analytical work that Mr. Khan and
the Team have begun doing concerning mass graves
is essential in order to fully investigate the facts and
to establish under Iraqi or third-country jurisdictions
accountability for those who committed crimes. We
will continue to support him in enabling victims to
obtain justice. It is vital that the role of victims, their
suffering and their needs be fully acknowledged. In that
context, the setting up of a witness interview facility
in northern Iraq is an important step forward that will
allow survivors to engage with investigators in a safe
environment. It is important that the highest standards
of witness and victim protection be applied.

Next, I wish to commend the close cooperation
between the Investigative Team and judicial authorities,
in particular the Iraqi judicial system. I congratulate
it on its close dialogue with the Iraqi authorities,
which is very positive and which, we hope, will allow
it to enhance its data sets. The end goal is to use the
evidence in proceedings against members of Da'esh
with full respect for the principles and best practices
of the United Nations. In that regard, it is important to
recall the unwavering position of the United Nations
with regard to not transferring any evidence in the
context of judicial cases where the death penalty could
be imposed in any place under any circumstances.
Cooperation is also essential with the relevant United
Nations mechanisms, in particular the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which has a significantly
expanded mandate to combat impunity and protect
human rights.

Finally. I wish to once again welcome the
determination of the Iraqi authorities to incorporate
combating impunity for all crimes into efforts to
stabilize, rebuild and reconcile all components of Iraqi
society, which is key to preventing any resurgence of
Da'esh. As the Council knows, France is committed to
working with the Iraqis in combating Da'esh in all its
aspects. That message of solidarity was delivered by
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
during his visit to Iraq last month. France has allocated
more than €70 million to humanitarian assistance and
stabilization efforts in Iraq in direct support for victims
of Da'esh. In 2019, France also set up a programme to
host 100 Yazidi women, who were victims of Da'esh,
and their families in line with the commitments made
by the President of the Republic.

France will continue to support women victims
of Da'esh through its support to the reparations fund
for victims of sexual violence launched by Mr. Denis
Mukwege and Nadia Murad, to which we have allocated
€6.2 million. Lastly, France contributes to training Iraqi
magistrates. We are convinced that combating ISIL on
the ground is just one aspect of that fight. Establishing
the truth about crimes committed by ISIL and punishing
the perpetrators in judicial proceedings that meet the
highest international standards are equally essential to
restoring lasting peace.

In conclusion, the Council must remain mobilized
to prevent the resurgence of Da'esh in all its aspects.
We must continue to support the efforts of the Iraqi
authorities to overcome those challenges and help
UNITAD to further enhance its work and sustain it.
In that way, the objectives ofjustice and reconciliation
sought through resolution 2379 (2017) can be achieved.

