Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
the impartial and efficient way in which you have
conducted this debate in difficult and pressing
circumstances. I should also like to recognize the
contribution of the delegation of Lebanon, both as a
member of the Council and as spokesperson for the
League of Arab States, to these deliberations.

Colombia voted in favour of resolution 1973
(2011) because it is convinced that its purpose is
essentially humanitarian and conducive to creating
conditions that will allow for the protection of the
civilian population from the atrocities of a regime that
has lost all legitimacy. We did not vote in favour of the
indiscriminate use of force or of the occupation of a
State. We voted in favour of measures that are aimed at
protecting the civilian population from imminent
attacks by a Government that, through its actions and
statements, has shown that it is not up to the
international responsibility of protecting its population.
Moreover, the Council unanimously reminded the
Libyan authorities of that responsibility in its
resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February. The
Government of Colombia deeply deplores the fact that
the provisions of that resolution have been
systematically violated and that our calls have gone
unheeded. We deplore also the fact that this time there
is not the unanimity we saw in the case of resolution
1970 (2011).

Colombia believes that the new resolution that we
have just adopted represents the continuation of a
process involving gradual measures that is in keeping
with the Charter and that we began with resolution
1970 (2011), which was adopted by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

In resolution 1970 (2011), the Council decided
unanimously that it would keep this matter under
review and that it was willing to consider the
strengthening of sanctions should there be persistent
non-compliance by the Libyan regime. My delegation
believes that this is what we have done today.

My delegation is clear on the fact that the Libyan
authorities had sufficient time to comply with
resolution 1970 (2011) and in particular the call for an
immediate ceasefire and an end to the violence. In the
face of this non-compliance, the Council has a pressing
need to act. It has decided that the best way to increase
the pressure on the Al-Qadhafi regime under current
circumstances is through the establishment of a no-fly
zone, as requested by the States members of the
League of Arab States.

Colombia shares the view of those delegations
that have affirmed or suggested that perhaps even more
important than the establishment of a no-fly zone is its
enforcement. It is for this reason that from the very
beginning we supported the inclusion of language
granting clear authorization to States to use all the
means necessary to enforce the ban on flights as set out
by the terms of the resolution. Without this
authorization, the no-fly zone would be illusory. Also
important are the decisions we have taken to strengthen
the freezing of the assets of individuals and entities
with ties to the regime.

Colombia is convinced that in the case of Libya,
all of the conditions are present for the Council to act
under Chapter VII and take measures additional to the
sanctions adopted previously.

We are facing a situation that clearly constitutes a
threat to international peace and security and that,
furthermore, has already taken a high toll in terms of
human lives. We have effectively responded to an
express request made by a regional organization, the
Arab League, which, to its great credit, instead of

acting on its own went to the Council to call for it to
discharge the functions assigned to it by the Charter.
Colombia is secure in the knowledge that it is acting in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of international law.

