Mr. Schieb (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.

Seventy years ago, on 17 January 1946, the Security
Council convened for the very first time. Horrified
by the destructiveness of the Second World War, 11
nations gathered in London with one all-important goal
in mind - the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Today, that aspiration is as important as ever, as
conflict continues to rear its ugly head across the globe.
Syria is torn by civil war. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham continues to wreak havoc across the Middle
East and beyond. The unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine are at stake. North Korea has allegedly tested
a nuclear device and launched a rocket in defiance
of Security Council resolutions. Territorial disputes
persist around the world. Everywhere we look, conflict
appears to abound.

Yet, let us take courage in the ambitious activities
of the United Nations. Despite the inherent challenges
involved, the United Nations has created a crucial
framework for engagement designed to facilitate
international peace and security. It is that system of
collective security - based on the prohibition of the
use or threat of force and the duty to settle disputes
peacefully - that has allowed the United Nations to act
with purpose and resolve. Over the years, the United
Nations has helped end conflicts in dozens of countries.
Moreover, the United Nations has served as the forum for
negotiations to contribute to and consolidate peace. By
providing basic security guarantees and responding to
crises, the United Nations has helped to abate conflicts,
form habits of cooperation, and develop shared norms
and perceptions. Its capacities to assist in restoring,
keeping and consolidating peace deserves, therefore, to
be strengthened further, as do its mechanisms aimed
at preventing gross human rights violations and violent
conflict within and among sovereign States.

As the concept note prepared for this meeting
(S/2016/ 103, annex) rightly points out, sovereignty and
the sovereign equality of States are, and remain, key
principles set out in the Charter. However, at the 2005
World Summit, United Nations Member States spelled
out the principles of the concept of responsibility to
protect. They declared their willingness

"to take collective action through the Security
Council, in accordance with the Charter, including
Chapter VII, on a case-by-case basis should
peaceful means be inadequate and national
authorities are manifestly failing to protect their
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity." (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 139)

Germany continues to support the concept of the
responsibility to protect. We also support the initiative
by France and Mexico to limit the use of the veto by
permanent members of the Security Council in cases
of genocide.

While rightly praising the crucial importance of
the United Nations system, we should not lose sight of
the necessity of reforming it, in particular the Security
Council. Security Council reform must include both
expanding the membership of the Council as well as
improving its working methods. A majority of the
Member States has voiced support for adding new
permanent and non-permanent seats to better reflect
the gee-political realities of the twenty-first century.
How can it be, to give but one particularly pertinent
example, that no African country is represented
with a permanent seat at the Security Council table?
In addition, improvement of the Council's working
methods is crucial. However, that cannot be a substitute
for an urgently needed structural reform of this organ.
A more representative, legitimate and effective Security
Council is needed more than ever, while also taking
into account that more Member States have the capacity
and willingness to take on the crucial responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. We,
together with our group of four partners - including
Brazil, India and Japan - stand ready to engage with
all Member States in concrete, text-based negotiations
in the framework of the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform to arrive at such a
reform i which is long overdue.

In conclusion, let me emphasize again that the
United Nations is indispensable to our mutual peace
and security. Despite its many trials and tribulations,
the United Nations remains essential to the peaceful
resolution of conflict. As long as there are people who
continue to suffer from the scourges of war, Germany
will work tirelessly with the United Nations to end their
pain. For their plight is our plight.

