Mr. Ebner (Austria): Mr. President, let me also
warmly welcome, on behalf of Austria, the newly
elected Security Council members - Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria -
and pay tribute to those countries that completed their
term at the end of 2009. I should like to express our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Burkina Faso, Ambassador Kafando, for the great
diplomatic skill with which he presided the Council
last month and to congratulate Ambassador Zhang
Yesui on the assumption of the presidency for this
month.

On the issue of the day - Afghanistan - I wish
to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Eide, for their statements and for
their great personal commitment. Let me also thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Tanin, for his statement.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the European Union (EU)
delegation on behalf of the European Union.

When the Council met to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan in September 2009, Afghanistan was in
the midst of a deep political crisis in the wake of last
summer's elections. It is due both to the democratic
responsibility displayed by stakeholders in Afghanistan
and to the efforts of the international community that
the immediate crisis could be overcome. We now need
to refocus attention on the requirements of building a
better future for the people of Afghanistan.

At the same time, it must be ensured that last
year's course of events does not repeat itself. Lessons
need to be learned in order to improve the process for
the parliamentary and district council elections
scheduled for May this year. The recommendations
made by observation missions, such as the EU election
observation mission, as well as the findings by the
experts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, should be taken into account.
In view of the imminence of the 2010 elections, the
final report of the EU mission can provide valuable
guidance. It highlights a number of measures that, in
the view of the mission's experts, could be
implemented within a short time frame in order to
address the most urgent concerns.

In order to tackle the many challenges, all
political stakeholders in Afghanistan must work
together in a constructive spirit for the benefit of the
country. We welcome the priorities set out by President
Karzai, as well as the commitments made in his
inauguration speech last November. That was an
important first step towards rebuilding trust and
confidence.

A clear agenda and strategies for institution-
building and economic development must be developed
for the endorsement and support of the international
community at the London Conference. A new joint
framework for the implementation of the Government's
priorities must include concrete benchmarks and
timelines. The people of Afghanistan need to see
tangible progress soon. That has to include improved
governance, accountability and institutional reform, as
well as a more effective rule of law, including human
rights, particularly women's rights.

Improvements on the ground should be seen to be
delivered increasingly by the Afghan authorities and
institutions. The Secretary-General's emphasis on
capacity-building rather than substituting for local
capacity is the right approach in order to enhance
Afghan ownership and responsibility. In that respect,
we would like to commend the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission for its efforts in monitoring
and implementing human rights throughout
Afghanistan.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that there is a need for a reinforced

international coordination structure in Afghanistan in
order to increase the impact of the peacebuilding and
development efforts. The coordination role of the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will be vital for the success of international
civilian activities. Austria therefore fully supports the
planned expansion and strengthening of UNAMA,
which should further enhance its effectiveness and its
ability to operate in the provinces.

The improvement of the security situation in
Afghanistan remains one of the biggest challenges. The
reported increase in attacks against the aid community
is extremely worrying and constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law. We are equally
concerned over the insurgents' total disregard for the
lives of Afghan civilians. International humanitarian
and human rights law must be observed by all parties
at all times. Violations must be thoroughly investigated
and those responsible must be held to account. The
new approach of the International Security Assistance
Force, which places the protection of the Afghan
population as the highest priority and includes a closer
operational partnership with the Afghan National
Security Forces, has our full support.

We recognize the extremely difficult conditions
under which the United Nations is operating in
Afghanistan, which were highlighted by the attacks
against the United Nations guest house in Kabul last
October. We welcome the safety and security measures
taken in response to the rising threat against United
Nations personnel and premises. At the same time, we
fully agree with the Secretary-General that the United
Nations cannot and must not be deterred by such acts
of violence and needs to carry its important mission
forward. I wish to salute here the great courage and
commitment of all the United Nations staff operating in
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's current security situation is also
closely linked to other factors, as set out in the recent
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) on addiction, crime and insurgency,
which reveals the links between drugs, crime and
regional insurgency in Afghanistan. The fight against
drugs intensified in 2009, prompted by UNODC's
triangular initiative, and opium production could be
reduced significantly in certain parts of the country.
However, Austria is convinced that in order to further
improve the situation and to turn the tide on opium
cultivation in other areas as well, such as Badghis and
Kandahar Provinces, our continued support is needed.

In conclusion, let me stress that the current
mandate of UNAMA, as defined in resolution 1868
(2009), has been a sound basis for the Mission's work
but will have to be refocused in the light of the results
of the London and Kabul conferences, as well as
through further guidance by the Security Council. We
would like also to encourage UNAMA to continue
pursuing a results-based approach in its reporting by
refining the benchmarks and indicators of progress put
forward last September and by adjusting them to the
priorities of the new Afghan Government. Our
objective must be to facilitate the gradual transfer of
authority and responsibility to the Afghan authorities
and to assist them in their efforts towards security,
stability and prosperity.

