Mr. Waxman (Israel): Allow me to express Israel's
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your able
stewardship of the Security Council this month.

It has been 18 years since a bomb ripped through
the Argentine Jewish Community Centre in Buenos
Aires, killing 85 people and injuring hundreds of
others. The Islamic Republic of Iran - a State Member
of the Organization - was responsible for that act,
along with its proxy, Hizbullah. Last week, a suicide
bomber exploded his bomb on a bus carrying Israeli
tourists in Burgas, Bulgaria. Six were killed, including
a pregnant woman. More than 30 were injured. The
victims were mostly young people on vacation. Again,
Iran and Hizbullah were responsible.

In recent months, Israelis were targeted in terrorist
attacks and attempted attacks in India, Azerbaijan,
Thailand, Kenya, Turkey and, most recently, in Cyprus.
Iran and Hizbullah were responsible for each and every
one of those acts. That is just one part of a bigger
picture. Iran and Hizbullah's most recent terrorist plots
span five continents and at least 24 countries.

It should be clear to everyone in the Chamber that
those horrific events are not isolated. A clear line of
terror runs from the bombing in Argentina to the attack
in Bulgaria. It begins and ends in Iran.

The Iranian campaign of terrorism is a plague
that threatens not only Israelis and Jews, but innocent
people all over the globe. The time has come for the
world to put an end to that campaign of terror, once and
for all.

One must not underestimate the significance of
the present moment. The Middle East is perhaps at its
most important crossroads since the end of First World
War. There are two main roads that the region can take.
One is the road of fundamentalism. Today, the Iranian
regime is trying to move the region down that road. Its
ideology does not empower people to build a brighter
future, but enslaves them in a medieval past. Instead
of opening minds with honest discourse, it clouds them
with conspiracy and hate.

Last month, Iran's Vice-President, Mohammad-Reza
Rahimi spoke in the presence of United Nations
officials at an event in Tehran. He said that the
teachings of the Talmud, one of the holiest books in
Judaism, were responsible for "inciting the global drug
trade and addiction in a bid to annihilate non-Jewish
communities". He added that "gynaecologists around the
world kill 'black babies' on the orders of the Zionists".
Those statements were yet another example of the vile
anti-Semitism that is part of the core ideology of the
Iranian leadership.

But Iran's leaders do notjust spread their hate with
words; they advance it with actions. Hizbullah and Iran
are an integral part of Al-Assad's killing machine.

Just a few days ago, Hizbullah's leader gave a speech
praising the Al-Assad regime, calling it "a real military
partner". Hizbullah and Iran provide Al-Assad with
weapons, ammunition, training, intelligence, logistical
equipment and more. They offer their unique expertise
in the business of terrorism, monitoring people on the
Internet and bypassing international sanctions. Iran and
Hizbullah, Al-Assad's allies in this trio ofbrutality, will
cross any line to keep the Al-Assad regime in power
and to make sure that the Syrian people's quest for
freedom is suppressed. And as we watch these events
unfold, Iran continues to advance its military nuclear
programme. The international community should ask
itself a very simple question: If this is the way Iran
behaves without nuclear weapons, how will it behave
when it possesses the most dangerous weapon of all?

Israel continues to monitor the events in Syria
closely. We are horrified by the humanitarian disaster
taking place, and greatly concerned about the wider
implications for regional stability and security. Last
week, Syrian soldiers crossed into the area of separation
set up according to the separation-of-forces agreement
between Israel and Syria, in blatant violation of that
agreement. This week, Syrian officials acknowledged
the existence of their stockpiles of chemical weapons
and stated clearly that they are ready to use them.
That vast stockpile of chemical weapons is a potential
disaster. The international community cannot stand idle.
Al-Assad must know that he will be held accountable
for using these weapons, and he must understand that
transferring chemical weapons to Hizbullah or other
terrorist organizations is a red line that he cannot cross.

Iran represents one road - a road of hatred - but
there is another road that the Middle East can take, a
road of peace, progress and prosperity. Moving down
that road will require the region to push back against
the fundamentalists and deal with the fundamental
problems facing our region. Yet in this debate and
indeed across the United Nations, one hears very little
about such fundamental issues. I am sure that today's
debate will be no exception. I am sure we will hear the
same old criticisms of Israeli policies, but very little
about the core challenges facing our region.

The United Nations Development Programme
has sponsored five Arab human development reports
since 2002. The reports reveal the crippling deficits
of freedom, educational opportunities and women's
empowerment that have long afflicted the Arab world. I
ask: Is Israel responsible for the fact that gays are hunted
down and hanged in Iran; that bloggers in the West Bank
are jailed by the Palestinian Authority; that artists in
Lebanon are ruthlessly censored by their Government;
or that women in Gaza are arrested and tortured for
daring to leave the house without a headscarf? Are
we responsible for the Christians and other minorities
who are fleeing the Middle East these days in droves
because Islamic extremists attack their communities?
Is Israel responsible for the fact that 25 per cent of Arab
young people are unemployed and that many others
are desperate to find a decent job? Maybe it is time to
stop using Israel in this debate to sweep such important
issues under the carpet. It is certainly time to finally
deal openly and honestly with the basic deficits that
cripple the Middle East.

A lot is said during these debates about Gaza. Much
of it is disingenuous. Some in this Chamber claim that
the situation in Gaza is deteriorating; however, the
International Monetary Fund reports a gross domestic
product growth of 20 per cent per capita in Gaza for
2011. Some here speak of a so-called Israeli blockade,
although there is not a single item of civilian goods that
cannot enter Gaza today. Let me be clear. There is a
crisis in Gaza, for Israelis and Palestinians alike, and it
is called Hamas.

The crisis in Gaza is that Hamas attacks the
crossings used to transfer humanitarian aid and then
complains about shortages and delays. The crisis in
Gaza is that global terrorists have found fertile ground
from where they can operate and destabilize other
parts of our region, including the Sinai peninsula. The
crisis in Gaza is that Hamas uses Palestinian schools as
launching pads to fire rockets at Israeli schools, and uses
Palestinian hospitals to fire rockets at Israeli hospitals.
More than 200 rockets have been fired into southern
Israel in the past two months alone. Just yesterday, a
rocket was fired into the major city of Ashkelon.

Yet even as rockets fly out of Gaza, Israel continues
to work with the international community to make sure
that humanitarian aid, medicine and goods reach the
inhabitants of Gaza. How many other Governments
provide essential assistance to the very areas from
which their citizens are being attacked?

As we stand at this critical crossroads, the leaders
in our region should look in the mirror and finally take
the road less travelled in the Middle East - the road
of tolerance, compromise and moderation; the road that
condemns terrorism and promotes understanding of the
other; the road of peace.

The Palestinian leadership should do the same.
They can start by dropping their preconditions and
rejoining Israel in direct negotiations that deal with all
final status issues. They can take that road by ending
incitement in their schools, mosques and media, and
by naming their town squares after peacemakers, not
suicide bombers. They can take that road by finally
acknowledging that the Jewish people have a historic
connection to the land of Israel.

The Government of Israel is prepared to work hard
to achieve lasting peace with the Palestinians through
direct negotiations. The people of Israel are prepared
to make painful compromises to reach that noble goal.
Yet, as we wait for them to return to the negotiating
table, the Palestinians continue to take unilateral steps
that will not bring us one inch closer to peace.

The moment is critical. It is time for the leaders of
the Middle East to make the right choices. The people
of our region have already sacrificed so much. They
deserve nothing less.

