Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to welcome Ambassador Dian
Triansyah Djani as the new Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004,) on preventing non-State actors and terrorist
groups from developing, acquiring, manufacturing,
possessing, transporting or using all types of weapons
ofmass destruction (WMDS), whether nuclear, chemical
or biological. I also thank him for his informative
briefing on the work of the Committee. I wish him and
his team at the Permanent Mission of Indonesia every
success. I would like also to thank the Committee's
Group of Experts and the relevant secretariat for their
tremendous and tangible efforts in supporting the work
of the Committee.

We welcome the adoption of the 2019 programme of
work of the 1540 Committee. The programme of work
is a road map for Member States to develop strategies
and national legislation for preventing non-State
actors from possessing weapons of mass destruction.
That would allow us to achieve the objective of a
future free from those lethal weapons. We hope that
this meeting will serve to further convince Member
States of the need to enhance the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in an optimal way in order to
reach the full implementation of its provisions and
achieve universality.

In that regard, I would like to note that the 2019
programme of work of the 1540 Committee is the most
comprehensive one to date. It highlights the sectors
that require more attention given the new threats of
proliferation, as well as national plans along with
country and regional visits by the Committee and
its Group of Experts. The programme of work also
addresses the special circumstances of States as they
implement non-proliferation measures. It enhances as
well the role of civil society in fighting the proliferation
of all forms of WMDs.

We all seek to develop and improve the performance
of the 1540 Committee and its four working
groups - on implementation, assistance, cooperation
and transparency - as well as to operationalize its
mechanisms at the national, regional and international
levels. The Committee has become an integral part of
international efforts to achieve non-proliferation owing
to its great importance to maintaining international
peace and security. We should all redouble our efforts
in our collective work to enhance the non-proliferation
regime and make it as effective as possible.

The State of Kuwait has on more than one occasion
expressed its concern about the challenges faced by
the non-proliferation regime in the world today. The
proliferation of WMDs and the threat of non-State
actors acquiring them are quite worrisome issues,
especially amid the increase in terrorist threats,
conflicts and instability in our contemporary world.
It is possible that non-State actors could come to
possess, develop, use and traffic in nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons. The consequences of that would
be grave and difficult to predict. Hence our main task
should be to appropriately assess the evolving nature of
the threat of proliferation and the rapid advancement of
science and technology, as well as to take precautionary
and proactive measures.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
State of Kuwait is committed to the position of the
League of Arab States calling for making the world
free of nuclear weapons and other WMDs including the
Middle East region. We are keen to improve the work
and performance of the Committee. In that regard, we
are preparing for the visit by the Committee's Group
of Experts to the State of Kuwait in the next few
months so as to benefit from their expertise and best
practices with a view to submitting our next, updated
voluntary report.

