Mr. A] Saad (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
would like to express particular thanks to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Spain for the attention and
importance he attaches to this question.

We meet today as young Palestinians are being
killed by bullets fired by the Israeli occupation forces,
and while blood continues to flow in the courtyards
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in its vicinity and at its gates.
Israeli soldiers and terrorist settlers rush out to kill,
destroy and burn. One of them even proudly posted a
video of a bleeding Palestinian boy he had shot, while
cursing the boy and wishing him dead.

Let us recall the reasons behind the acts of violence
that began with repeated acts of aggression by the
Israelis against Al-Haram Al-Sharif, when settlers and
soldiers stormed the precincts of the Mosque without
even taking off their shoes. The Israeli Government
tried to impose a new pattern of spatial division and
restrictws access based on time slots to one of the sites
most revered by Muslims everywhere. Let us not forget
that Israel has failed to protect the Islamic holy sites. The
Al-Aqsa Mosque was set on fire by Israeli extremists
shortly after the Israelis occupied Jerusalem. There
were also repeated attempts to demolish Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and to excavate beneath it with the aim of
destabilizing the building or causing its collapse. Nor
should we forget that Israel demolished the gates of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the protective fences around
the courtyard and turned them into places of prayer
for Jews without taking their sanctity for Muslims
into account. Let us not forget that Israeli extremists
set fire to the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron and
attacked people at their prayers, and built a temple and
a memorial to glorify the base acts of those killers.

Therefore, who can really blame the Palestinians if
they mistrust the intentions of Israel and its Government
with respect to the preservation and security of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque or with rspect to changing its historic
status quo? Who can blame the Palestinians for reacting
in the face of the Israeli occupation when its officials
call for Israeli settlers and occupiers to fight to the
death? Who can blame the Palestinians for feeling that
settlers can walk into their villages and neighbourhoods
like criminals and stalk their children, families and
property? Who can blame the Palestinians for trying to
defend themselves in their occupied towns and cities,
in Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories? And who
can deny Palestinians the right to seek international
protection to defend their land, their sons and their holy
sites?

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on the
international community once again to say no to Israeli
occupation, injustice and arrogance, to end to the
bloodshed and to hold the Government of the Israeli
occupation legally and criminally accountable for its
flagrant crimes and violations against the Palestinian
people, which can truly be considered war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Of that there can be no
doubt. Israel must respond immediately to and abide by
international decisions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also calls on the
Security Council to intervene immediately to protect
our children in Palestine. We appeal to the Council
to demonstrate a reaction commensurate with the
gravity of the situation and with the seriousness
of its responsibility. The Council should not be
content with issuing repeated statements. It must act
courageously to grant the Palestinian people the right
to self-determination leading to the establishment of
an independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, on the basis of the borders of June 1967, and to
end tragedy that has afflicted Palestine ever since.

The Kingdom of Saudia Arabia views with grave
concern the ongoing suffering ofits brothers, the Syrian
people, who continue to face an oppressive regime that
bombards their villages and cities with barrel bombs
and uses chemical weapons against its own people. In
abdicating its own sovereignty, it has granted foreign
Powers and militias, which are equally criminal, the
opportunity to participate in a genocide that the regime
has waged against its own people in a grave escalation
that will have serious consequences in the region.

We call on all active parties to cooperate
immediately in implementing the Geneva Communique
(see resolution 2118 (2013), annex II), including the call
for a transitional governing body with wide executive
powers that seeks to establish a future Syria that will
embrace all well-intentioned Syrians, regardless of
their religious, political or ethnic affiliations. It will be
a Syria that rejects terrorism, violence, fanaticism and
extremism and not a Syria for those who have killed
their own people.

