Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the comprehensive briefing delivered by Mr. Zahir
Tanin on the situation in Kosovo. Peru takes note of
the statements made by Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States.

We note with concern the tensions of recent
months. We stress, however, the existence of a strong
and comprehensive framework, provided by resolution
1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement, to maintain
peace and stability in Kosovo and the region. In that
regard, we welcome the timely resumption of the
political dialogue process facilitated by the European
Union, and the meetings held by the technical
negotiation teams. We also welcome the ratification
by the Kosovar Parliament of the territorial delineation
agreement with Montenegro - a development that
promotes stability and the normalization of relations
in the region, which, in turn, should lead to concrete
benefits for Kosovar citizens.

On the other hand, we are concerned about the
recurrence of incidents such as the arrest of the Serbian
politician, Marko Burie, in Kosovo and the lack of
progress in the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in the
country. We consider it necessary for the Kosovar
authorities to deal with such sensitive issues with
greater diligence.

Similarly, we believe that it is necessary to uphold
and strengthen the rule of law and confidence in
institutions. That is essential to prevent a new conflict
and consolidate sustainable peace. We therefore note
with concern the lack of progress in the relevant
investigations into the assassination of the political
leader Oliver Ivanovic'.

We also note the need for the Kosovar authorities
to cooperate fully with the Specialist Chambers and the
Specialist Prosecutor's Office, which are responsible
for prosecuting the allegations of heinous crimes that
occurred during the conflict in Kosovo. We would like
to highlight the important work of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, in particular in the
promotion and protection of human rights. We welcome
its training programmes for the Kosovar police and
encourage the early adoption of the new criminal code.

We also consider it important to move towards
sustainable peace by addressing the root causes of the
conflict, promoting reconciliation and policies aimed
at recognizing and including minorities and addressing
the needs of internally displaced persons. We believe
that women and young people should be called upon
to play a decisive role in rebuilding the social fabric
and creating a shared vision of the future. We welcome
the initiatives organized by UNMIK to promote greater
participation by women and young people in political
and social processes. On the other hand, we must
reject and deplore the illegal destruction of protected
cultural heritage, as well as hate speech that fuels
intercommunal tensions.

We would like to conclude by expressing our support
for the work of UNMIK, as well as for the Kosovo
Force, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in their efforts to
help build sustainable peace in Kosovo and the region.

