Archbishop Auza: Preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and of their means of
delivery constitutes a common challenge facing the
international community and is a key element in global
governance and international peace and security.

It has been nearly six months since the Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, the situation has not, in our view, substantially
changed, because, as Pope Francis has stated, we may
say, "never again", but at the same time we produce
weapons and sell them to those who are at war with
one another. The Pope would like to remind us that
it is an absurd contradiction to speak of peace and to
negotiate peace, while at the same time promoting or
permitting the arms trade. He invites national leaders
to commit themselves firmly to ending the arms trade,
which victimizes so many innocent people, and he
reiterates his strong support for the rapid adoption of
steps that would lead to the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction and to the reduction of the world's
reliance on armed force in the conduct of national and
international affairs.

The principal legally binding instrument currently
available for combating the proliferation threat is
resolution 1540 (2004), adopted unanimously more
than a decade ago. That resolution's preventive role and
the 1540 Committee's efforts in the five areas of its
work, namely, implementation, assistance, cooperation,
transparency and dissemination, are fundamental in
guiding the actions of all States in seeking to pool
efforts to combat proliferation.

In that regard, my delegation would like to reiterate
that it is essential to improve assistance to States
and cooperation among them, if we are to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It
is necessary to increase the coordination of national,
regional and international efforts, as appropriate, so as
to strengthen our response to that serious challenge.
All States ought to take appropriate measures,in
accordance with national and international law, and
they ought to fulfil scrupulously their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. The establishment of zones free of
weapons of mass destruction would also be a big step in
the right direction, as it would demonstrate that we can
indeed move toward a universal agreement to eliminate
all such weapons.

The proliferation of weapons, both conventional
and those of mass destruction, aggravates conflict
situations and results in huge human and material
costs that profoundly undermine development and the
search for lasting peace. Indeed, non-proliferation,
arms control and disarmament underpin global
security and sustainable development. Without them,
the achievement of the much-vaunted 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will be seriously jeopardized,
peace will continue to be dangerously in grave deficit
and human sufferings will sadly remain unabated.

It is imperative, therefore, that all State actors
overcome their differences and find political solutions
that can prevent and halt the involvement of non-State
actors in wars and conflicts. Otherwise, the human
cost of wars and conflicts will continue to grow and
the proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons, along with their delivery systems and the risk
of their use by States or terrorist groups, will remain
very clear and present dangers.

