Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank His Excellency Mr. Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbe, President of the Togolese
Republic, for his personal attendance at this Security
Council debate on counter-terrorism in Africa in the
context of peacebuilding and international security.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his attendance and Mr. Abdullahi Shehu,
Director General of the Intergovernmental Action
Group Against Money Laundering in West Africa, for
his briefing.

Before I begin, I would like to condemn on behalf
of my Government the terrorist attack that took place
on Saturday in Reyhanli in southern Turkey, near
the Syrian border, which cost the lives of at least 43
people and wounded 100. I offer the condolences of the
Rwandan Government to the victims' families and to
the Government and people of Turkey. We hope that
justice will be done, and we express our deep concern
with regard to the information that the attack might be
linked to the Syrian crisis.

Rwanda concurs with the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/5) that was just adopted. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for
choosing the topic for today's meeting and statement,
which shows Togo's commitment to peace and security
on our continent. The theme chosen for the second
Togolese presidency of the Security Council of your
term is right in line with the theme chosen for Togo's
first presidency in February 2012, "The impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region".

Rwanda, a brotherly country of Togo, fully shares
the concern for peace and security in Africa. That is
why our country chose, for our presidency in April, to
organize a briefing on the prevention of conflicts in
Africa so as to tackle the root causes (see S/PV.6946).
We would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Togo for his attendance at the time. In fact, Africa
will not be able to sustainably fight transnational crime
and terrorism until the continent adopts an effective
strategy to prevent conflicts in Africa by tackling their
root causes.

The issue of terrorism, especially in Africa, is
extremely complicated. It is true that terrorism and
conflicts in Africa generally have the same underlying
causes, but terrorism can also be both the cause and the
effect of conflicts on the continent, as those conflicts
can be fed by terrorism or can lead to terrorism. In fact,
most of the underlying causes of conflict in Africa,
considered by members of the Council during the April
briefing, are also the causes of terrorism. I would note,
in particular, the artificial delineation ofborders, which
is a legacy of colonialism and has engendered identity
and nationality problems, porous borders, foreign
interference, the lack of democracy and rule of law,
corruption and poor governance, poverty and famine,
as well as exclusion and discrimination based on race,
ethnic group, religion and region of origin.

In addition to the fact that terrorism and conflict in
Africa share the same deep-rooted causes, it is important
to note that terrorism and conflict can also be the cause
and effect of each other. In fact, it is quite obvious
that conflicts in Africa can be a breeding ground for
terrorism, which, as we all know, can only sustain itself
and develop in conditions of chaos or in lawless areas.
And it is no coincidence that terrorist groups regularly
attack Blue Helmets and threaten troop-contributing
countries. Along those lines, terrorism can also be a
cause of conflict. In fact, repeated terrorist acts against
religious, ethnic or racial communities is a source
of exasperation, which can lead to intercommunity
fighting. It is therefore very obvious that terrorism,
which always goes hand in hand with all types of
trafficking and transnational crime, should be a central
concern in all thinking about conflict prevention in
Africa.

Although terrorism can find its root causes in our
society, there can be no excuses or justification based
on extenuating circumstances for the perpetration of
such acts. Poverty, unemployment, exclusion and the
corruption of some Governments do not necessarily
lead to terrorism, in the sense that most of the victims
of those scourges struggle peacefully as citizens every
day to achieve a better future.
We need to tackle the underlying causes ofterrorism
by tackling those who decide to cross the Rubicon by
breaking up families and terrorizing communities.
In that connection, Rwanda wishes to recall the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We commend the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
as well as the other committees established to fight
terrorism, for their activities. We encourage them to
strengthen their cooperation, in particular through the
exchange of information on best practices, in order to
ensure better coordination of international efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism.

Rwanda also supports United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations and subregional
organizations. We welcome the work that has been
done by the African Centre for Studies and Research on
Terrorism, the objective of which is to strengthen the
cooperation between African countries in the prevention
of terrorism. In that regard, we also reaffirm that we are
eagerly awaiting the launch of the integrated strategy
on the Sahel, which we hope will help countries in the
region to prevent and combat terrorism.

Rwanda reiterates its condemnation of Al-Shabaab
in Somalia, Boko Haram in Nigeria, the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa, the Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and all other terrorist organizations
operating on the African continent.

However, in referencing the presidential statement
that has just been adopted, Rwanda reaffirms that
terrorism cannot and must not be associated with
any one religion, nationality or civilization. We also
regret the fact that the word "terrorism" is often used
in conjunction with movements that have a particular
affiliation and use their own particular methods.

We recall that the definition of terrorism is not
limited to the use of explosives; it also extends to armed
groups that commit mass atrocities, practice abduction,
burn villages, and use rape as a weapon ofwar and terror.
In that respect, I note that a genocidal group in Rwanda,
the Armee pour la liberation du Rwanda, was designated
as a terrorist group before it changed its name, 12 years
ago, to Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda.
We call on the brotherly Congolese Government, the

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire
international community to redouble their efforts
against that genocidal terrorist group, which is the main
source of conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
In conclusion, Sir, I again commend your personal
commitment to fighting terrorism in Africa and the
world. I pay a special tribute to all citizens and civil
society organizations that fight terrorism every day
around the world, at the risk of their lives or the lives of
their members. We have an obligation to achieve results,
and we hope that our collective efforts in the Security
Council and elsewhere will ultimately rekindle hope for
Africa and all communities living under the threat of
terrorism.

