Mr. Vale de Almeida: I am honoured to address
the Council today on behalf of the High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in her capacity as the Coordinator of the Joint
Commission established by the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), to whom I will refer simply as
the "Coordinator".

In today's world, the number of challenges we have
to face prevents us from focusing on the successes we
have achieved. This debate comes just two days after
the first anniversary of the implementation day of the
JCPOA. That agreement was a major achievement. It
was born of the efforts of the E3/EU+3, coordinated
by the European Union (EU) High Representative
and Iran; however, it now belongs to the international
community through its endorsement by the Council
in resolution 2231 (2016). In the past, many predicted
that we would never reach an agreement or that, even
if we did, it would not last for long. Not only did we
reach an agreement, but we are now clearly making
progress in implementing it. Since implementation day,
important steps have been taken by all parties towards
the successful implementation ofthe deal. In the course
of this year, all JCPOA participants have fulfilled
their commitments. Iran has implemented its nuclear
obligations, and the United Nations, the EU and the
United States have lifted, as agreed, the nuclear-related
economic and financial sanctions.

The adherence of Iran to its commitments is being
closely monitored and has been confirmed by four
International Atomic Energy Agency reports up to
now. That is essential in order to deliver on the goal of
a civilian nuclear programme exclusively for peaceful
purposes. The lifting of sanctions has also led to a
surge in trade and investment with Iran. To give just an
example, bilateral trade between the EU and Iran has
risen by a staggering 63 per cent over the first three
quarters of 2016. More efforts are needed to make sure
that those benefits are felt by our populations, but the
trend is clear and progress undeniable.

However, JCPOA implementation is an ongoing
task, and we expect full and effective implementation
by all sides throughout the lifetime of the agreement.
The EU High Representative, as the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission, which is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of the deal, remains
committed to that goal. The EU High Representative,
or her designated representative, has already chaired
six JCPOA Joint Commission meetings, which have
monitored and provided guidance on implementation
issues. At the latest meeting of the JCPOA Joint
Commission on 10 January 2017, all sides reaffirmed
their strong commitment to continued full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA. The rigorous
implementation of commitments by all sides is the
best way to continue to build trust, to strengthen the
JCPOA and to overcome the hurdles that are part of all
comprehensive and far-reaching deals.

I would also like at this point to extend my gratitude
to former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, as well as
to Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi, who served
as the facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) in 2016, for the excellent cooperation since
Implementation Day. I would also like to welcome
the new Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, as
well as Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy, who
will serve as the facilitator for the implementation of
the resolution in 2017. Once again, let me thank our
colleagues in the Security Council Affairs Division for
their unwavering support regarding the establishment
of the procurement channel. I would also like to take
note of the latest report of the Secretary General on the
implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136).

I will now focus on the work of the Procurement
Working Group. The EU High Representative,
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission and the
Procurement Working Group, is responsible for the
smooth operation of that newly established mechanism,
which has been tasked with reviewing proposals by
States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that
involve nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end-uses. On
implementation day, the Joint Commission established
the Procurement Working Group, which is comprised of
representatives of the E3+3 and Iran and is coordinated
by the EU High Representative. The Group has been in
full operation since its establishment. The first proposals
received through the procurement channel have been
reviewed and approved. That is a clear demonstration
that the established procurement mechanism works.

Transparency has been one ofour guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone ofthe JCPOA.
According to para 6.10 of JCPOA annex IV, the Joint
Commission shall report to the Security Council every
six months on the status of the Procurement Working
Group's decisions and on any implementation issues.
In that context, on 23 December 2016, the coordinator
of the Procurement Working Group submitted to the
facilitator, on behalf of the Joint Commission, the
Group's second report to the Security Council on the
work of the Group in support of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/2016/1113). The report seeks to provide the facilitator
and Security Council members with an overview of the
work undertaken by the Procurement Working Group
from 7 July to 22 December 2016.

During the period under review, the participants in
the Procurement Working Group, coordinated by the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, continued working intensively to
further develop the modalities of its operation. The
participants have held six meetings, and in one of those
meetings the International Atomic Energy Agency
participated as an observer. The Group has made
great efforts to be as transparent as possible without
compromising confidentiality, by reaching out to third
States and promoting a better understanding ofits aims,
objectives and review process.

We have taken note of the points raised by third-
party States during those outreach meetings. In
that respect, during the reporting period, the Joint
Commission updated several documents relating to
the work of the Procurement Working Group. All of
those documents have been published on the Security
Council's dedicated web page on resolution 2231 (2015).
The Procurement Working Group also responded to an
inquiry put forward by one State through the Security
Council. The work we have undertaken so far has
proven that it is possible to reach agreements, even on
the most contentious issues, and to implement them,
provided that there is a will to do so.

Let me conclude by reiterating the European
Union's resolute willingness to respect the JCPOA and
work for its success throughout its lifetime. We call
on all the other parties to do likewise and to remain
committed to the full implementation of the JCPOA
and of resolution 2231 (2015) in all its dimensions. That
is essential if we wish to continue building trust among
all and shore up multilateral diplomacy.

