Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
earnest efforts and your initiative to discuss and assess
the implementation of the measures set out in the note
by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507)
on the Council's working methods, with a View to
enhancing transparency and interaction between the
Security Council and non-member States, to enhance
the effectiveness of the Council's work and to broaden
the legitimacy of its resolutions.

Developing the Council's working methods is an
integral part of the Security Council reform for which
we have all been calling. Yet the international realities
have changed and the Security Council's tasks have
evolved, especially with the increase in peacekeeping
forces and political missions and the establishment of
sanctions committees. Still, the Council, through its
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, has taken a number of positive
steps in this respect, and we are confident,
Mr. President, that your chairmanship of the Working
Group will enable us to achieve further progress in the
full implementation of the measures set out in
presidential note S/2006/507.

Lebanon welcomes the steps taken by the
Security Council and its presidency to enhance
transparency, as that is the window through which
non-member States can be informed about the work of
the Council and its subsidiary bodies. With a View to
further enhancing the transparency to which we aspire,
Lebanon proposes an increase in the number of open
meetings as opposed to closed meetings, in line with
rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure, and, as
appropriate, an increase in the number of Arria
Formula meetings and informal interactive sessions, so
as to enhance open-door diplomacy and allow
non-member States to have their say as well. Such
practices help increase interaction between the Security
Council and the States that entrust it to act on their
behalf to maintain international peace and security
under Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Nonetheless, if open meetings are to proceed in a more
effective manner, we believe that it would be useful for
statements to be shorter and repetitive formalities less
frequent so as to focus more on the concrete results
that must be reached.

Furthermore, Lebanon welcomes the current
approach to involving regional organizations and other
groups in open meetings so as to benefit from their
experiences and to listen to their presentations, as was
the case during the presidency of China early this year
when we discussed the theme of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security (see S/PV.6257).

Lebanon also calls for increased interaction
between the Security Council and the heads of other
United Nations bodies, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and Peacebuilding
Commission. In addition, Lebanon believes that States
involved in conflicts under consideration by the
Council should attend closed consultations, because it
is essential to hear their views by virtue of their direct
involvement with said conflicts.

On the other hand, Lebanon welcomes the
coordinating meetings that take place between the
Council and troop-contributing countries and calls for
their expansion to include host States as well. Lebanon
also supports the idea of hearing briefings by the
Secretary-General's representatives in open plenary
meeting and not in closed, except in exceptional
circumstances.

As for the Security Council's subsidiary organs,
notwithstanding the steps proposed in the President's
Note contained in document S/2006/507, they remain
insufficient. Lebanon therefore proposes that the
agendas of the Security Council's subsidiary organs be
published and circulated prior to their meetings,
including on the website of each body, in order to
inform States of their work. We also call for increasing
the number of meetings between the heads of the
subsidiary organs, especially the Sanctions
Committees, and non-members of the Security Council
to inform them on a regular basis of the details of the
meetings held and resolutions adopted, as this would
increase transparency and dialogue.

Lebanon joins in the numerous appeals for the
definitive adoption of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council after more than 60
years of considering them to be provisional. We also
stress the need to involve all Council members in
preparing draft resolutions and presidential statements.

When we speak of effectiveness, we have to
consider the Security Council resolutions that have not
yet been implemented and to find a mechanism to
secure their implementation. I will offer the Arab-
Israeli conflict as an example because it is the oldest
10
item on the agenda of the Security Council. Dozens of
resolutions have been adopted in this respect, but the
occupation continues and the settlements are
unchanged. That is why we must stop the rhetoric and
move towards implementation.

In conclusion, Lebanon calls for convening an
open meeting at least once a year to consider the
working methods of the Security Council, which are
not a goal in themselves but a means towards further
transparency, effectiveness and interaction. Lebanon is
aware that agreeing the most suitable rules for the
working methods of the Council is related not only to
the proposed ideas, but also to the political will of
States.

