Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for being the seventh President
to organize a wrap-up session this year, and the third to
do it in a public meeting. As Rwanda has always said,
these meetings provide a unique and regular opportunity
for the Security Council to assess its work and examine
its progress and effectiveness critically, and the format
of a public briefing enhances our transparency vis-a-vis
the United Nations membership and the larger public.

Rwanda also appreciates the way you,
Madam President, presided over the Council during
Argentina's second and last presidency in its current
term. We particularly appreciate the fact that during the
month of October you continued the so-called "Power
formula", introduced by the Permanent Representative
of the United States in September, which is aimed
at encouraging more interaction between Council
members and briefers during closed consultations. We
also offer our appreciation to your Deputy Permanent
Representative and political coordinator, the engineer
who made Argentina's well-oiled machinery function
this month.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia
on his assumption of his last presidency of the Council
for the busy month of November. I have no doubt
that in November the interactive formula initiated
in September will be continued, since Ambassador
Quinlan has in any case never been a man for
following written scripts. As Argentina and Australia
and the other outgoing delegations, Luxembourg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda, move slowly
towards the end of their terms - which I believe
have been successful - we would like to reiterate our
congratulations to our successors, Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela, on their election
earlier this month, and to wish them success in their
two years to come.

Besides being an election month, October also
saw the adoption of the annual report of the Security
Council (A/69/2), for which Rwanda, as Council
President for the month of July, was in charge of the
drafting process. We would again like to thank our
fellow Council members, as well as the Secretariat, for
their invaluable contributions and support. As we stated
when introducing the report last week (see S/PV.7283),
Rwanda believes that a more analytical report, with an
assessment of the Council's effectiveness during the
reporting period followed by a debate on the occasion
of its adoption, would benefit the work of the Council
in the future.

It is in that context that Rwanda appreciated
the discussion conducted last Thursday by Member
States during the open debate on working methods
(see S/PV.7285). We all agree that, pending the
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, there
is a need to continue improving the accountability,
transparency and effectiveness of this organ of the
United Nations entrusted with the responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. As we
stated in the open debate, we believe that improving our
working methods will require extending the mandate
of the Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, to
cover all Sanctions Committees, as well as enhancing
dialogue and interaction between Council members
and the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), in order to regularly consider all our standing
issues related to ICC referrals and deferrals, in
accordance with the Rome Statute.

The Council should also strengthen its relations with
the International Court of Justice. The private meeting
we held yesterday (see S/PV.7290) with its President
gave us an opportunity to appreciate the important role
played by the Court in the pacific settlement of disputes
between States.

The annual briefing held this month with the
Force Commanders of United Nations peacekeeping
missions (see S/PV.7275) was critical for the Council
to better understand the challenges that they face on
the ground. We appreciate in particular the fact that
the upcoming Australian presidency will organize in
November a similar meeting with the heads of United
Nations police components. During the meeting with
Force Commanders, we were briefed on the delicate
situations in various missions, such as the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, which is no longer operating in a
peacekeeping environment, as it is facing terrorist
organizations against which it was not mandated,
equipped or trained to fight. The situation of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is
quite different. MONUSCO, which is one of the largest
peacekeeping missions, was reinforced last year with
the Force Intervention Brigade, mandated to neutralize
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda. Unfortunately, though, despite
a clear mandate and a significant budget, MONUSCO
has yet, some 15 years after its inception, to live up to
the Council's expectations or those of the Congolese. In
that regard, while the Security Council should, when
adopting resolutions, ensure that the peacekeeping
mandates provided reflect the security context on the
ground, it is also critical that it should ensure that the
activities of missions are results-oriented, so that they
can be held accountable.

The situation in the Middle East was prominent
on the programme of work of October, as it was in the
preceding month. With the gridlocked Middle East
peace process, the ongoing fighting in Syria, the rise
of a barbaric terrorist organization named "the Islamic
State", or "Daesh", and the increasing security chaos
in Yemen, the Security Council seems unequipped or
unable to have a significant impact on the situation
in the region. Nonetheless, it is all too convenient to
put the blame on the Council. This organ of the United
Nations is not a separate or independent entity; it
was created by us, the States Members of the United
Nations; it is us. Therefore, as long as members of the
Council, in particular the permanent members, together
with other world and regional Powers fail to use their
influence in New York and in the field to support
the efforts of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security - and we all know
that they can - the Council will always be used as a
scapegoat for international inaction.

In conclusion, Madam President, as your country
has successfully completed 22 months ofmembership, as
well as two presidencies of the Council, I wish, without
awaiting 31 December, to congratulate Argentina for
its successful term on the Security Council. I wish to
pay tribute in particular to you, Madam President, for
your unique style and talents, for your commitment
to the improvement of the working methods of the
Council and to the promotion and protection of women
in conflict and post-conflict situations, and for your
steadfast attachment to justice and accountability.

