Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Mr. President, I thank
you for convening this debate on peace and security in
Africa as it relates to support for African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. The fact that this debate is taking place a few
months after a similar one under the presidency of
Libya (see S/PV.6092) is indicative of the importance
the Council attaches to the issue.

Nigeria commends the Secretary-General for his
incisive report contained in document S/2009/470, and
thank Ambassador Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union, and Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for their illuminating briefings to the Council.
Similarly, we recognize the presence of Mr. Romano
Prodi in our midst at this important debate.

The recognition by the framers of the United
Nations Charter that peace and stability are the
precursors of social and economic development
explains the special role given the Council on the
question of maintaining international peace and
security. Nigeria firmly supports the Security Council
in its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, regional
organizations are a critical and integral component of a
broader global strategy for maintaining and
strengthening peace and security within the ambit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter.

My delegation is encouraged by the continued
close collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union in their efforts to strengthen partnership
in the area of peace and security, and by the
cooperative endeavours of the two organizations
towards achieving peace and security in such
challenging situations as in Darfur and Somalia. The
Council should therefore build on lessons learned from
these endeavours in strengthening future cooperative
work.

If the African Union is to continue to undertake
responsibilities effectively and efficiently, it requires
robust support for its existing peace and security
architecture, which consists of the Peace and Security
Council, the Continental Early Warning System, the
Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the
Peace Fund. Africa also needs sustainable, flexible and
predictable funding for peacekeeping operations, as
well as support for facilitating building the continent's
peacekeeping capacity and institutional mechanisms.

For these reasons, Nigeria has been steadfast in
its commitment to the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in regard to strengthening peace and
security, particularly at the regional levels. In this
regard, Nigeria has played a proactive role in regional
efforts to complement the Security Council's primary
duty of maintaining peace and security and in
consonance with Chapter VIII of the Charter,
concerning regional arrangements. As chief motivator
for the creation of the ECOWAS Ceasefire Monitoring
Group in 1990, Nigeria provided the backbone of the
troops that enforced the Cotonou peace agreement for
Liberia, ended the civil war and military rule, and
restored democratically elected Governments in
Liberia and Sierra Leone.

As an active and founding member of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, Nigeria would like
to reiterate its firm support for the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the panel's report (S/2008/813),
as well as the detailed analysis provided in his latest
report. We are not unmindful that, no matter how
painstaking the exercise may be, it cannot address all
the peacekeeping challenges that have built up on the
African continent over the years. We are, however,
encouraged that, if genuinely implemented by all
stakeholders, the recommendations would indeed lay a
solid foundation for viable support to the African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations.

The use of United Nations-assessed funding to
support United Nations-authorized African Union
peacekeeping operations, and the establishment of a
voluntarily funded multi-donor trust fund, canvassed
over the years as a panacea for the lingering problems
of peacekeeping in Africa, would be of immense
assistance. Similarly, there is a need to establish a trust
fund for capacity-building, the development of the
African Union's logistics capacity, and the
establishment of a joint United Nations-African Union
team to examine the implementation of the panel's
proposals.
While reaffirming the decision of world leaders,
as expressed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), that the
development of African peacekeeping capacity should
be the central objective of the United Nations in the
next decade, Nigeria hopes that today's debate will
assist the Council in forging a new consensus and
support for the proposals contained in the Secretary-
General's report. Once more, we urge the Council to
adopt a presidential statement approving the five
financing mechanisms that have been proposed to fund
African Union peacekeeping operations, with a view to
strengthening the African Union's capacity to respond
to the ever-growing peacekeeping and security
challenges in our region. We look forward to the
emergence of a robust and more strategic alliance
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council, as well as between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission.

