The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We thank Ms. Susannah Sirkin and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their important briefings. We would also
like to express our appreciation for the efforts they are
leading in order to alleviate the suffering in Syria.

Peru is deeply concerned by the intensification
of violence on Syrian territory as well as the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation that this
entails. The north-west of the country remains the
current focus of our attention due to its population
density, high volatility and increased risks as a result
of terrorist groups' extensive control of the area. We
are alarmed to note that the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
continue to be ignored in this area, such as the due
proportionality of military responses and precautions
with regard to their effects.

Peru joins the expressions of deep regret for the
deaths of children, which have increased this year
as a result of air strikes that do not discriminate
between civilians and combatants. We also deplore
the destruction of civil infrastructure, including
schools, medical centres and drinking-water-supply
facilities, aggravated by the fact that the geographical
coordinates of several of those centres had been shared
with the Syrian authorities. Such barbaric acts must
cease immediately.

We must underline that these acts represent
flagrant violations of international law and, due to
their deliberate nature and the impact they have on
the civilian population, can and should be declared
war crimes. We hope that these reprehensible acts will
be subject to exhaustive investigations that properly
identify their perpetrators and bring them to justice.
We wish to highlight the particular responsibility
borne by those countries with the capacity to influence
the situation, which can and must do more so that the
parties abandon all attempts to find a military solution.
Preserving the agreement reached by Turkey and Russia
in September 2018 is of fundamental importance in
these delicate circumstances.

The general focus on the events developing in
north-western Syria must in no way detract from
the urgency of addressing the humanitarian crises
looming over other areas of the Syrian territory. We
consider it imperative to direct greater efforts towards
meeting the basic needs of the tens of thousands of
internally displaced persons who remain in the Al-Hol
camp, as well as to promote comprehensive solutions
that will allow them to return home safely and in a
dignified manner. Accordingly, we encourage the Iraqi
Government to finalize the repatriation plan for their
over 30,000 citizens, with the assistance of the United
Nations. These efforts should also be extended to Raqqa
and other urban centres in Deir-ez-Zor, since the return
of Iraqi nationals is a tangible fact that requires great
mobilization by the international community so as to
provide them with a minimum of security and proper
living conditions. We also urge the Syrian authorities
to issue the appropriate authorizations to the United
Nations so that it can carry out exhaustive assessments
of the living conditions in Rukban camp and provide
sustained assistance.

I conclude by reaffirming that only a political
solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) will allow us
to overcome the humanitarian disaster still affecting
Syria, with full respect for its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Sirkin to make a
further statement.

