Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, for being here with us today. This late in
the debate, I do not intend to make a comprehensive
statement. Nor do I need to, since the Permanent
Representative of Belgium will be speaking later on
behalf of the European Union.

I would like to focus on two aspects, and I would
like to take as my text the Special Representative's
concluding remark that the answer is not alienation and
boycott. This, I think, is particularly relevant in the
context of our discussion of the elections and of the
new institutions in Kosovo, about which other
colleagues around the Council table and Mr. Haekkerup
himself have had a good deal to say. Clearly, the 17
November elections are going to be an extremely
important step, and participation thereafter in the new
institutions will be an equally important, if not a more
important, step forward.

I really want to underline the need for
participation. It is welcome to have confirmation now
that more than 150,000 Serbs have registered for the
elections, and we recognize the key role that the
authorities in Belgrade have played in encouraging that
process. But, frankly, it is not enough that Serbs
register. As Ambassador Durrant reminded us just a
moment ago, that does not guarantee that they will
participate. So the people of Kosovo from all
communities must vote. We strongly agree with the
Secretary-General that it is imperative that all
communities participate in the elections and in the
ensuing institutions of provisional self-government if
they wish to have a say in the daily running of their
affairs and indeed if they wish to build, and participate
in, the long-term future for Kosovo that we all want to
see.

So we equally support the Secretary-General's
call on the Yugoslav authorities to encourage Kosovo
Serbs to vote. It is vital for Kosovo's future that
Belgrade take a decision soon to support voting. As I
have indicated before, that would clearly be in the best
interests of the Kosovo Serbs, and also clearly in the
interests of the multi-ethnic future of Kosovo.

I also want at this point to draw attention, as
others have done, to the ongoing dialogue between the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the representatives of both
Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs. It is important that this
should make progress on issues of key concern to the
Kosovo Serbs since such progress must be a basis for
strengthened cooperation and trust in the future. The
dialogue also provides a good basis for a Yugoslav
Government decision to support voting in the election.
Clearly, concrete results from the dialogue would
underpin such a decision by Belgrade, which we hope,
as I have indicated before, will be taken very soon.

My second point relates to organized crime and
extremism. Other delegations have mentioned this too.
It is very clear from the Secretary-General's report and
from other information reaching us that organized
crime and extremism remain the key internal threats to
Kosovo as well as to the stability of the wider region.
As others have done, I would like to commend UNMIK
for the progress that has been made on pillar-I -
police and justice - issues since June.

In particular, we welcome the planned increase in
detention facilities in Kosovo and the creation of a
Kosovo Organized Crime Bureau. It is very, very
important that the Organized Crime Bureau should be
up and running as quickly as possible, and I would be
grateful for anything Special Representative Haekkerup
might want to say about that.

The lack of capacity in the investigative, judicial
and penal areas has also been a considerable brake on
the development of capacity in this area in Kosovo.

We welcome the achievements that have been
chalked up so far, but there is clearly a considerable
amount that still needs to be done. I should like to ask
the Special Representative what the prognosis is.

Finally, I should not close without welcoming
UNMIK's involvement in the recent regional meeting
of Interior Ministers. That is a very helpful step. We
would urge the earliest possible follow-up to that
meeting, which, we hope, will lead to intensified
regional cooperation on both organized crime and
extremism.

