Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
United States supports the draft resolution initiated by our
Council colleagues from Bahrain and Malaysia. We thank
them and express our appreciation for their efforts.
Similar thanks go to the other sponsors of the draft
resolution.

This draft resolution focuses our attention on the
urgent issue at hand in Kosovo and the surrounding
region: the plight of hundreds of thousands of refugees
and displaced persons, and the critical need to assist the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other humanitarian organizations and workers in their
efforts to address this crisis.

 

Slobodan Milosevic is responsible for the humanitarian
crisis. It is his campaign of ethnic cleansing, of burning
villages, of executing men, women and children and of rape
and intimidation that has caused hundreds of thousands to
flee their homes. It is clear how this crisis can be resolved:
Belgrade must meet the conditions set out by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the principles of the
Group of Eight, agreed to at the Foreign Ministers' meeting
in Bonn on 6 May. We remain firm in our resolve to
continue to exert pressure on Milosevic and his Government
to stop their planned, systematic campaign of ethnic
cleansing and to permit the return of all refugees and
displaced persons to their homes in safety and in security.
All of our efforts in Kosovo and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia are focused on this objective.

The number of Kosovar refugees and displaced
persons now exceeds 1 million. Many of the ethnic
Albanians in Kosovo have been rendered homeless. The
United States has contributed and will continue to
contribute to humanitarian relief efforts. My Government is
currently building a camp in Fier, Albania, that will house
as many as 20,000 Kosovar Albanian refugees. We are
working to identify other sites for up to an additional
40,000 refugees. Americans have also opened their doors to
these homeless, with the recent arrival of the first of 20,000
Kosovar Albanians for whom we have pledged to provide
safe haven. We urge other countries, too, to provide
temporary shelter for Kosovar Albanian refugees.

We expect that the Secretary-General's humanitarian
mission to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will focus on
the destruction in Kosovo. The mission can greatly assist in
preparing for the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes. The team can also identify the types
of humanitarian food and medical assistance that are most
urgently needed. In our view, it is essential that this team
have unimpeded access throughout its visit.

I would like to conclude by reiterating a statement
made by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright at the
conclusion of the 6 May meeting of the Foreign Ministers
of the Group of Eight. She said,

"by standing together, as we do today, our nations
offer an alternate vision to Milosevic's campaign of
terror, tyranny and vicious intolerance. We are united
in urging Belgrade to choose a future of integration,
can to make that future a reality."

