The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the Security Council, to
express our outrage at the terrorist attack that occurred on
Sunday in Grozny, the capital of Chechnya in the Russian
Federation, which killed President Akhmad Kadyrov
and others and wounded many more. The Council
condemns that act of terrorism in the strongest possible
terms. The members of the Council express their
sympathy and condolences to the victims and their
families and to the Government of the Russian
Federation. On behalf of the Council, I should like to
request the representative of the Russian Federation to
convey those sentiments to his Government and people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Timor-Leste

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(S/2004/333)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Singapore and Timor-Leste in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Pessoa
Pinto (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Ms. Ana Pessoa Pinto,
Senior Minister and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste and Head of Mission.

If there is no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kamalesh Sharma to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/333, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and Head of Mission.

Before giving him the floor, I wish to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sharma, to the Security Council, where, as we all
know, he has many friends.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sharma has effectively overseen and managed a
complex operation that has adjusted and adapted
responsively to the changing situations on the ground
and has successfully launched important peacekeeping
innovations such as the United Nations executive role
in policing and the provision of civilian advisers to the
Government. Here in New York, the Security Council
has benefited from an excellent flow of information
and analyses from his office that has allowed us to
follow closely developments within Timor-Leste and to
make decisions as required.

It is a pleasure to receive Mr. Kamalesh Sharma
within this Chamber, which is tempered only by our
regret that, as we understand, this will be our last
opportunity to welcome him in this capacity.

On behalf of the members of the Council, I wish
to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, for his contributions and to wish him every
success in future.

I give the floor to Mr. Sharma.


