Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank Lord Ashdown for his detailed and clear
presentation. I also wish to thank Mr. Klein for
everything that he did during his mandate while
carrying out his responsibilities. We all know his great
skill, great energy and the effective way he has carried
out his task.

Taking advantage of the remarks made by the rest
of the members of the Council, I would like to refer to
the issue of elections because in a way it is
symptomatic that the elections could have been
interpreted as a result that, at a certain moment,
discredits the democratic processes. Everything seems
to indicate that the risks of an extreme nationalism,
especially in the situation we all know exists in the
region of Bosnia and Herzegovina, are real. But even
so, if the nationalist tendencies had clearly triumphed, I
would say that it in itself cannot disqualify the
democratic process, because democracy must work and
must express itself. And if that is democratic
expression, it is still an expression. The problem is
what kind of signals does that send us? In what way
does it alert the international community? And can that
result be used to reflect on where the process
originated and where it is going?

Let us not forget the Dayton agreements, which
have been mentioned several times. They are now
seven years old or more. They are agreements that in a
way impose certain conditions which put an end to
conflict. But those agreements should be able to
guarantee the future that the international community
wishes and which the inhabitants of Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserve. If the agreements serve simply to
put an end to the conflict, and might generate a future
conflict, it is possible that such a conflict could be of
even larger greater dimensions. That is why we have to
be cautious in our analysis of a democratic expression
of will. We cannot impose the sort of democracy that
we want. We must aim for an expression of will in
conditions compatible with the healthy wishes of the
international community.

I would thus venture to ask Lord Ashdown a
question about what he himself has called the need to
speed up the reforms. For example, among the reforms
that have been commented on, he has an idea to
develop a new structure in the central Government -
to create or to strengthen the central Government. He
explicitly mentions it in the report (S/2002/1176). He
has spoken of the creation of the position of a single
Prime Minister. That would be the first time that such a
post has existed since the end of the war seven years
ago. It is even mentioned that two months have been
granted for the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to decide whether it would create the position, based on
the powers and responsibilities of the High
Representative. How does the High Representative see
this situation, if it is possible to hear some comments
on that point? But he will understand that there is
concern about what that political result could mean
with respect to what can or cannot be done or what
must or must not be done.

The important thing, I would say, is to link the
electoral result to the future, as the High
Representative explained in the report. For example, I
was struck by the reference that he makes in paragraph
47 of the report to a "new beginning". The report then
clarifies: "after these elections". In other words, these
elections are a kind of point of departure. We need to
relate this to the future, and we must bear in mind that
the political results draw very clear attention to the
theme of reform.

Also, in a very general way, I would like to pick
up on the emphasis the High Representative has placed
on the rule of law and the establishment of reliable and
efficient judicial processes. I feel bound to say that this
is not just a priority for him, but his work has
demonstrated it in fact. This is a very important point.
The point has been made that justice must work, and
that the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities need to
cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia. There is also a need for the
judicial system, including the judges, prosecutors and
investigators, to be capable of generating trust, and,
above all, capable of producing effective results.
Otherwise, we would have some bodies that are very
highly qualified but ineffective, and this would give
rise to greater frustration.

I would like to say that a lot of ground has been
covered in this respect in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
And, undoubtedly, we will see how cooperation with
the international community can yield results. We have
great hope that the evolution will be in this direction.

