Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs, Patricia O'Brien, for her detailed
presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/50). We would also like to express our thanks
for the briefing that was given by Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. We commend the efforts that have
been undertaken to date by the Secretary-General,
together with the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Special Adviser on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Those
measures have allowed a considerable enhancement of
the capacities to enforce the rule of law and to find a
solution to such a complex issue.

We note that the percentage of recorded pirate
attacks decreased in 2011 thanks to the combination of
effective measures including, among others, naval
operations and the institution of improved anti-piracy
management practices on the part of the shipping
industry itself to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia.

We believe that the report provides a basis for
moving forward towards establishing an effective
system for trying and imprisoning pirates. It is
important to analyse in detail the constitutional and
legal framework for establishing new anti-piracy
tribunals and for defining their potential material and
procedural bases, taking into account the multiple
problems that the issue poses.

On the other hand, we believe that this debate is
linked to resolution 2036 (2012), which was adopted
this morning, and to the consultations that we have
been holding with regard to the future operations of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Any
initiative that supports stabilization in Somalia will
have an impact on the illegal activities that are taking
place off its coasts.

We are aware of the fact that Somalia cannot
address piracy in isolation and that, over the past few
years, the phenomenon has taken on a regional
dimension. In that regard, Guatemala can contribute its
own experience. For, although they are different
phenomena, we have been able address the fight
against impunity with United Nations support by
establishing the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala. That joint initiative between
the Government of Guatemala and the United Nations
strengthened the entire judicial and prosecutorial
system in our country and gave rise to a culture of
combating impunity.

In order to avoid impunity and to discourage new
attacks, it is essential to achieve appropriate and
speedy trials of those suspected of acts of piracy and to
ensure their post-trial imprisonment. We fully support
increased assistance from the United Nations to the
States of the region to build the necessary capacities to
bring pirates to trial and, in the event, to imprison
them. The United Nations should focus its efforts on
the following key elements, namely, legislative
reforms, capacity-building for judging and bringing to
trial cases of piracy, effective implementation of the
law and improvements to the prison infrastructure in
Somalia and in the States of the region. In that respect,
Guatemala supports the establishment of specialized
courts for piracy committed off the coast of Somalia.

Finally, we believe it is important to take into
account the position of the Transitional Federal
Government and of the Somali people. At the same
time, as part of its programme of institutional
enhancement, Somalia must update its legal framework
and should adopt a package of anti-piracy laws before
the end of the transition period.

