Mr. Ging: Last month, Yemen entered the third
year of its armed conflict with no clear end in sight.
The human cost of this conflict has been devastating.
Air strikes, shelling and ground fighting continue in
urban areas, where civilians are being injured or killed
and the critical infrastructure they rely on is being
destroyed. The international community has witnessed
the devastation in which the Yemeni people now live,
and because of the crisis approximately 15 million
people lack adequate access to clean drinking water,
sanitation and hygiene, or health services; and about
7 million people are faced with the threat of famine.
Worse, all of this has been exacerbated by the largest
single-year outbreak of cholera ever recorded. As
the conflict continues, some 2 million people remain
displaced. They live in crowded, unsafe, unsanitary and
undignified spontaneous settlements, where shelters
made of rags, cardboard and just about anything their
residents can find in the streets are exposed to the
elements. The conflict in Yemen remains a man-made
crisis, generating intolerable suffering for the Yemeni
people.

I take this opportunity to highlight three of the
challenges facing the Yemeni people, and humanitarians
in particular f humanitarian access and its limitations,
the impact of civil-servant-salary interruptions on food
insecurity and critical services, and the ongoing risks
in commercial access to the country.

Humanitarians face unacceptable obstacles from
all sides in carrying out relief efforts in Yemen. The
biggest problem is actual prevention of humanitarian
access. For example, the authorities in Sana'a regularly
deny access and have arbitrarily delayed or denied
dozens of requests for humanitarian personnel to enter
the country via Sana'a. Furthermore, for several weeks
now, humanitarian partners have been reporting a freeze
on the issuance of visas by the authorities in Aden for
international non-governmental organizations.

Such obstacles are abhorrent in a country where
the threat of famine looms over millions, where there
are over 800,000 suspected cases of cholera across
90 per cent of communities, and where only 45 per
cent of health facilities are functioning. Quite simply,
these obstructions cost lives. We hope that the recent
commitments made by the parties will translate into
giving priority to unfettered humanitarian access.

The interruption of regular salary payments for
1.25 million civil servants is an additional driver of
humanitarian need, particularly food insecurity, as
affected public employees and their families represent
nearly a quarter of the population. Where food is
available in markets, people now lack the cash to buy
basic necessities. The prices have risen significantly.
Recent market analysis puts the average price of a
food basket 30 per cent higher than pre-crisis prices,
and in some cases as much as 60 per cent higher,
despite the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism's facilitating the majority of Yemen's
average food requirements each month. The price
of cooking gas in Aden and Hudaydah is more than
70 per cent higher than the pre-crisis level. That reality
is having a negative effect on the capacity of the
population to cope. People are now taking to such acts
as selling their assets and taking on debt to buy food.

Children are paying a particularly high price, not
least the 460,000 who are severely malnourished. Even
if the fighting were to stop today, stunted growth and
delayed cognitive development would linger for an
entire generation. The loss oflivelihoods for adults also
means that thousands of children are forced to work
rather than go to school, with child marriage rates also
increasing as families claim incapacity to support their
children.

In addtion, the lack of civil-servant salaries has
disrupted the provision of basic services to the wider
population. Already stressed critical services are
unavailable if employees are not present to operate
them, most notably in the health, water and sanitation
and education sectors. We seek the support of the
Council in finding a way to prioritize salaries for those
sectors. It is not difficult to draw a clear link between
the near-absent health, water and sanitation services
and the unprecedented cholera outbreak.

As the Council is aware, Yemen has long been
reliant on the importation of commercial goods to meet
its basic food and fuel needs. However, commercial
traffic to Yemen, by both sea and air, remains
challenging. Any significant decline in imports due to
bureaucratic delays risks making the threat of famine
a reality. In that regard, we renew our calls for the
protection and continued operation of Hudaydah port
and for the unconditional instalment of the four World
Food Programme mobile cranes. The closure of Sana'a
airport to commercial traffic has blocked thousands of
Yemenis from travelling for medical care, and students
from attending universities abroad. A resumption
of commercial flights is urgently and immediately
needed. There appears to be no legitimate reason that
the inspection mechanism operated by the coalition
prior to August 2016 cannot be reinstated.

The Yemen humanitarian response plan is 55 per
cent funded, with $1.3 billion ofthe $2.3 billion required
to reach the 12 million people in need of humanitarian
support and protection this year. We thank Member
States for their generosity and funding. Despite the
complexity of the response, this year humanitarians
have already reached 7 million people with direct
assistance. We therefore encourage Member States to
directly support our efforts and to do more through
the response plan. This year, the Yemen Humanitarian
Fund has reached $128 million, the largest globally. The
Fund was nimble in rapidly responding to the cholera
outbreak and famine prevention. Over 21 per cent of
the Fund's allocations have gone to national partners.
We salute them for their efforts on the front lines of
the humanitarian response and, again, we thank donor
Member States for their generosity.

As we desperately wait for a political solution and an
end to the conflict, we call upon all States to exert their
influence on all parties to the conflict to comply with
their obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and human rights law. The Human
Rights Council's recent adoption by consensus of
resolution 36/31 is one example of the influence States
can exert. The parties and their supporters need to show
greater commitment to finding a political solution. We
need the international community to step up its efforts
in support of a viable solution that addresses the root
causes and restores the hope of the Yemeni people for a
better future. They deserve nothing less.

