Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to thank the Secretary-General for his report and the
Special Representative, Mr. Jacques Klein, for his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). We agree with
the Secretary-General's assessment that, nearly five
years after the end of the war, peace is taking root, but
that ultimately the success of the Mission's work
depends on the cooperation of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The report concludes that acceptance of
accountability and responsibility by local leaders is
crucial to this endeavour.

It is against this background that my delegation
commends the Special Representative and the men and
women of UNMIBH for their commitment to
implementing the Mission's mandate to assist parties to
the peace agreement in their obligations to provide a
safe and secure environment for all persons in their
respective jurisdictions by maintaining civilian law
enforcement agencies operating in accordance with
internationally recognized standards and with respect
for internationally recognized human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

We are pleased to note the efforts to restructure
and reform the police force, the screening of law
enforcement personnel and the incremental progress
being made in changing the composition of the police
force to reflect the multi-ethnic character of the
communities it serves. We attach importance to the
continued emphasis on the training of police officers
and agree that the key to self-sustaining police reform
is professional training.

We appreciate, however, that more needs to be
done in increasing the recruitment of minority police
officers. We have noted from paragraph 37 of the
report that UNMIBH still requires some $40 million to
support the operations of the State Border Service, to
sustain police restructuring, including minority
recruitment, and to attain a minimum standard of police
efficiency and competence in specialized areas,
including management. We therefore join Mr. Klein in
his appeal for additional funds and generous
contributions to the Trust Fund.

We also agree with the Special Representative
that there is one gap in the progress that we have noted
that must be filled. This is in the area of judicial
reform. We were concerned to learn from the report
that the judicial system assessment programme has
found that the entire judiciary is, to a greater or a lesser
degree, politically, professionally and structurally
dysfunctional throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. If
UNMIBH is to fulfil its mandate, the judicial system
must be comprehensively reformed. It cannot be left to
chance. It is therefore important that international
assistance for this programme be maintained.

My delegation is pleased to note that UNMIBH's
components have begun the preparation of a strategic
and operational framework for the fulfilment of the
Mission by December 2000, and we sincerely hope that
by that time the organizational structure of the police
forces will incorporate the necessary mechanisms to
ensure an acceptable amount of accountability and
transparency, as well as freedom from political
interference. For this to be accomplished, UNMIBH
must be able to count on unwavering support from the
people and the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Another issue that my delegation wishes to
address is the situation of human rights. We note that
the UNMIBH human rights office has broadened its
approach from investigating individual cases to
improving the institutional integrity of the police
forces. At the same time, we believe that continued
emphasis must be placed on rooting out the trafficking
in human beings. We would therefore wish to ascertain
from the Special Representative what action has been
taken on the report prepared by UNMIBH with the
assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

My delegation believes that the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina lies in the creation of common multi-
ethnic institutions and the continued normalization of
relations between the various ethnic groups. It is in this
context that we again emphasize the need for provision
of adequate security for returnees and for their
reintegration into the country.

In conclusion, I wish to underline Jamaica's
support for the extension of UNMIBH's mandate in
order to consolidate the gains already made and to
address the challenges that remain.

