Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
for Michael Steiner for an excellent first briefing of the
Council. It is also good to have here with us today
Deputy Prime Minister Covie. It was particularly nice,
I think, to see Bernard Kouchner here listening to Mr.
Steiner's first briefing, and I hope that the French
delegation will pass on to him our appreciation.

The representative of Spain will be speaking later
in the debate on behalf of the European Union, and I
fully associate myself with the statement that he will
make.

Speaking nationally, I would like warmly to
welcome the Secretary-General's report, and strongly
endorse, on behalf of the British Government, his
conclusions. There have been a number of very
positive developments within the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and within Kosovo during the reporting period, and we
recognize that very significant achievements have been
made.

I would also like to congratulate Michael Steiner
on a truly excellent start as Special Representative. We
strongly support his priorities for UNMIK.
Strengthening law and order, making economic
progress and creating a safe society for all communities
are self-evidently important and, indeed, vital, for
Kosovo's development as a forward-looking, tolerant
and prosperous society.

We also very strongly support the work that Mr.
Steiner has in hand to define benchmarks against which
progress in critical areas can be measured. This is
highly consonant with the approach being followed in
other United Nations operations, not least the post-
independence presence in East Timor, and we welcome
it - not least as a good example of better management
practice.

But in Kosovo the development of a political and
economic road map for both UNIK and the Provisional
Self-Government is a very positive forward step. Using
this road map, Kosovo's elected representatives can
work towards the development of an effective
Government for all its citizens. With our support and
encouragement, as required, they can build lasting
security, democracy and prosperity in Kosovo, under
the rule of law, developing cooperation with Belgrade
and with others in the region.

We would also like to support the proposals of the
Special Representative to strengthen minority
representation in the Government at political and
official levels, although we are disappointed by the
continuing delay in the nomination of the minister from
the Serbian community to serve in the Kosovo Self-
Government, despite the brave stance which has been
taken by leading members of the Kosovo Serb
community in advocating engagement and cooperation.
I want to underline that this delay harms the interests
of Kosovo's minority communities.

I also welcome Mr. Covie's continued
commitment to improving the situation in Kosovo.
Although I noted the stark - perhaps, in places,
deliberately stark - contrast between the two
statements we heard today, I would like to say to
Deputy Prime Minister Covic': that teamwork between
Belgrade, UNMIK and the Provisional Self-
Government in Pristina is essential to make progress in
areas of importance to all communities. We welcome
the continuing dialogue in the High-ranking Working
Group and, in particular, the increasing use of sub-
groups to take work forward as quickly as possible. It
is important that concrete progress be made rapidly on
all aspects of the UNMIK-Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Common Document, particularly on
security returns and the missing. You do not need me to
tell you, Mr. President, that this is an important
element of inter-ethnic confidence-building.

The United Kingdom fully backs efforts to
support the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to Kosovo. In answer to Mr. Steiner's appeal
for help and support, I would like to say that the United
Kingdom is keen and willing to fund projects to help
this process, and we are awaiting concrete proposals
from UNMIK to take this forward. I would encourage
as many partners as possible to join us in this effort.

Like Special Representative Steiner, we remain
concerned about the levels of organized crime and
extremism. This is a key factor in holding back
economic and political development in Kosovo, and in
also holding back returns on a substantial scale.

I also want to register concern at the continuing
ethnically motivated attacks in Kosovo and the increase
in violence against KFOR and the UNMIK. We will
continue to support robust action by UNMIK and
KFOR against those engaged in such activities.

Finally, I would like to underline our support for
efforts to resolve the recent escalation of violence in
Mitrovica. All those directly engaged, including
UNMIK and Belgrade, should quickly find a solution
that maintains UNMIK's responsibility for the
administration of the whole of Kosovo while, at the
same time, adequately protecting the interests of local
Serbs.

