Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): We thank the Security
Council for adopting resolution 2489 (2019), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan for 12 months. It signifies the Council's
support for Afghanistan at a time when the people of
Afghanistan are entering a new and crucially important
phase of their long-standing efforts to achieve peace
and prosperity.

On 28 September, our people will vote in the
upcoming presidential election and again prove their
everlasting commitment to consolidating democracy as
a key imperative for a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
The Government and the people of Afghanistan are
fully prepared for that important national event, which
will strengthen the pillars of constitutional governance
and the rule of law in our country. At the same time,
consistent with our long-standing commitment to
peace, we stand fully committed to advancing an
effective peace process that conforms with and meets
the fundamental needs of our people - a dignified
peace that holds and protects human rights and our
democratic gains, which are embraced and accepted by
the people of Afghanistan.
I wish to reiterate the importance of the principle
of Afghan ownership and leadership in the context
of peace efforts and that all international support
measures should serve to complement and reinforce
our national efforts. In that regard, we thank the
United Nations - the Council in particular - and
other partners in the international community for
their continued support in our journey for a stable and
representative Afghanistan, especially in our joint
efforts to further empower women in the country. That
expression of support was highlighted in the Council's
meeting on Afghanistan last week (see S/PV.8613), for
which we are grateful.

Afghanistan also places great importance on the
region and regional cooperation. In that regard, we
prioritize economic projects that help us and Afghanistan
to better strengthen connectivity. Looking ahead, we
are aware that the future is not void of challenges and
difficulties. That said, I can state with full confidence
that the determination of Afghans to achieve success is
greater than the challenges we confront. In that regard,
I would like to make reference to last night's attack by
the Taliban, in Parwan at an election campaign rally,
which took the lives of more than 26 people. Once
again, we request the Council to call on the Taliban to
stop the killing of civilians, especially those who will
participate on election day.

We in Afghanistan look forward to continuing
our partnership with the Council and the brotherly
international community to complete the mission on
which we embarked together in 2001. I must say that we
have made tremendous achievements since then, which
we all need to preserve and build on. Allow me to again
thank the United Nations and the Security Council for
accompanying us in this very difficult journey and
standing beside us, in support and solidarity, as we
prepare to hold that important election on 28 September
and to secure democracy and peace in Afghanistan.

I will conclude by thanking the delegations of
Germany and Indonesia for leading the difficult
negotiations in the lead-up to the adoption of today's
resolution. I think our colleagues need a raise.

The meeting rose at noon.
