Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): It is my pleasure to
thank the Permanent Representative of France, His
Excellency Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, in his
capacity as President of the Security Council, for
organizing this open debate on a region that has been
the object of so much attention in the past 10 years.

We also welcome the presence of Mr. Bildt and
Mr. Solana, and appreciate their valuable contributions.

The protracted crisis in South-eastern Europe has
challenged the international community in many
respects. It has strained its collective security resources
and has drawn on its humanitarian and economic
resources. It has also tested its political resolve and its
moral and legal consciousness alike. In spite of a
substantial investment of energy and resources and
some notable achievements, much work still remains
ahead. The return of refugees and displaced persons
throughout the region, demining, rebuilding, economic
and social reconstruction and development, and healing
and reconciliation remain standing objectives for the
years to come. Most important, the countries in the
region have yet to take charge of their own fate and to
find their respective ways towards sustainable peace,
the rule of law, protection of human rights and
economic development.

There are some grounds for optimism in that
respect. People in the region have strengthened their
resolve to break out of the spiral of instability and face
the challenges of full democratization. In that regard,
we welcome the recognition of Croatia's efforts and
appreciate the words of encouragement addressed to us
today. Indeed, Croatia has managed to pull itself from
the circle of crisis and has joined the circle of well-
intentioned neighbouring countries willing to help
those still in need.

Croatia's case serves as the best example that
positive change in the region is possible. Moreover, it
proves that such a change is welcomed and rewarded
by the international community. Given the main
priority of the Croatian Government - that is, to make
up for time lost 7 the demonstrated willingness of the
European Union to speed up the integration process for
qualified newcomers, based on their own individual
achievements, remains of extraordinary importance. It
is a clear signal to other countries ofthe region that, if
the conditions are met, Europe's door remains open.

In that context, we welcome the initiative of
President Chirac to pay special attention during the
French presidency of the European Union to ways to
accelerate the integration of the region into a European
mainstream, and we pledge Croatia's full support. In
our opinion, the French initiative to convene a summit
to serve that purpose should enlist support and
participation of a broader range of neighbouring
countries.

Over a short period of time following the
elections held earlier this year, Croatia has made
substantial progress in joining political, economic and
security institutions and mechanisms and in developing
good-neighbourly relations. The Croatian Government
is also conducting an active regional policy aimed at
establishing a sustainable peace. This includes
participation in the Stability Pact for South-East
Europe and consistent implementation of the refugee
return programme.

More precisely, our efforts are directed at the
consolidation of cooperation in all fields, and
particularly at extending political stability and
economic revival in South-eastern Europe. In this
regard, we are fully committed to the implementation
of the Dayton accords, and supportive of the
international efforts to achieve sustainable peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. While the situation in Croatia
has improved and the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is improving, the situation in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia raises serious concerns. After
affecting other countries that emerged after the
dissolution ofthe former Yugoslavia, the crisis has now
returned to its origin: to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The same ideology and the same regime
that caused so much suffering during the aggression
waged on Croatia and on Bosnia and Herzegovina now
represents an obstacle to the democratic dialogue on
how to resolve ethnic tensions in Kosovo and protect
equality and the legitimate interests of citizens of
Montenegro. It is in Croatia's interest to see the
Normalization Agreement with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia fully implemented. But prior to democratic
developments in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
this appears unrealistic. Meanwhile, we will continue
to normalize relations with Montenegro, especially
regarding the free movement of civilians throughout
the Prevlaka area, towards which the Milosevic regime
still harbours territorial pretensions.

Our cooperation with other successor States to
the former Yugoslavia has been good and is constantly
growing in both the bilateral and the multilateral
spheres. Among other issues, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Macedonia and Slovenia, united by a common
interest in developing good-neighbourly relations-
and consequently, stability and prosperity in the
region - have invested sustained joint efforts to
resolve with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia the
issues of succession to their common predecessor
State. Resolving the succession issue on the basis of
the equality of all five successor States, a basis which
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia stubbornly rejects,
is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and stability in
the region.

Security Council resolution 777 (1992) and
General Assembly resolution 47/1 affirmed the
principle of equality of all successor States; however,
they were never fully implemented. Some statements
heard today are encouraging with regard to their full
implementation in the foreseeable future.

Another issue which directly impinges on the
prospects of sustainable peace in the region is that of
criminal accountability for the tragic events that
occurred during the conflict on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. It is vital that the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia reflect in
its work the extent and the level of the involvement of
the various sides and the war crimes committed. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's unwillingness to
cooperate with this Tribunal remains a serious obstacle
in this respect. As long as the indicted war criminals,
such as Milosevic, Mladic', Karadzie, Sljivaneanin,
Radie, Mrksie, Martie and others remain at large,
justice, healing and reconciliation cannot be achieved.

In order to prevent a distorted recollection of the
tragic events that took place, and for the historical
record, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
raised genocide claims against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia before the International Court of Justice.
These proceedings are not directed against Serbs in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia or the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, but against the State
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which are to be held responsible. In a joint statement
issued recently, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
expressed the belief that their cooperation in the
proceedings of the International Court of Justice
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would
ultimately contribute to democratization, reconciliation
and the establishment of lasting peace and stability in
the region.

Finally, Croatia firmly believes that the efforts of
the international community will prove successful and
self-sustained stability in South-East Europe will be
ensured only when the countries of the region are able
to assume responsibility for their future. For some of
them, this might still be a long way off, but it remains
worthwhile to further invest individual and collective
efforts.

