Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to begin by
expressing our congratulations and appreciation to the
Republic of South Africa for its most able leadership of
the Security Council in this month of its presidency. I
would like to welcome you, Madam Minister, and thank
you for presiding over today's meeting. I would also like
to welcome Her Excellency Ms. Antje Leendertse, State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany.

We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing on
the current situation in occupied Palestine, including
East Jerusalem.

Every month, we come before the Security Council
to appeal to it to act to ensure the implementation of
its resolutions on the Palestine question, certain that
only such action can bring us all back from the brink,
stopping the senseless, painful human suffering caused
by the man-made crisis and salvaging the prospects
for a just peace. Yet, every month we are compelled to
listen to reports of a worsening situation, as Israel, the
occupying Power, intensifies its illegal occupation and
colonization of our land and a political horizon for a
peaceful solution remains obstructed.

It cannot be that the role of the Council is reduced
to that of a gathering for the airing of grievances,
statements of sympathy and solidarity, as important as
they are, and helpless hand-wringing. The Palestinian
people and the global community at large expect and
await more. The mandate of the Security Council,
under the Charter of the United Nations, to maintain
international peace and security surely requires more.

As the calls to preserve multilateralism against
current threats grow, shoring up the Security Council's
role in the peaceful resolution of conflicts must be front
and centre. That requires urgent action to uphold and
enforce international law, aimed at halting violations,
deterring future violations and fostering an environment
conducive to the pursuit and achievement of peace.

In the case of Palestine, the Council's relevant
resolutions, from resolution 2334 (2016) to allresolutions
preceding it, provide a solid basis for such action. The
international consensus is firm and attempts to alter or
negate it have failed. Indeed, we have often heard that,
when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, there
is no need to reinvent the wheel. International law is
clear. The parameters of a just solution are clear and
there is no alternative to the vision of two States, based
on the 1967 lines and in accordance with international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. But, in the absence of serious
action to give tangible meaning to that consensus, the
alternative is rapidly unfolding before our eyes and
is one of an apartheid State in control of the lives of
millions who are being oppressively, violently and
unjustly deprived of their fundamental rights, even the
right to live as free and equal human beings.

After over 52 years of illegal occupation and the
cruel exile imposed on millions of Palestinians for
over seven decades, it is clear that the failure to reach a
solution is not for lack of attention to the conflict or lack
of resolutions; it is for lack of genuine efforts to uphold
the rules, decisions and humanitarian commitments
that have been repeatedly pled for. As concluded by
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the human
rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territory in
his latest report:

"No occupation in the modern world has been
conducted with the international community so
alert to its many grave breaches of international
law, so knowledgeable about the occupier's obvious
and well-signalled intent to annex and establish
permanent sovereignty, so well-informed about
the scale of suffering and dispossession endured
by the protected population under occupation, and
yet so unwilling to act upon the overwhelming
evidence before it to employ the tangible and
plentiful legal and political tools at its disposal to
end the injustice."

Without accountability, the deplorable situation
we have faced will surely only worsen, paving the way
for more suffering and insecurity for all, with innocent
civilians, among them children and woman, bearing
the heaviest and most heart-breaking weight of the
international community's negligence. Indeed, despite
decades of global attention, none of Israel's violations
in occupied Palestine have stopped. Those include the
colonization or de facto annexation of our land by all
means, with the settlements and wall being the most
insidious examples; the inhumane 12-year blockade
and collective punishment of 2 million Palestinians
in the Gaza Strip, inflicting devastating poverty and
despair; the killing and injury of defenceless Palestinian
civilians by the occupying forces and extremist settlers;
the destruction of homes and properties and the forced
displacement of Palestinian families, especially in
occupied East Jerusalem - with 140 homes demolished
in the city in 2019 alone - rendering homeless 238
Palestinians, more than half of them children; the
dangerous provocations and assaults at holy sites; the
impoverishment and detention of thousands of our
civilians, or the blatant theft of our natural and financial
resources. That all continues unabated.

The fact is that the occupying Power has been led to
believe that it has carte blanche to act as a State above
the law, going so far as to openly threaten to annex our
land, in flagrant breach of the universal prohibition on
the acquisition of territory by force. With or without a
formal Government, Israeli politicians and candidates
shamelessly compete to see who can be more brutal and
punishing to the Palestinians and who can cater more
to extremist Israeli groups that will never be satiated,
as evidenced by their daily terror campaign against our
civilians, as well as their incitement and their rabid land-
grabs. Nothing else could be expected in the absence
of consequences for such great violations by this most
protracted foreign occupation in modern history.
Only accountability can change that. I repeat - only
accountability can change that.

Therefore, we appeal once more to the Security
Council and all States to act. We urge them to mobilize
the political will to fulfil their obligations by taking
practical measures in line with international law and
the relevant resolutions, which guarantee just and
sustainable peace and security. The Security Council
must shoulder its responsibilities and act immediately
in line with its resolutions to bring about a halt to the
occupation's crimes, avert further destabilization,
protect innocent civilians and salvage any chance for
peace. States, intergovernmental organizations and
civil society must also uphold their respective roles
and responsibilities.
Should Israel continue to defy the Council and the
will of the international community, it must bear the
consequences for its Violations. All legitimate political
and legal tools and measures available, including
sanctions and court prosecution must be pursued
to ensure accountability. That must include action
pursuant to the call for distinction in resolution 2334
(2016) and other relevant resolutions including, inter
alia, resolution 478 (1980), on Jerusalem, and resolution
465 (1980), in which the Council clearly called on all
States not to provide Israel with any assistance to be
used specifically in connection with its settlements in
the territories occupied since 1967.

We urge States to take concrete steps in that
regard, in both multilateral and bilateral frameworks,
in conformity with their legal obligations and with
affirmed support for the two-State solution. We reiterate
our call for release of the database on businesses
engaged in activities related to the illegal settlements,
which was mandated by the Human Rights Council
and will help States to uphold their obligations. States
also have a duty of non-recognition of any decisions or
measures altering or purporting to alter the geographic
and demographic character or status of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in
violation of the law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention. All such decisions and measures must
be deemed unlawful, null and void and should incur
consequences if not rescinded. The legal and historic
status quo at the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem,
including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, must be respected,
as must Jordan's custodianship of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites.

Lastly, we reiterate our call for continued
principled support for the rights of the Palestinian
people, including to self-determination and freedom.
Until they are realized, we shall continue our appeals
for humanitarian assistance to alleviate the plight
of our people, including Palestinian refugees and to
ensure that they are not left behind. We recognize
with deep gratitude the generous international support
in that regard through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and urge strong backing for the renewal of
its mandate, an important expression of responsibility
and solidarity and an indispensable source of hope
and stability until a just solution for the Palestinian
refugees is realized based on resolution 194 (11). Only
such determined, collective and coordinated action can
move us from deadlock to finally bringing an end to the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967, thereby fulfilling
the Palestinian people's right to independence in their
sovereign, contiguous democratic State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and achieving
Israeli-Palestinian peace and security, the cornerstone
for peace and security in the Middle East as per the
long-standing international consensus.

For the sake ofpeace, the benefit ofall peoples ofthe
region and the respect for the authority of international
law, we must act together to change course, restore hope
and attain just and comprehensive peace. Failure to do
so will have far-reaching repercussions and unravel
decades of efforts and resources invested in our shared
noble goals of peace, stability and human dignity. We
must not let another generation suffer that injustice.

