Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Costa Rican delegation for
bringing us together for a discussion of this important
subject. Costa Rica's dedication to fostering peace
through the promotion of disarmament is well known,
as is your personal commitment, Mr. President; we are
honoured by your presence. We also welcome the
presence of Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro, Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama, and we
thank Mr. Sergio Duarte for his statement.

The United States recognizes the role of the
United Nations in promoting the maintenance of
international peace and security and the responsibilities
of all United Nations Member States in that regard. To
that end, the United States has taken a leading role in
promoting arms reduction and fighting proliferation,
particularly of weapons of mass destruction.

The United States recognizes that multilateral
engagement is an important tool in curbing armaments
and in blocking weapons proliferation. Treaties can
play a role, but so can voluntary associations. In 2003,
the United States launched the Proliferation Security
Initiative (PSI), a dynamic, active approach to the
global proliferation problem. Today, more than 90
participating member States work voluntarily and in
concert, employing their national capabilities to
develop a broad range of legal, diplomatic, economic,
military and other tools to interdict threatening
shipments of weapons of mass destruction and missile-
related equipment and technologies. The United States
also participates alongside 39 other States in the
Wassenaar Arrangement, a voluntary export control
regime that governs both conventional weapons and
dual-use items. We hope that additional States will join
the United States in participating in the PSI and
adopting the Wassenaar Arrangement's export control
list. The United States has also taken a leading role in
reducing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons through its assistance programmes in such
areas as destruction, stockpile security and the marking
of weapons.

Of course, action within the United Nations is
also important. The United States, for its part, has
introduced a draft resolution at the current session of
the General Assembly that reaffirms Member States'
commitment to full compliance with arms control
agreements and commitments. The United Nations has
also developed a Programme of Action on the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and produced a

consensus report (A/61/ 1028) that includes the
recommendations of experts on verification in all its
aspects.

More specifically, the Security Council has a role
to play as well. Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) is an unprecedented initiative and a good
example of the type of contribution that the United
Nations can make to promoting international
cooperation in the area of non-proliferation. While the
scope of the resolution includes terrorist activities, it
was designed to address the full range of proliferation
activities, including those of non-State actors that
provide proliferation-related services. The resolution
also places requirements on United Nations Member
States to take specific measures to criminalize
activities that can contribute to or support proliferation
activities.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has an important
role to play in promoting implementation of the
resolution. In addition, the resolution advances the
economic interests of nations seeking to become global
economic suppliers of goods and services.

The United States and several other States have
extensive programmes that can help Member nations
implement resolution 1540 (2004), and we stand ready
to do more. We believe that the Council can play a role
in bolstering that effort and others, not least by calling
on States to live up to their obligations under Council
decisions and other binding undertakings.

The reduction of armaments is an important goal
for many United Nations Member States, and,
particularly under the right circumstances, it can
increase security and contribute to enhanced
development.

