Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia decided to speak in this open debate because
of the obvious urgency of providing to the Iraqi people,
as soon as possible, the humanitarian assistance that it
requires at this difficult time.

Leaving aside considerations about what occurred
in the Security Council and on the international stage
during the past three weeks, the Government of
Colombia believes that what is fundamental today is
that we try to prevent the past from distorting our
current and future obligations, which are to make less
difficult the conditions in which the Iraqi people are
living and, later, to work on rebuilding the nation.

In a communique dated 17 March, Colombia
urged the United Nations to provide the Iraqi people
with the humanitarian assistance required at every
stage of this crisis. We also urged the international
community to contribute to the objective of opening up
new progress and development opportunities for the
Iraqi people, in a democratic environment and with full
guarantees of their fundamental rights and freedoms.
That was stated by President Uribe Velez when, in a
message to the Colombian people, he said,
"International action must protect civilians and respect
the democratic rights of the people of Iraq".

It is essential that the Security Council and the
United Nations take up the issue of Iraq to provide the
assistance required by the people in terms of
humanitarian aid and the rebuilding of the country. We
must prevent a humanitarian catastrophe, brought about
by hunger, that might arise in the coming weeks.

Colombia urges all Security Council members to
put an end to the debate of the past three weeks and to
concentrate on real aspects of life and sustenance for
the Iraqi people, such as providing humanitarian
assistance, ensuring the continuation of the oil for food
programme, giving priority to such supplies and
permitting the required funding for all these tasks. It is
essential that the draft resolution currently being
discussed in the Council provide the Secretary-General
with the necessary authority and flexibility to move
this work forward. It is urgent that the draft resolution
be adopted as soon as possible.

Later, we will be able to - and will have to -
discuss all the legal aspects of the current situation, and
the arguments of Member States will surely serve to
guide us in future crises and in similar situations. But
today, our principal concern must be to rise to the
ethical demands of our time. In the past, war
theoreticians and practitioners spoke of the scorched-
earth policy and its deadly consequences. Today, how
things have changed. Humanitarian aid, promoted by
all, is entirely the opposite, since it seeks to make
conditions less distressing and to protect lives during
and after confrontations. Let us stop the verbiage and
return to the human aspect. The requirements of
humanitarian assistance mean we must act and we must
act quickly. Let's clear the way for the United Nations
to make this vital contribution.

