Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Lord Paddy Ashdown, for the significant
progress achieved and for the quality of his report. I
should like also to express our appreciation to Judge
Theodor Meron, President of the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, for his informative briefing
and for his praiseworthy efforts in carrying out his
mission.

My delegation notes the improvement in the
functioning of the major institutions in the country and
the securing of more stable funding for them as key
achievements. Among other areas of progress -
pursuant to the priorities set out by the High
Representative - the establishment of the Anti-Crime
and Corruption Unit; the overhaul of the country's
judicial system at all levels; the launching of the
European Union Police Mission; the operationalization
of the State-level Civil Service Agency; and the
establishment of coalition governments at the State,
entity and cantonal levels all are encouraging factors
on the path to reconstruction, ethnic harmony and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In the area ofjustice and the rule of law, the High
Representative should be encouraged to continue his
offensive against those networks that fund and support
key International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia indictees, including Radovan Karadzic, and
to establish a system for domestic prosecution of war
crimes, pursuant to the request made by the Peace
Implementation Council.

In this context, my delegation supports the
creation by the Council of a special War Crimes
Chamber within the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There can be no doubt that the speedy implementation
of this project will be one of the pillars of the
reconstruction of the country and of its integration into
the international community.

Key criteria enable us objectively to evaluate the
social, political and economic progress achieved. Let
me mention in this connection the drawing down of, by
the end of 2003, of the Reconstruction and Return Task
Force, due to the high level of property law
implementation, greater visibility and improved
assurances in connection with the return of refugees
and displaced persons; the closing of the Media
Development Department, following the successful
completion of its mandate; the entry into force of the
Criminal Procedure Code, as a turning point in the
reform of criminal justice; the suppression of support
networks for war crimes indictees, thanks to close
cooperation with the European Union and the United
States of America; increased growth in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on the basis of reforms laid down to
promote employment and consolidate economic and
administrative infrastructures; and the enhancement of
regional cooperation for security and justice. However,
that progress must not mask the difficulties
encountered by the High Representative in his efforts
to restore the situation.

We are particularly concerned at the
replacement - for political reasons - of members of
the administrative boards of various public entities and
the appointment of officials based on political or ethnic
criteria; at the constitutional dysfunction of the Council
of Ministers and the meagre resources at its disposal; at
the swift decline in international financial assistance at
a time when refugees and displaced persons are
returning in large numbers; and, finally, at the slowness
in the pace of reform. All those challenges can be
addressed thanks to the international community's
support and to the dynamism of the Office of the High
Representative.

Seven years after the end of the war, Bosnians
must assume the bulk of the responsibilities in the
country's restoration and revitalization. That being
done, the Council must lend its full support to the High
Representative with a View to the swift implementation
of the six essential tasks set forth in the Office's
implementation plan, which was approved by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
congratulations and its words of encouragement to the
High Representative and to the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia on the significant progress achieved, under
their far-sighted and effective leadership, in
implementing the Dayton Accords in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

