Mr. Sung Joo Lee (Republic of Korea): First of all,
my delegation wishes to commend the members of the
International Commission of Inquiry for the tireless
efforts they have made in fulfilling the Commission's
mandate under difficult conditions. We are also grateful
for the two reports that the Commission has submitted,
following its comprehensive and in-depth investigation of
the allegations of the illegal sales and supply of arms in
the Great Lakes region.

In reference to the Commission's reports, my
delegation expresses its grave concern about the
Commission's conclusion that it is highly probable that a
violation of the arms embargo occurred involving two
shipments of arms to Goma, Zaire, from Seychelles in
June 1994, destined for former Rwandan government
forces. We are further disturbed by the finding of the
Commission that certain Rwandan elements are receiving
military training to conduct destabilizing raids into
Rwanda.

In view of the fact that illegal flows of arms and
related materiel in the Great Lakes region would seriously
threaten the peace and stability of the area, my delegation
stresses the importance it attaches to the continued, full
and effective implementation of the arms embargo under
the relevant Council resolutions. This is all the more so
in the post-United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) period, in which the presence of the
United Nations is considerably reduced. Against this
backdrop, we welcome and support the retention of the

 

Commission of Inquiry with a view to following up its
earlier investigations and to ensuring the full
implementation of the arms embargo, as reflected in
operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution.

In order to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the arms embargo, my delegation
believes that all States, particularly those in the region,
should intensify their efforts to prevent illegal flows of
weapons and military equipment to militia groups or former
Rwandan government forces and create such national
mechanisms as deemed necessary in this regard. My
delegation urges all States, in particular those whose
nationals have been implicated in the report of the
Commission, to render every possible assistance to the
Commission. In this regard, the Commission should be
given, among other things, full access to all relevant
locations and witnesses requested by it, in private and
without the presence of officials or representatives of any
Government. It is also important to note that States in the
Great Lakes region should not allow their territory to be
used as a base for armed groups to launch incursions or
raids against any other State, in violation of the principles
of international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

Lastly, my delegation would like to stress that there is
an urgent need to find a long-term solution to the plight of
the millions of refugees and displaced persons in Rwanda
and neighbouring States. The return of these people to their
homes is essential, not only for the normalization of the
situation in Rwanda but also for the stabilization of the
region. In this regard, my delegation commends all States,
United Nations agencies, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations that have provided
humanitarian assistance and encourages them to continue
their much-appreciated work. To this end, we attach special
importance to the effective implementation of the Cairo
Declaration of Heads of States of the Great Lakes Region
of 29 November 1995, which reaffirms the need to
terminate radio broadcasts that spread hate and fear among
the people, especially among the refugees in the region.

On the basis of these views of my Government, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us.

