Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): First and foremost, I should
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members
of the Security Council for allowing my delegation to
participate in this debate on the peaceful settlement of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Let me
also take this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr.
President, for the efficient manner in which you have
continued to conduct the business of the Council. You
have an abiding interest in African affairs, and it is thus
fitting that this debate should be taking place under your
leadership.

I hasten to pay tribute to Ambassador Robert
Fowler, Permanent Representative of Canada to the
United Nations, for the skilful manner in which he
conducted Council business during the month of February.

Africa is a continent tormented by various conflicts,
including the one in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is the subject of our debate in the Council
today. The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has profound ramifications for peace and security,
not only in the Great Lakes area, but for Africa as a
whole. It is a conflict that has pitted not only the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against the rebel elements within the country, but also

 

some African countries against other African countries. If
not resolved quickly, this conflict will mushroom and pose
a grave danger to international peace and security.

Furthermore, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is one country, among others, with which my own country,
Zambia, has a very long border. It is therefore to be
expected that any developments in either country would
have an immediate impact on the social, economic and
security interests of the other. This has already been borne
out by the considerable influx of refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into Zambia in the
recent past.

The southern African leaders have been exploring the
possibilities of bringing a halt to the conflict for some time
now. In this respect, Zambia was honoured to be requested
at the second Victoria Falls summit of the regional heads of
State, held in Zimbabwe, in September 1998, to spearhead
a mediation effort in pursuit of the mandate by regional
leaders. This is an indication of Africa's strong belief that
only a negotiated settlement can guarantee lasting peace. In
this regard, we thank the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the United Nations, and we much appreciate the
contributions of the senior officials of these organizations
in the overall search for a peaceful solution in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The mediation efforts so far expended have revealed
that the matter at hand is as delicate as it is complex.
Hence, the need to proceed with caution and patience so as
to ensure that the solution that may he arrived at enjoys the
support of all the parties concerned. The mediation effort is
also expensive in terms of investment in time, energy and
resources. This therefore calls for assistance from the
international community to enrich the regional efforts.

As Chairman of the regional mediation effort on the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, President
Chiluba has been greatly inspired and encouraged by the
support that his mediation efforts have enjoyed not only
from the OAU, but from the United Nations, the Security
Council, the European Union and, indeed, the international
community at large.

In this connection, my delegation is happy to recall
that the Security Council presidential statement issued on
11 December 1998 stated, inter alia,

"The Security Council is prepared to consider, in the
light of efforts towards peaceful resolution of the
conflict, the active involvement of the United Nations,
in coordination with OAU, including through
concrete, sustainable and effective measures, to
assist in the implementation of an effective ceasefire
agreement and in an agreed process for a political
settlement of the conflict."

(S/PRST/1998/36, sixth paragraph)

There are those who misguidedly say "Leave Africa
to Africans; let them solve their own problems." To such
people we say Africa is not an island. It is part of the
global village. Africa is part of greater humanity; the
progress of that humanity is bound up with the progress
or lack of it on the African continent.

Fortunately, the Charter of the United Nations does
not discriminate between one conflict in one part of the
world and another in another part of the world. All must
be treated the same.

Indeed, the fact that the Security Council is involved
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is as it should
be, because under the Charter the Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, which are currently being threatened by the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For
now, it is essential that, given the limitations of the
regional efforts, the Security Council should be able to
augment those efforts in a tangible way. In this regard,
my delegation Wishes to urge the Security Council at the
appropriate time to put in place the machinery needed for
policing the ceasefire once it has been realized. Security
Council involvement is an essential ingredient on the
difficult road to the establishment of lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

