Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation joins in the congratulations extended to you,
Sir, and to your country as you assume the presidency.
We also join in the congratulations extended to
Ambassador Le Luong Minh of Viet Nam, his
delegation and his country for the excellent way in
which he presided over the Council in July. I should
also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing, as well as
the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States and the Permanent Representative of Iraq.

My delegation is pleased to note the positive
evolution of the situation in Iraq, particularly in terms
of security, with the exception of the recent attacks in
Baghdad and Kirkuk. The ceasefire in Sadr City
remains in force, with tangible benefits for the people,
and the reintegration of the various political blocs into
the Government represents significant and noteworthy
progress. However, the Council must take into account
the remarks of the Secretary-General to the effect that
the situation is still critical and that the challenge
requires redoubled efforts on the part of the
Government of Iraq, as well as the combined efforts of
all sectors of the population and the continued
cooperation of the international community.

We acknowledge the important work being
carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) to assist the Government of Iraq in
developing an inclusive electoral system that will allow
the holding of fair and transparent elections
guaranteeing the participation of all. A peaceful Iraq
also requires certain important common goals to be
achieved, such as the law on hydrocarbons and the
demarcation of internal boundaries. We should like to
thank the Ambassador of Iraq for the information he
has provided to us today on the progress made in those
matters.

The delegation of Panama notes with optimism
the recent initiatives of regional and international
dialogue, in particular the commitments achieved at the
meeting of the International Compact with Iraq in
Stockholm and the decisions of Bahrain, Jordan,
Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates to reopen their
diplomatic missions in Iraq. Those events reaffirm the
commitment of the international community to the
cause of Iraq. We should also like to acknowledge the
gesture by the United Arab Emirates in cancelling
Iraq's debt.

Despite all those endeavours, the humanitarian
situation in Iraq remains critical and deserves the
greatest attention of the United Nations and Iraq. While
we acknowledge the work that has been done, we also
urge UNAMI and the Government of Iraq, in
particular, to strengthen their response with regard to
the basic needs of the most vulnerable population
groups both within the borders of Iraq and beyond, so
as to provide aid to the refugees in the region and to
guarantee their safe and voluntary return. We also urge
the international community to lend its efforts and
cooperation to that difficult task.

Lastly, we note with concern the observations of
the Secretary-General indicating that the human rights
situation in Iraq remains alarming. The Council must
pay more attention to the report prepared by the
UNAMI Human Rights Office. To that end, the cycle
of reports and discussion thereof must be improved.
We are concerned about the serious situation of
children, reports of gender violence and the excessive
use of force against civilians, and the position of
detainees. The consolidation and development of
political and administrative institutions in Iraq must go
hand in hand with security and the respect for the
fundamental rights and freedoms of its people. Here we
echo the appeal to Iraq by the Secretary-General to
take the necessary measures to enhance its system of
protection and information with regard to human
rights.

