Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the end of the year, five members of the Council
will finish their term on the Council. It is very
significant that you, Mr. President, have organized this
wrap-up session, and we are very grateful to you for
that.

I also wish to congratulate you on the outstanding
manner in which you have presided over the work of
the Council this month. Although the Council's
working days were reduced in December due to the
holidays, the relevant items of the programme of work
scheduled at the beginning of the month were discussed
in depth. Some of the very complicated and difficult
questions were also appropriately addressed. The fact
that the Security Council has been able to carry out its
task in a transparent, efficient and fruitful way reflects
your hard work and thoughtful planning, Mr. President,
and that of the Colombian Mission. The President, in
particular, gave detailed information to the members
each day about the following day's work and the
following stage of work, which was very useful in our
preparation. I express my appreciation for that.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our sincere thanks to the outgoing members -
Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius, Norway and Singapore.
In the past two years, they have actively participated in
the consideration of various questions before the
Council and have presided over the work of the
Council's subsidiary organs in an outstanding manner.
We will not forget their important contributions to the
work of the Security Council.

Once again, I wish to welcome Angola, Chile,
Germany, Pakistan and Spain to the Council. We
believe that those countries will bring fresh vitality to
the work of the Council. The Chinese delegation will
cooperate closely with them.

Throughout the year that will soon end, the
Council has considered a series of questions in a timely
manner, which has included anti-terrorism, Iraq, the
Middle East and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It has adopted more than 100 resolutions and
presidential statements. When I say that, it does not
mean that the more documents the Council can
produce, the better. I merely want to emphasize that we
have made substantive progress. For example, in the
area of anti-terrorism, the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee have done an enormous
job overall in cooperating and carrying out joint efforts
to fight terrorism. We have laid a very solid
foundation. That work has far-reaching impact.

Regarding the Iraqi issue, the Security Council
has made fruitful efforts, and continues to do so, for
the disclosure of information on the destruction of
weapons of mass destruction in order to settle the
question politically within the framework of the United
Nations and to avoid war. Here too, therefore, we
believe that the work of the Security Council has been
productive. It is worth mentioning that striving to
achieve consensus through consultation has become a
prominent characteristic of the work of the Council.
We hope that that trend will be maintained.

African issues have accounted for almost half of
the Council's agenda items. Some progress has been
made this year on African hotspot issues and, in some
cases, it has been groundbreaking and very significant.
In the coming year, the Working Group on African
issues and the Security Council can consider in greater
depth and reflect on ways of strengthening
coordination and cooperation with the African Union,
African regional organizations and concerned African
countries, so as to adopt effective measures to promote
the early resolution of African issues and consolidate
the progress achieved.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
wish the President and other members of the Security
Council, including the general membership of the
United Nations, a Merry Christmas and a Happy New
Year.

