Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
are very grateful for this report from Mr. Oshima and
the whole team in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). It is very useful to
remind the Council of our commitments to protect
civilians in armed conflicts and to back up the
objectives of the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6, annex). This means, as Mr. Oshima suggested this
morning, the linking together of the various categories
of risk to civilians and dealing with them
comprehensively. That is why we have always placed
an emphasis on mainstreaming these issues across a
broader framework in order to take the commitments
forward and put them into operation. This needs to take
place both here at the United Nations and in the field,
and within our own delegations, our own Missions, and
in our capitals. Otherwise, we are not doing the
groundwork that makes mainstreaming work.

In this respect, the United Kingdom is working to
identify where policy links and interoffice working
could be achieved to secure a closer relationship
between, for instance, protection of civilians and
peacekeeping policy in its operational form. We very
much support both the initiative behind the aide-
memoire and the substance in it. It is an effective tool
for operationalizing a protection approach, and we
would like to see Member States, the Secretariat, the
agencies and United Nations offices everywhere
identify cross-cutting ways of working to achieve the
goals in the aide-memoire and to respond to the
Council's approach in mainstreaming protection. In
that respect we very much support the intention to
make proposals to update the aide-memoire in the next
six-monthly report.

We were interested to hear about the
establishment of the implementation group in the
Executive Committee for Humanitarian Affairs, and we
very much hope that Mr. Oshima's successor will be
able to update us on the work of this group and what its
discussions point to in terms of the scope, shape and
resourcing of peacekeeping operations. It would
perhaps be a good idea to let the Council know, before
the next six-monthly report, of the agreed objectives
for the Executive Committee and its implementation
group and give us some ideas on how Member States
can help the group to achieve them.

I have one or two questions coming out of
Mr. Oshima's report to us this morning. On
mainstreaming, can OCHA point to any changes or
improvements in how the system is managing
mainstreaming both at Headquarters and in the field? I
cross-reference my question on this with resolution
1325 (2000) and our work on gender mainstreaming. It
has been brought home to us in the United Kingdom
delegation that, although there is of course a certain
amount of rhetoric behind resolution 1325 (2000), it
does lay a basis for groups in the field to operationalize
the objectives and aims set out in that resolution. We
would like the same to apply to the work on
mainstreaming of protection and the text of and follow-
up to the aide-memoire.

We were very glad to hear about the beginning of
the workshops on protection of civilians. Mr. Oshima
this morning referred at several points to the
forthcoming West Africa mission of the Security
Council. I wonder whether the outcome of the Accra
workshop could be conveyed to us in writing so that we
can take account of it, both as we go round on next
week's mission and in writing our report, particularly
in view of any lessons that the workshop produced that
can be learnt from experience to date.

Finally, members are used to hearing me mention
the need for the Security Council to work with other
parts of the United Nations system. I wonder whether
OCHA sees a role for Security Council discussion with
the Economic and Social Council in the area of
protection of civilians and whether there are other parts
of the United Nations system which, from the overview
that OCHA has of the whole humanitarian area,
Mr. Oshima would like us to continue to pursue.

I should like to end by warmly thanking
Mr. Oshima for his excellent work and his steady
leadership during his tenure as Under-Secretary-
General and Emergency Relief Coordinator. It has been
a period in which humanitarian affairs have, I think,
increasingly taken a higher profile in the work of the
United Nations and within Council discussions. His
briefings to us and his work in our areas have been
clear and thought-provoking, as his report was this
morning. The United Kingdom is very glad to continue
to support the work of OCHA and we wish Mr. Oshima
every success for the future.

