Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate
on promoting and strengthening the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
It gives us an opportunity to review the progress that
has been made in this area and to contemplate future
actions so as to meet the aspirations of peoples striving
to consolidate justice and the rule of law.

We are convinced that promoting the rule of law
at the international level is fundamental to building a
more prosperous, just and peaceful world. The United
Nations plays a major role in this area. We believe that
the efforts of the international community require
more than developing the normative framework of
international law. National priorities in that regard
should support and implement international judicial
mechanisms that can ensure accountability and end
impunity for those who commit genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, violations of international
humanitarian law or gross violations of human rights.

My own country's endorsement of the Rome
Statute and the accession to the Statute of 121 States
attest to the respect that exists for the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its role in ending impunity.
In order to support the Court, it is essential that
it be given adequate resources. Such support also
entails ratifying the Statute in order to enhance its
effectiveness and establish close cooperation and
constructive dialogue between the States concerned
and the Court, which would enhance mutual trust. The
multiple ways that the Security Council and the ICC
can cooperate, as laid down in the Statute, reflect the
importance that the international community attaches
to enforcing international humanitarian law. As the
body with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the involvement of
the Security Council can provide strong support for the
Court in dealing with more serious crimes.

It is also important that the Security Council
continue to develop an integrated approach to using
its power to refer the most serious international crimes
to the ICC. In that regard, it must avoid policies that
reflect a double standard in dealing with situations
that pose a clear threat to international peace and
security, particularly where there are practices that
constitute war crimes that fall under the jurisdiction
of the ICC. In that regard, a case in point was cited
in the 2009 report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) - the
Goldstone report - which was followed up by the ICC
Prosecutor's 3 April decision regarding Palestine. We
are confident that the Security Council's adherence to
the basic tenets of the rule of law in developing that
approach will enhance the effectiveness of its future
resolutions in such cases.

The creation of the ICC was a first and important
step. In our view, it should be reinforced by taking
additional steps and making further efforts to
prevent such crimes before they take place. We would
therefore urge States to respect their obligations
under existing international legal and human rights
instruments. In that regard, Tunisia proposes creating
an international constitutional court, similar to the
ICC, to which national and international civilian
organizations, as well as democratic political parties,
can turn to challenge constitutions or laws that
contravene international law or the holding of unfree
elections. The proposed court's mandate would include
reviewing disputed constitutions and laws and, in
extreme cases, invalidating fraudulent elections, thus
rendering illegitimate vis-a-vis the United Nations
the regimes that they support. Another fo the court's
no less important mandate would be to provide advice
to countries that are in the process of writing their
constitutions so that they are in line with international
standards. We believe that the establishment of such a
court would encourage Governments to abide by their
obligations under international instruments, which in
turn would help to meet the aspirations of peoples to
freedom, justice and democracy and to seek peaceful
change, thereby avoiding any resort to violence, with
all its evident and bloody costs.

