Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for your leadership of the Council for the
month of December. I take this moment also to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2013/721) and to thank our dear friend,
Special Representative Kubis, for his presence today
and his able leadership ofthe United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

Our meeting here this December, 12 years to the
month since leaders of Afghanistan's political parties
signed the Bonn Agreement, is a Iucid reminder of the
progress in Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban
regime. December evokes the hopeful atmosphere of
Bonn in the winter of 2001, when unity was in sight,
emergence from the shadow of violence and fanaticism
seemed possible and the vision of an Afghanistan as a
home for all - one of tolerance and moderation e was
taking shape.

We have made significant progress since those days
and have seen many of our objectives come to fruition.
More than 6 million Afghan refugees have returned
to the country after being forced to live outside their
homes for years due to war and conflict. Our State is
now based on a democratic Constitution. Millions of
Afghans have access to education and health care.
And the Afghan people enjoy more freedom and
rights than they have for decades. Although we face
challenges and continue to engage those who seek to
reverse our progress, we are advancing apace to stand
independently, take command of our future and realize
a peaceful and secure Afghanistan.

This year in particular has been pivotal to the
advancement of our goals and the solidification of our
achievements. The year 2013 marks the culmination
of transition, paving the way for Afghanistan to
embark upon the transformation decade. Since June,
the Afghan National Security Forces have assumed
full responsibility for security nationwide, proving
themselves ever more capable of defending the country
and doing so with confidence and determination.

As 2013 comes to a end, Afghans look ahead to
the transformation decade. That milestone signifies
Afghanistan's progress towards sustainable peace and
marks the start of a new phase of cooperation with the
international community. In the past year, we have
renewed our international partnerships and signed a
number of strategic partnership agreements with several
countries, including the United States. In May of last
year, President Karzai and President Obama signed the
Enduring Strategic Partnership Agreement. That was
followed by 15 months of comprehensive negotiations
on, and then the completion of, the text of the bilateral
security agreement.

Last month in Kabul, 2,500 Afghan representatives
endorsed that agreement during a consultative loyajirga.
The resolution adopted at the end ofthe Jirga reaffirmed
that the agreement should ensure Afghanistan's peace,
security and development and should be accompanied
by visible steps taken on specific issues in the lead-
up to the signing of the agreement. As reiterated by
the leadership of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
those entail assurances for measures to end the
military raids on Afghan homes, and the launching of
negotiations between the Afghan High Peace Council
and the Taliban. We are certain that the bilateral
security agreement will be signed in a timely manner.
As a next step, Afghanistan is ready to begin formal
negotiations on a status of forces agreement for the
post-2014 NATO presence in Afghanistan, which will
continue our enduring security and defence partnership
with NATO.

We are preparing for our next milestone, namely,

presidential and provincial council elections. The
timely holding of transparent, free and fair elections is a
reflection of strong national consensus about the future
direction of Afghanistan and its status as a democratic,
peaceful and prosperous nation. To that end, technical
and logistical preparations are proceeding with
momentum. The Independent Election Commission has
announced the final list of 11 presidential candidates
and their running mates. More than 3 million new
voters have registered for the elections, of which one
third are women. That number is expected to increase
in the lead-up to elections. As we move towards the
final stage of preparations, Afghan national security
institutions have put in place a comprehensive strategy
to ensure security on election day.

Afghanistan's peaceful future requires a political
solution to the conflict. Reaching out to the armed
opposition, building confidence and engaging in peace
talks remain central to our efforts towards peace and
stability. In spite of some setbacks, we are working to
renew momentum in the peace process. In that regard,
the Government has been continually involved at the
regional level, launching a new phase of dialogue
between Afghanistan's and Pakistan's leadership
through bilateral and trilateral meetings in London,
Kabul and Islamabad. We are fully committed to the
success of reconciliation, and we are conscious that
further progress depends upon not only the dedicated
efforts of all stakeholders but also the opposition's
united voice for peace.

Alongside security and political transition, in the
light of the withdrawal of international forces at the end
of 2014, we are strengthening regional understanding
and cooperation to ensure the success of Afghanistan's
transition. In recent months, we have ramped up efforts
to increase contact with neighbours and countries
in the region. President Karzai has engaged with
regional leaders to enhance development and security
cooperation, focusing on transition and beyond, in
New Delhi, Islamabad, Beijing, Dushanbe and Tehran,
as well as at the Shanghai Cooperation Summit in
Bishkek. The leaders agreed that they had a strategic
stake in Afghanistan and that peace and stability in
the country were essential to peace and stability in the
region. As we move forward, we will benefit from all
forms of cooperation, particularly the Istanbul Process.

As we proceed steadily towards the transformation
decade, it is essential that the successes of the past 12
years be maintained. Progress depends upon preserving
the rights of all Afghans, particularly women and girls,
upholding the rule of law and furthering economic
transition. Our continuing partnership with the
international community is critical to success in those
areas, as reflected in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. We are determined to meet our related
commitments and we hope that the international
community will be similarly steadfast in its promises
to Afghanistan.

Speaking today at this December meeting of the
Council, mindful of our recent and future milestones
and of the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead,
I again recall the spirit of Bonn. We knew during that
December 12 years ago that the challenges in front ofus
were great. But we were also aware of the tremendous
potential for change and for the establishment of a stable,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. As
we arrive at 2014, we ground our progress firmly in the
constitutional foundations established 12 years ago, in
the spirit of hope and optimism that was alive in Bonn,
and with commitment to build upon and maintain the
great achievements of the past decade.

