Archbishop Auza: Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to express its profound appreciation for the
decision of Jordan's presidency this month to hold
this open debate on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

The Holy See is deeply concerned about the total lack
of progress in the negotiations between Palestine and
Israel. It is difficult not to share the frustration expressed
by the then United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, during
his last Security Council briefing, on 27 March (see S/PV.7417). As was recognized on that occasion, Israel
has genuine and legitimate concerns for its security.
However, the Holy See believes that such security will
come not in isolation from its neighbours, but in taking
its place with them through a negotiated peace with the
Palestinians through the implementation of the two-
State solution, which has the support of the Holy See
and of the international community in general. The
Holy See joins its voice once more with all the people
ofpeace in calling for serious and concrete negotiations
that will reinvigorate the peace process.

The Holy See does not cease to encourage the
leaders of Lebanon to resolve the impasse that has
prevented the election of a President since May 2014 by
putting aside narrow political interests for the sake of
the greater good ofa unified Lebanon. That institutional
void makes the nation more vulnerable and fragile in
the face of the overall situation in the Middle East.
The international community must support Lebanon in
every way to regain institutional normalcy and stability.
It must also help it care for the huge number of refugees
in its territory, which has created a situation that carries
the danger of extremist infiltration among the hapless
refugees.

The conflict in Syria, as Baroness Valerie Amos
defined it in her Security Council briefing last 26 March
(see S/PV.7418), has reached breathtaking levels of
savagery. The indiscriminate destruction of basic
infrastructure, such as water and electricity facilities,
hospitals and schools, worsens the plight ofcivilians each
passing day. The fall of Idlib, just 37 miles south-west
of Aleppo, has sown panic among Aleppo's population
of more than 1 million people. The ethnic and religious
minority groups are particularly anguished. The Holy
See calls on the international community to prevent
the enormous humanitarian disaster that a siege on,
and battle over, Aleppo will surely provoke. We must
do all we can to prevent yet another gross violation of
international humanitarian law and of fundamental
human rights.

The Holy See reiterates its condemnation in the
strongest terms of all attacks and abuses based on
ethnic, religious, racial or other grounds. Once again, it
wishes to point out that the disappearance of ethnic and
religious minority groups from the Middle East would
not only be a religious tragedy, but a loss of a rich
patrimony that has contributed so much to the societies
to which they belong. That those groups are threatened
with extinction causes unfathomable anguish and pain.
Last month at the United Nations Human Rights Council
in Geneva, 65 countries signed a statement supporting
the human rights of Christians and other communities,
particularly in the Middle East. That statement calls
attention to the fact that the instability and conflict in
the Middle East seriously threaten the very existence
of many religious communities, especially Christians.
It calls on all States to join together and address this
alarming situation.

When we call to mind those who have already lost
their lives or those who have already been driven out
of their homes, and even out of their own countries,
any action would already be coming too late. But from
now on, every action to spare even just one person
from persecution and from all forms of atrocities is not
only timely, but most urgent. Pope Francis calls on the
international community not to remain mute and inert
before such an unacceptable crime and not turn a blind
eye to this. To watch in complicit silence the horrors
of our fellow human beings persecuted, exiled, killed,
burned or beheaded solely because they hold a different
religious creed or they happen to belong to a minority
group can never be an option.

