Mr. Da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): On 6 February 1996 the Security Council held
an open debate on the situation in Angola. We welcomed
that debate all the more because Angola is a friend and
brother with which Guinea-Bissau shares an age-old
cultural and linguistic heritage and with which it
maintains an excellent fraternal relationship. As members
know, the changing course of history has endowed our
two peoples with a common past. In the fifteenth century,
two Portuguese navigators landed on the African
continent: Nuno Tristao arrived in Guinea-Bissau in 1426,
and Diogo Cao in Angola in 1492. Since then, historical
events have forged social and cultural ties between our
two peoples, and have charted for them a common
destiny in space and in time, in the quest for new
horizons.

Five hundred years later, armed struggle broke out
in Angola in 1962 and in Guinea-Bissau in 1963 to gain
the independence and emancipation of our respective
peoples. Thus it was that Guinea-Bissau declared
independence on 24 September 1973 and Angola on 11
November 1975, following the signing of the Alvor
agreement.

More than 20 years after our respective
proclamations of independence, Guinea-Bissau, by a quirk
of fate, is among the members of the Security Council
today, as the Council discusses the situation in Angola,
which is still without peace or tranquillity.

 

I need hardly recall the importance that we attach to
questions concerning Angola or our great interest in all that
relates to them, for on many occasions and in diverse
circumstances Guinea-Bissau has demonstrated its concern
and reaffirmed its readiness to help seek lasting peace in
Angola. It was in that spirit that, from the very outset, we
participated in a number of peacekeeping operations in
Angola.

On 23 July 1997, the Security Council adopted a
presidential statement pursuant to resolution 1118 (1997),
in which it urged the parties concerned, and in particular
UNITA, to abide by their commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol. In conformity with the presidential statement of
23 July, the Council is today reviewing the latest
developments in Angola in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General; we share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in that report. The report clearly indicates
that the peace process in Angola is facing serious
difficulties at a time, three years after the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, when we had hoped that the Angolan
parties, UNITA in particular, would have been able to pool
their efforts to address all pending political and military
issues.

Unfortunately, recent events have made us dubious,
even sceptical, about the future of the Angolan peace
process. We consider that full implementation of the
"Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol by the parties is
a sine qua non for restoring and consolidating lasting peace
in Angola.

We therefore call once more on UNITA to respect
unambiguously the commitments it recently undertook
regarding resumption of the normalization of State
administration, the submission of relevant information on
the strength of the UNITA leader's security guard and of
the "mining police", and the conversion of Radio
VORGAN to a non-partisan station.

Paragraphs 12 to 14 of the report of the Secretary-
General, relating to military aspects, are of grave concern
to the delegation of Guinea-Bissau. We call upon the
parties, in particular UNITA, to demonstrate maximal
restraint and to cooperate fully with the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) to reduce the
tension that persists in a number of provinces. It is
unacceptable to all for MONUA personnel to be subjected
to the kind of harassment we have recently seen.

Any delay in the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol will have negative effects upon the entire Angolan
peace process. In that connection, we reaffirm our
conviction that the consolidation of peace in Angola will
depend upon the good will of all Angolans and upon the
contribution they make to a movement of national
solidarity that can join all actors in perfect synergy.

Much money has been spent on the proper
functioning of the peacekeeping machinery in Angola.
This mission is among the largest to date, which indicates
the magnitude of our responsibility to continue to ensure
that all goes as planned with respect to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. My delegation
considers that shouldering this responsibility will be
effective only if the international community now
mobilizes sufficient financial resources to carry out the
enormous task of national reconstruction that the
Angolans will have to undertake following this process.
We believe that the economic situation in Angola
deserves special attention because it has been sadly
shaped by 30 years of devastating war that dismantled the
entire infrastructure and plunged the country's social and
economic life into disarray.

We appeal urgently to international financial
institutions and to donors to fulfil the pledges they made
at the September 1995 Brussels Round-table Conference,
with a view to consolidating peace and national
reconstruction in Angola.

We voice the hope that President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi will meet in Angola as soon as possible in
order to create the climate of trust that is a necessary, key
requirement for the consolidation of peace in Angola at
this crucial time in its history.

Guinea-Bissau wishes also to pay well deserved
tribute to the endeavours of the Secretary-General, who
since taking office has persevered in this task with the
support of his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, the personnel of MONUA and the troika
countries - all of whom have actively worked together
to resolve the Angolan problem.

Guinea-Bissau will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Security Council, in the hope that its
provisions will help speed up the peace process in Angola
in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the
"Acordos de Paz" and the relevant provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol.

