Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate and to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February.

Looking back on the road we have travelled in the
70 years since the launch of the United Nations, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations have
been a guiding light in the building of a more peaceful
and prosperous international community.

The current global security environment, however,
is a far cry from what it was after the Second World
War. Various challenges of a wide-ranging nature
have evolved quickly. Conflicts are much more
complicated in terms of their causes and forms, as
we see in non-State-actor-related security issues,
intra-State conflicts, transnational violent extremism
and cybersecurity threats, to name but a few.

In the face ofthese diverse challenges, the principles
of the United Nations Charter should continue to guide
our efforts. At the same time, we must recall that
those principles reflect more fundamental values. The
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
such as sovereign equality, territorial integrity and
non-intervention, are not goals per se; they are the tools
that we use to realize our values of preventing war and
protecting humanity.

But in reality, we sometimes witness principles
being invoked for reasons of political convenience.
Future historians looking back at today might take note
of the struggle of the United Nations to overcome such
constraints and remain true to the underlying values of
the Charter. We also need to be wary of another kind
of challenge to the values of the Charter, one that can
come from attempts to disregard the lessons of history.

Peacekeeping operations are a case in point. While
respecting principles such as national sovereignty, the
concept ofpeacekeeping operations is being evolved to
bring peace and protect civilians. We believe that the
Secretary-General's comprehensive review on peace
operations will be another milestone in this regard and
look forward to contributing to building on this review.
Some other important initiatives by the Secretary-
General, such as Human Rights up Front and the open-
door policy, demonstrate the growing nexus between
security and human rights.

Last but not least, our quest for a more responsible
and effective United Nations would not be complete
without joint cooperation in bringing the necessary
reform to the Security Council, the primary tool in our
collective efforts to maintain peace and security.

Such reform should be future-oriented and
membership-driven instead of expanding the exceptional
status introduced to settle a World War 70 years ago.
Our common goal is a more accountable and more
functional Security Council. To achieve this, we have
to reduce the possibilities for inaction and increase
the potential for action. The Republic of Korea will
continue to contribute to this process.

