Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): I would like to
thank the Council for providing my delegation with the
opportunity to contribute to this open debate of the
Council.

At the outset, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Sir, for the very
timely consideration once again of this truly pressing
and burning issue, with the widest participation of the
membership of the United Nations.

My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing
of the Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including on the grave humanitarian tragedy
developing in the West Bank, especially at the Jenin
refugee camp and some other populated areas.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by Ambassador Kumalo, Chairman of the
Coordinating Bureau on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In addition, as a concerned Member of the
United Nations, my delegation would like to make the
following brief comments.

The long-standing Middle East crisis, and
especially the latest Israeli and Palestinian conflict,
constitute a serious threat not only to regional peace
and stability, but equally to the cause of global peace
and justice. Today, it is absolutely clear that continued
use of military force is not only unhelpful, but, on the
contrary, is further aggravating the situation and
hurting the long-term solution of the Middle East
problem. Mongolia reiterates its deepest concern over
the serious deterioration of the situation there and the
continued failure to fully comply with the Security
Council resolutions that have been adopted.

Facing such an emergency situation, the
international community has been seeking to find a
productive and workable solution to end the present
conflict. In the past few weeks, the Council, within its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has extensively
debated this issue and adopted the important
resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002),
as well as the presidential statement of 10 April, all of
which Mongolia fully supports.

In our view, implementation of those resolutions
would not only halt the escalation of violence. It could
lead to conditions for the resumption of negotiations
that would ensure the vision of two long-suffering
peoples living peacefully next to each other within safe
and recognized borders. The new Saudi peace initiative
would allow all States of the region to normalize Arab-
Israeli relations, something which is of primary
importance for regional peace, security, stability,
mutual understanding and development. Mongolia
supports the last week's joint Madrid statement of the
"quartet" and appreciates Secretary of State Colin
Powell's mission to the region and his bilateral
meetings with the parties concerned, which were aimed
at helping to stop the violence and to resume
negotiations.

Immediate, more forceful measures need to be
taken to avoid a repetition of the kind of humanitarian
tragedies that the international community is all too
familiar with. Therefore, in the face of the continued
violence, my delegation welcomes the proposal of the
Secretary-General, made to the Council earlier today:
to establish, under Chapter VII of the Charter, an
international presence on the ground by sending to the
region a United-Nations-approved, impartial
multinational force formed by a coalition of the
willing. That would be a concrete, constructive step
that might help end the spiral of violence and
destruction, monitor the situation on the ground, lead
to the gradual restoration of trust between the two sides
and create an environment in which the parties
concerned can resume the peaceful search for durable
peace and justice on the basis of the various plans and
the resolutions of the Council, all of which are well
known to all. It is to be hoped that members of the
Council will be able to respond expeditiously to the
Secretary-General's proposal.

Allow me in conclusion to reiterate once again
my delegation's hope that the Council's debate will
lead to realistic, concrete measures to arrest the
unfolding catastrophe in the Middle East and to resume
steps aimed at promoting the long-awaited just, lasting
and comprehensive solution in the Middle East.

