The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Costa Rica, India, Ireland, Japan and
South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Heraldo Munoz,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Munoz to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/349, which contains the text of a
letter dated 27 April 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities.

I now give him the floor.


