Allow me to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his informative briefing and express Estonia's continued support for the activities of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and for the work of the Special Representative. We welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia. We welcome the Colombian Government's continued commitment to ensuring the implementation of peace-related programmes. The growing global pandemic of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which has also reached Colombia, threatens to make the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace much more challenging. We support the efforts made by the Government of Colombia to combat the coronavirus pandemic and we welcome the announcement by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional of a unilateral ceasefire as a positive step towards the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire in order to help save lives. We are pleased by the positive steps taken in the implementation of the peace agreement, especially by the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. It is important that the victims be at the centre of efforts. We encourage continuing to move forward with the implementation of the agreement despite the challenging context of COVID-19. We welcome the firm commitment of the vast majority of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo to the peace process. Ensuring a comprehensive transition is important to reintegrate former combatants into society with dignity and to strengthen the foundation for the long- term process. Challenges remain. We stress our concern about the continuation of violence against community leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. According to the latest report of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, killings of women human rights defenders increased by almost 50 per cent in 2019 compared to 2018. We call on the Government of Colombia to reduce impunity and guarantee that all human rights violations are duly investigated and alleged perpetrators prosecuted. To reiterate, we urge the Government to take all necessary measures to stop the tragic killings of social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. The National Commission on Security Guarantees should be convened more regularly in order to fulfil its full role in line with the peace agreement, particularly concerning dismantling the criminal groups behind most of this violence. Lastly, protection measures need to be extended to former combatants outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration, including new areas of collective reintegration. In conclusion, we encourage all parties to continue to cooperate in a constructive spirit. We would like to express Estonia's strong support for the comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement.
