Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Bosnia and Herzegovina for convening today's debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and Deputy Prime Minister Guterres of
Timor-Leste for his insightful comments today. Timor-
Leste itself is a nation that has faced immense
challenges but has demonstrated strong, effective
leadership over its own institution-building process. It
is to be congratulated on its commitment to sharing
that experience with others and on continuing to call
for more effective international support to post-conflict
States, including as Chair of the Group of Seven Plus,
to which Australia is very pleased to provide support.

I also would like to thank the outgoing Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Wittig, for
his contribution to the debate. Australia remains a
strong supporter of developing a more organic
relationship between the Council and the Commission.

Australia's own experience over the past decade
in supporting post-conflict institution-building,
particularly in Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands and
Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, has yielded many
lessons. Perhaps most important, and one that has been
central to the debate today is that national leadership
and ownership are fundamental to success. Assistance
should support national priorities and objectives, and
careful consideration must be given to how assistance
can best foster national capacities and, more
importantly, avoid stifling them.

The process of institution-building - and it is a
process - must be timely, flexible and sustainable.
Planning and implementation need to start as soon as
possible in the project, and also progress at a pace and
in a manner appropriate to local needs. We must avoid
imposing ill-fitting models and ensure that we harness
and strengthen existing capacities as we seek to
develop them further.

It is important to ensure strong coordination
among international actors. We must garner available
expertise in a coherent manner. Australia encourages
opportunities for South-South and triangular
cooperation, and for enhanced cooperation with
regional organizations - something we ourselves have
tried to do, for example, through our leadership of the
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.

Assistance obviously should be extended beyond
capitals to the subnational level, civil society and the
private sector. We need to strengthen the fabric of
stable and prosperous communities through political,
security, service delivery and economic institutions.
We must recognize and promote the role of women,
who must be empowered to contribute to decision-
making and the implementation of institution-building.

Institution-building in any environment is
obviously complex. Institution-building in post-conflict
situations clearly presents even greater challenges.
That is why it is important that we share ideas and best
practices.

The United Nations has a vital role to play in
peacebuilding owing to its unique legitimacy and
comparative advantages. We encourage the Security
Council to consider institution-building when setting
mission mandates, but to do so while also giving
consideration to the role that other actors should play.
It should also continue to mandate integrated United
Nations missions to ensure comprehensive approaches.
We would also encourage better definition of roles and
responsibilities in key peacebuilding sectors within the
United Nations system.

My own country has been pleased to contribute to
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) over
the past year. We believe very clearly that the PBC can
play a stronger role in supporting post-conflict
institution-building, particularly by monitoring progress,
assisting coordination and providing expert guidance to
the Council. The Council should increasingly draw on
the PBC's advisory role. We endorse the comments
made earlier today by Ambassador Grauls of Belgium
on behalf of Brazil, Canada, Jordan and Switzerland in
their respective capacities as Chairs of the PBC's
country-specific configurations.

We also encourage greater coordination between
the United Nations and the World Bank and other
regional development banks, given their influential role
in institution-building.

Obviously, we need to use our resources to
greatest effect. In that regard, we look forward to the
conclusion of the forthcoming review of international
civilian capacities, which we hope will enhance the
United Nations effectiveness in supporting post-
conflict institution-building, including by increasing its
ability to draw on truly relevant expertise in response
to defined needs from the global North and the global
South.

We stand ready to contribute expertise through
the Australian Civilian Corps, which we established in
2009 specifically to provide skilled personnel to
support countries experiencing or emerging from
conflict or natural disasters.

At times, the challenges of institution-building
can obviously seem overwhelming. The international
community must be realistic in its expectations, set
clear objectives and coordinate and sustain support for
institution-building over the long term, regardless of
the challenges; otherwise post-conflict success does
not happen. This work requires patience, but it is
critical, given the centrality of strong national
institutions in delivering robust and sustainable peace.

