Mr. Loncar (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): Madam President,
allow me at the outset to say how pleased I am to be
here in the Security Council today and to assure you
that the Government of the Republic of Serbia studied
with the greatest attention the reports of the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Fausto Pocar, and of its
Chief Prosecutor, Ms. Carla Del Ponte.

As the country continuing the legal personality of
the State union of Serbia and Montenegro, the Republic
of Serbia is making all necessary efforts to contribute
to the realization of the goals of Security Council
resolution 1534 (2004), which defined the completion
strategy for the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
expressed its full readiness and a clear political
commitment to successfully complete its cooperation
with the ICTY. I would like to recall that, thanks to the
tremendous efforts made by the Government of the
Republic of Serbia, since the end of 2004 16 indicted
persons have to date surrendered voluntarily to the
custody of the Tribunal. It is well known that most of
the indictees are high-ranking military and police
officers. It should be noted that the period in which
most of the indicted persons surrendered to the
Tribunal was characterized by understanding and an
atmosphere of partnership and trust, which yields the
best results.

The efforts made so far by the Government of
Serbia towards the completion of its cooperation with
the ICTY are a confirmation of its firm commitment to
continue to fulfil its remaining international
obligations. I would also like to take this opportunity
to inform the Council that all indicted officers who
were in the service of the Republic of Serbia, either in
the army of Serbia and Montenegro or as members of
the police in Serbia, voluntarily surrendered to the
Tribunal, including indicted persons from the
Republika Srpska.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has on
many occasions publicly stated that it is in the interest
of Serbia to complete its cooperation with the ICTY as
soon as possible. As far as the case of General Ratko
Mladic is concerned, the Government of Serbia has
officially stated that the harbouring of Ratko Mladic is
an act of dishonesty that directly threatens the national
and State interests of Serbia.

I would like to emphasize in particular the fact
that the Government of Serbia has done absolutely
everything in its power to find Ratko Mladic and send
him to The Hague. The individuals who helped Ratko
Mladic to hide all these years have been identified. The
competent court sentenced 11 persons suspected of
helping Mladic escape justice to a several-months-long
prison term. Despite these very intensive and
thoroughgoing efforts, it has not been possible to locate
Ratko Mladic. Undoubtedly the political will exists to
establish his whereabouts, which is a matter of a
technical nature.

I would like to assure the Council that the
Government of the Republic of Serbia remains firmly
committed to fully honouring all of its remaining
international obligations in order to complete its
cooperation with the Tribunal. The results achieved so
far are the most telling proof in that respect.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
inform the Council of our readiness fully to cooperate
with the ICTY Prosecutor's Office in the area of access
to documents and archives. The State union of Serbia
and Montenegro and the Republic of Serbia as its
successor have so far received 1,148 requests from the
Prosecutor's Office. The National Council for
Cooperation with the ICTY has positively responded to
an overwhelming number of those requests. Currently,
only a few pending requests sent by the Prosecutor's
Office are considered urgent. New requests from the
Prosecutor's Office to Serbia and Montenegro arrive on
a daily basis and are expeditiously dealt with.

From 15 December 2005 to date, there have been
seven sessions of the National Council; 43 persons
were granted waivers, in line with requests made by
the Prosecutor's Office, and 39 requests by the
Prosecutor's Office for documents were positively
responded to. This involves several thousand pages of
documents.

In early 2006, the Prosecutor's Office sent a
proposal on practical modalities for access to the
archives of the State authorities of the State union of
Serbia and Montenegro, of the Republic of Serbia and
of the Republic of Montenegro, proposing practical
solutions to enable the Prosecutor's Office to
efficiently access the documents of the State authorities
of Serbia and Montenegro.

The proposal was reviewed at the twenty-third
and twenty-fourth sessions of the National Council,
and, after the opinion of the Government of the
Republic of Serbia was obtained, the Council of
Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro on 2 March 2006
accepted the Prosecutor's proposal on the practical
modalities concerning access to the archives of the
State authorities of the State union of Serbia and
Montenegro, of the Republic of Serbia and of the
Republic of Montenegro.

Once the practical details for access had been
harmonized, on 22 May 2006 investigators from the
Prosecutor's Office were granted access to the archives
of the Ministry of the Interior. On 29 May 2006,
Prosecutor's Office investigators were given access to
the archives of the Ministry of Defence and the
archives of the presidency of Serbia. Those activities
are ongoing.

It should be pointed out that in May 2006 a very
important law was adopted in the Assembly of the
State union of Serbia and Montenegro on freezing the
assets of persons indicted by the ICTY who are
fugitives from justice.

At the very beginning of my statement, I pointed
out that the Republic of Serbia is investing all its
efforts to contribute to the achievement of the goals set
in resolution 1534 (2004), in which the completion
strategy for the ICTY was set. In the context of these
efforts, it is important to pay attention to the words of
President Pocar to the effect that the last six months
have arguably been among the most difficult in the
International Tribunal's history. President Pocar's
remark refers in particular to the death in the Detention
Unit of Slobodan Milosevic, former President of the
Republic of Serbia and of the former Republic of
Yugoslavia, whose trial was not brought to a close, as
well as to the death of Milan Babic, who died before
the Second Instance Court reached a decision.

While acknowledging the fact that the reports on
the deaths of these two Serbs indicted for serious war
crimes have not been officially completed, the
Government of Serbia shares the view of the
independent investigation carried out by the State
authorities of the Kingdom of Sweden at the request of
President Pocar that the conditions and treatment of
inmates in the Detention Unit have to be significantly
improved, and that the control of the work of the
Detention Unit has to be more transparent. The
Republic of Serbia regrets that such cases - which
have happened before in the Tribunal's Detention
Unit - depart from the defined goal of the ICTY,
which is the efficient administration of international
justice towards the perpetrators of serious war crimes,
justice for the victims and the creation of conditions
for reconciliation among the peoples caught up in the
brutal civil war in the territory of Yugoslavia.

The Republic of Serbia welcomes the Tribunal's
efforts to make its work more efficient and more just in
order to honour the strict deadlines and conditions set
in the previously mentioned Security Council
resolution. In that sense, the Republic of Serbia
considers that tracking down the remaining indictees is
of crucial importance, as is transferring trials to
national jurisdictions. The trials before the domestic
courts may contribute to the realization of the goals for
which this high United Nations body established the
ICTY in The Hague in 1993.

When tried before a domestic court, an indicted
person is exposed to a strict moral authority, standing
responsible before his fellow nationals, and the court
cannot be labelled as biased. In the same vein, the
domestic court may truly contribute to the realization
of the goal of mutual reconciliation. That is why the
Republic of Serbia once again expresses the readiness
of its judicial authorities - especially the Special
Prosecutor's Office for the Prosecution of the
Perpetrators of War Crimes and the Department for
War Crimes of the Belgrade District Court - to
process and organize trials of the indictees, or to have
them transferred from The Hague.

Despite the fact that past work of the judicial
authorities of the Republic of Serbia has been assessed
as positive by the Tribunal itself - and by many
States, especially some permanent members of the
Security Council - not a single case has been
transferred from The Hague to the Republic of Serbia.
Let me recall that, to date, six cases have been
transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina and two to the
Republic of Croatia. We are convinced that mutual
cooperation and trust may greatly contribute to the
administration of justice.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the firm position
of the Government of Serbia that it will continue to
undertake all measures within our powers to track
down the remaining indicted persons and, if some of
them are hiding in Serbia, to transfer them to The
Hague. The Republic of Serbia is resolved that all
those who have committed war crimes should stand
trial either at the ICTY or in the national courts. The
Government of Serbia will continue to undertake all
available measures to fully honour its international
commitments and bring its cooperation with the ICTY
to a satisfactory close.

