Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would particularly
like to thank Special Representative Moussa for his
statement this morning and for the continued work
of United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) on these issues.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has blighted
the heart of Africa for over 20 years, and it remains a
violent threat to civilians across Central Africa. The
United Kingdom condemns in the strongest terms the
human rights abuses that the LRA continues to commit.
But progress against that scourge is being made.
As Special Representative Moussa has told us this
morning, the concerted efforts of the affected countries,
the African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners, have substantially weakened the LRA. A
permanent eradication of the threat that they pose is
closer now, we believe, than ever before, but that goal
can be achieved only through sustained regional and
international focus.

Progress is being made in implementing the United
Nations regional strategy to address the threat and
reduce the impact of the activities of the LRA. However,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
must continue to use its coordination role to deliver
across the entire strategy. The regional strategy and the
African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative against
the LRA are both essential in ending the LRA threat.
It is important that Special Representative Moussa
and African Union Special Envoy for the Lord's
Resistance Army Madeira continue to encourage the
full implementation of both. All regional Governments
should fulfil their commitments under the Regional
Cooperation Initiative and take measures to ensure that
the Lord's Resistance Army is not able to operate with
impunity in their territory.

The United Kingdom has provided UNICEF with
funding to protect women and children in LRA-affected
areas, but we believe more funding is needed. We urge
members of the international community to contribute
resources to ensure that the protection of civilians is at
the forefront of counter-LRA efforts. Countries affected
by the LRA would benefit from establishing standard
operating procedures for the reception and handover of
LRA women and children to civilian women and child-
protection actors.

Cross-border cooperation among the United
Nations Missions in the LRA-affected countries
must be enhanced. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan should develop and
adopt common standard operating procedures and
swift information-sharing so they can anticipate LRA
movements and imminent threats better than they can
currently do.

The United Nations, the AU and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) must
continue to work together to maintain a clear picture of
the LRA's current capabilities and areas of operation.
More also needs to be done to investigate the LRA's
possible sources of financing, including their alleged
involvement in elephant poaching and related illicit
smuggling. Cutting offthe LRA's last remaining source
of finance could be the thread that finally unravels that
deplorable group.

I also want to discuss UNOCA's broader role in the
region. UNOCA is playing an important coordinating
role between the Economic Community of Central
African States and the African Union to tackle the
crisis in the Central African Republic and further work
on maritime security, as Special Representative Moussa
has set out for us. The United Kingdom wants to ensure
clarity on the UNOCA's achievements. UNOCA must
continue to add real value to regional and subregional
efforts at a time when resources are tight and demands
on the United Nations system are so high. In particular,
criminality in the Gulf of Guinea threatens economic
development, peace and security in the region and has
a wider impact on international trade, energy, security
and stability.

UNOCA ably supported ECCAS, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Commission
of the Gulf of Guinea on the Heads of State summit on
maritime security held in Yaounde in June, as we have
heard. The code of conduct concerning the repression
of piracy and the agreement among regional States to
work together to tackle maritime crime is an important
step forward. UNOCA should continue to work with the
regional economic communities and regional States as
they work to implement the code.

The main focus of UNOCA's work should continue to
be on reducing the threat posed by the Lord's Resistance
Army. For too long, the LRA has stifled the potential
for progress and development in Central Africa. The
United Kingdom therefore stands by and will continue
to support the work of Special Representative Moussa
and Ambassador Madeira and their offices in bringing
an end to the LRA threat once and for all.

