Mr. Mahamat (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for having organized this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations and for inviting me to participate in this
discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General; His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic; and Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Armed conflicts currently raging throughout the
world reveal the suffering of civilians, particularly
women, children and the vulnerable. Despite the
obligations arising under the Geneva Conventions
and the various relevant resolutions of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians, the gap between
the responsibilities outlined in those texts and realities
on the ground remains wide as civilians remain the
deliberate targets of violence and brutal attacks in all
theatres of war.

Since the adoption ofresolution 1265 (1999) 17 years
ago, the United Nations has engaged in massive efforts
to strengthen its role in the protection of civilians, as
evidenced by the resolutions and presidential statements
adopted thereafter to that end. Nonetheless, recent
crises around the world unfortunately demonstrate
that the strengthening of the normative framework for
protecting civilians does not often translate into specific
action on the ground. United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as their name indicates, are primarily
called on to help build peace and security. However,
we note that for over a decade now, these missions have
been deployed where there has been no peace to keep,
insecurity reigns and civilians are increasingly exposed
to violence.

Protecting civilians in such an environment
requires a more proactive commitment, ranging from
the mere presence of Blue Helmets to their involvement
in prevention, mobility and active intervention with
the option, in extreme cases, to use force to physically
protect civilians from imminent danger. In Mali, for
instance, the extremely difficult environment and the
asymmetric threat not only complicate the mission
to protect civilians, but expose the Blue Helmets
to daily attacks by improvised explosive device,
claiming numerous casualties among them. Seventy-
one Chadian soldiers have lost their lives in Mali. How
can peacekeepers who cannot even protect themselves
fulfil their mission to protect civilians? We must find
a solution to this paradoxical solution by providing
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali with all the means
necessary, including not only an appropriate mandate
but rules of engagement that are fully commensurate
with the situation on the ground.
Despite the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, violence against civilians in those countries
sometimes descends to unimaginable depths. The
entire world has borne witness to the atrocities carried
out in full impunity against civilians in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, not to mention the
horrendous massacres carried out by Boko Haram in
northern Nigeria, the scope and cruelty of which have
transcended all bounds in the city of Damasak.

The presence ofpeacekeeping operations in some of
those countries has certainly helped prevent the worst,
but it has not prevented all Violence against civilians,
who must sometimes band together to defending
themselves. In the face of the massacres committed by
Boko Haram and the terrorist threat, the armed forces of
the members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission have
begun protecting millions of civilians, even without a
United Nations mandate. Even as I speak here, some
2,000 Chadian soldiers have crossed our national border
to assist the Nigerian army in protecting thousands of
civilian Victims of Boko Haram's barbarity. Moreover,
Chad - surrounded by crises in every direction and
host to 750,000 refugees - has for a number of years
sacrificed and continues to sacrifice in order to protect
those refugees by deploying an integrated security
unit, whose work has been commended by the entire
international community.

With or without peacekeeping operations, the
protection of civilians must be an absolute priority
everywhere and at all times. Efforts to that end must be
supported by the international community as a whole.
Given the increasingly complex environments and the
asymmetrical threats faced by peacekeeping missions,
the Security Council ought to consider the limitations of
classical operations and carry out an ongoing review of
its peacekeeping to adapt them to the specific changing
scenarios and by a better integration of the protection
of civilians in its dimensions.

While bearing in mind the primary responsibility of
the parties to the conflict to protect civilians, we should
also emphasize the importance of the contributions of
regional and subregional organizations, local actors
and non-governmental organizations in strengthening
protection for civilians. In that regard, the effectiveness

of peacekeeping operations in protecting civilians also
includes developing closer interaction and coordination
of protection activities among those stakeholders, in
particular regional and subregional organizations,
which have a comparative advantage with regard to
proximity to a situation, knowledge of the terrain and
ease of communication with local populations. As
part of their interaction, we should also highlight the
need for missions to demonstrate independence and
impartiality, so as to safeguard their credibility in
all instances. In that connection, the United Nations
should avoid that the concept of the protection of
civilians serve as a pretext forjustifying regime change,
military intervention or any other action contrary to the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

The effectiveness of protection-of-civilians mandates
also requires an exemplary partnership among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries in order to arrive at a
common understanding of the challenges faced in
providing protection. Moreover, we must ensure that
the Blue Helmets who are deployed possess, among
other things, a high degree of ability, adequate training
and suitable equipment and a mastery of the language
of the host country, without which they will not be
able to effectively carry out their mandate to protect
civilians. Likewise, it is important to draw lessons
learned and best practices from mission experience in
order to identify areas where there are shortcomings
to overcome that may lend themselves to improvement.
Also, effectively prosecuting the perpetrators of
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law will serve as an element of deterrence
for parties to a conflict. Such an undertaking should not
exempt Blue Helmets who may be guilty of the same
types of violations.

Effectively ensuring the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations also involves taking into
account various elements of a mission's mandate.
Mission mandates must therefore be systematically be
adapted to the changing circumstances, while there is
also a need for the necessary political and logistical
support and strong commitment on the part of troop-
and police-contributing countries on the ground.
Also of importance are the issues of training and
accountability, synergy of effort and the sharing of
information among all the relevant parties, including
local and regional actors.

In conclusion, we hope that today's debate marks a
new phase in the commitment of the States Members of
the United Nations to fully assume their responsibilities
on the protection of civilians and to reiterate their
resolute determination no longer to tolerate unjustified
attacks against civilians under any pretext.

