Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I would particularly
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and
High Commissioner Guterres for their very helpful
briefings to the Council.

Last Sunday, 22 February, marked the first
anniversary of resolution 2139 (2014), whereby the
Council took action to reduce the suffering of the
Syrian people. And yet, as our briefers just confirmed
so graphically, one year later, much of resolution 2139
(2014) is being ignored by the parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian Government. Indiscriminate
attacks, including with barrel bombs, have continued
with devastating impact on civilians on the ground.
Around 212,000 people remain besieged, administrative
hurdles impede humanitarian access and Government
security personnel remove surgical and medical
supplies from humanitarian convoys, as Assistant
Secretary-General Kang told us. Serious violations
and abuses of international humanitarian and human-
rights law continue, with direct impact on humanitarian
assistance and access. All that is unacceptable, and the
Security Council must do more to ensure that its own
resolution is implemented. We cannot stand by as if we
were spectators to this unfolding tragedy.

The first step must be to retain the attention of
the international community, through the Council, on
the full range of humanitarian issues that arise under
resolution 2139 (2014); to break the silence, as Jordan
urged us. With the Syrian crisis now in its fifth year, it
has become business as usual, to quote the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/124). While complacency and
fatigue are risks, they are simply unacceptable when
facing a humanitarian crisis on this scale.

Monthly briefings on the humanitarian situation
in Syria help to keep the crisis on the Security
Council's radar. But New Zealand believes we need to
reinvigorate those proceedings by making them more
thematic in scope. As a specific step, we propose that
going forward, the monthly briefers should focus on
certain specific humanitarian challenges. As a starting
point, they could be the five challenges identified by
the Secretary-General in his report - ensuring access
for medical and surgical supplies; lifting the siege on
212,000 people; ending the practice of using denial of
key services as a weapon of war; rebuilding Syria's
education system and addressing the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, including through the use of
barrel bombs. We also support having briefings from
other relevant speakers, in addition to the Office of
Humanitarian Affairs, such as this month's report from
High Commissioner Guterres. We would welcome
continuing that initiative in future months by inviting
other speakers.

As both Assistant Secretary-General Kang and
High Commissioner Guterres emphasized, funding for
the humanitarian response inside Syria has not kept
pace with the scale of the needs. New Zealand therefore
welcomes next month's international humanitarian
pledging conference for Syria in Kuwait, to be hosted
by the Amir of Kuwait. We commend the generosity
and commitment of neighbouring countries, notably
Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Egypt, in assisting the
more than 3.8 million people who have had to flee Syria.
Government services and local community services are
under immense strain in all of those countries.

Last month, New Zealand's Foreign Minister
visited Jordan, where he saw first-hand the impact on
host communities and the plight of those who have
had to flee, particularly children. Following his visit,
New Zealand announced a NZ$1 million contribution
to deliver basic education and skills training to more
than 1,800 vulnerable young people in Jordan. Overall,
New Zealand is extremely concerned both about the
more than 2.1 million children inside Syria itself who
are currently either out of school or attending classes
irregularly, and about the long-term impact of the
collapse of the school system. From previously having
a school attendance rate of almost 100 per cent, Syria
now has the second lowest in the world. About 670,000
children are being deprived of education following the
closing of schools by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, or Daesh. We know that disaffected, ill-educated
youth are more likely to join radical groups and to take
up arms, with obvious destabilizing consequences for
the whole region. There are also worrying reports from
recent evacuees from Ghouta of minors being forcibly
recruited by non-State armed groups.

In neighbouring countries, almost 2 million Syrian
children are living as refugees, placing a heavy burden
on local education systems. Almost half of all Syrian
children living as refugees remained out of school
through the 2013-2014 school year. Having lost their
schools, having lost their homes, these children are
now also losing their chance to build a future. The High
Commissioner described them as the "lost generation".

Let me come back to Security Council resolution
2139 (2013). One year after its adoption, the Council
must now take a leadership role and address the very
serious gaps in the implementation of that resolution.
New Zealand commits to working with other Council
members, stakeholder countries and those on the
ground to determine what we can do to ensure that the
Council's own resolution - our express wishes - are
fully implemented with no "ifs", "buts", "maybes",
prevarication or bureaucratic blockages. We commit
to finding ways to maintain pressure on the parties
concerned to abide by international law. In parallel, we
will continue to support the Council's renewed focus
on the political track, without which there can be no
resolution of this humanitarian crisis.

New Zealand welcomes initiatives to give
momentum to a political solution based on the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), including the recent
meetings in Cairo and Moscow, and we commend those
who initiated those processes. Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura's freeze proposal is also important. Modest
in scope, it still offers the best short-term chance to
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. We now
look for action, not words, from the Syrian Government
and the other parties to the conflict, in working with the
Special Envoy to implement that proposal. The Council
should stand ready to show the leadership urged on us
by Assistant Secretary-General Kang, and to act if that
action is not forthcoming.

