The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join the
Security Council today for this important and timely
debate on the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
the Great Lakes region. I thank Angola, as President
of the Security Council and Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, for organizing
this meeting.

Significant advances have been made over the past
16 years since the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was first
deployed to that country. These include the withdrawal
of foreign armed forces, the reunification of the country,
the establishment of a transitional Government, the
organization of two national elections, and the signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
in February 2013.
The past several years have also seen some
progress in stabilizing the security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and the successful
conclusion of the Kampala dialogue in December 2013
have helped to improve the region's security situation.
Nonetheless, major peace and security challenges persist
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
and require our continued attention. Sustained efforts
are required to neutralize all negative forces, including
by finding sustainable solutions for former combatants
and extending State authority into areas reclaimed
from armed groups. In this regard, I have welcomed the
decision of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to resume joint military planning and
operations with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to eliminate negative forces, notably the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the Allied
Democratic Forces.

I urge participants in today's debate to agree
on tangible recommendations to accelerate the
disarmament and demobilization of all armed groups
still operating in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I also call on the members of the Security
Council to reach out to relevant actors and to support
our efforts to fully implement the Nairobi Declarations,
which ended the M-23 insurgency. There is no doubt that
eliminating negative forces will be more challenging
if these forces continue to harvest and trade in natural
resources from the region.

The illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources is worth billions of dollars. It is urgent
that these economic lifelines be cut. I am therefore
encouraged that my Special Envoy is working with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
to help improve the governance of natural resources.
I call on the Governments of the Great Lakes region
to formulate sound strategies to turn their States'
natural resources into powerful drivers of human and
economic development.

I am worried about continued violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts of
the region. In addition to the Violence perpetrated by the
many armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the past months have seen
a sharp increase in intercommunal and inter-ethnic
conflicts. This is an alarming trend that requires our
urgent attention. Attending to the needs of the most
vulnerable people in conflict-affected areas is a key
component of the United Nations strategy to promote
sustainable peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone,
7.5 million people are currently in need of humanitarian
assistance, including more than 1.5 million internally
displaced persons. Due to the threat posed by armed
groups, population displacements and human rights
violations occur on a daily basis in some parts of the
country. As the Democratic Republic of the Congo
enters a delicate electoral period, we are concerned
about the risk of election-related violence, which. could
worsen an already grave humanitarian situation.

The rapidly deteriorating security situation in
Burundi is also of concern. More than 1 million people,
including some 25,000 internally displaced persons,
are in need of assistance in Burundi. In addition,
some 250,000 Burundian refugees are being hosted
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. I commend Member
States for their hospitality in receiving refugees from
neighbouring countries. I also remind Member States
of their international and moral obligation to protect
and provide asylum to refugees. Under no circumstance
should States use refugees for political purposes.
It is also our shared responsibility to prevent the
militarization of refugee settlements, which must retain
their civilian character.

(Spoke in French)

I am also very concerned about the continuing
impasse in organizing the upcoming elections in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. During my recent visit
to the country, in February, I urged all stakeholders to
resolve their differences through dialogue and to create
conditions conducive to the holding of timely and
credible elections, in accordance with the Constitution.
In the past, political crises in the Great Lakes region
have led to widespread violence and serious security
problems. We must prevent such a scenario from
materializing. I ask the Security Council and the leaders
of the region to help us to maintain political stability in
the Democratic Republic of Congo by quickly finding a
solution to the current impasse.

(spoke in English)

While we often focus on political, security and
humanitarian issues as we discuss conflict prevention
and resolution, we should remind ourselves that
peace and security go hand-in-hand with human
and economic development. That is why I am very
pleased with the success of the Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference held in Kinshasa in
February. The Conference gave Great Lakes leaders a
rare opportunity to engage with private investors and
business leaders from around the world to discuss how
to improve the business and investment climate in the
region. I am particularly pleased with the Conference's
recommendation that private investors should support
business ventures that promote livelihoods for women
and youth, with a special emphasis on capacity-building
and skills-development.

Finally, today's meeting marks the official launch
of the United Nations Regional Strategic Framework,
which seeks to better align the work of the United
Nations in the Great Lakes region with the objectives of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
Strategic Framework has six pillars, namely, sustainable
natural-resource management, economic integration,
cross-border trade and food nutrition security, mobility,
youth and adolescents, gender and sexual and gender-
based violence, and justice and conflict prevention.
Progress in implementing the strategic framework will
greatly contribute to sustainable peace and development
in the region. I call on the Security Council, the States
of the Great Lakes region and the donor community to
endorse the strategic framework and extend their full
support to its implementation.

(spoke in French)

Let us work together to bring stability, dignity and
opportunities for the future for the peoples of the Great
Lakes region.

