Mrs. Garcia Guiza (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General and other high-level representatives for their
participation in this debate. We welcome the fact that
the Security Council is addressing the topic of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
as non-proliferation is one of the gravest risks to
international peace and security.

Mexico reaffirms its historical and staunch
commitment to nuclear disarmament and the
non-proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction, as well
as its commitment to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) as a crucial mechanism for coordinating
the efforts of the international community to take
on the challenge of enforcing the non-proliferation
regime, and particularly for impeding non-State actors
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction or their
components through the trafficking of related materials
or dual-use goods. Mexico hopes that the comprehensive
review of thr resolution will lead to commitments that
strengthen the non-proliferation regime and will yield a
work plan in that field.

Security in the twenty-first century should be
approached from a multidimensional perspective
that includes the consideration of public health,
biotechnology, epidemiology, monitoring and early
warning, the regulation of dual-use materials, and
intergovernmental technological and scientific
development and cooperation. Mexico considers
it vital that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction establish synergies with other
relevant bodies and mechanisms so as to pave the way
for its full and effective implementation and bring
about sustainable public policies, which would prevent
that technology and type of weapons from falling into
the hands of unauthorized actors.

The Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction and
its monitoring authority, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, have managed to lead
the international community to a historic landmark-we
are on the brink of physically eliminating all chemical
weapons worldwide. Nevertheless, despite the success
of those efforts, we have seen with great concern the
use of toxic chemical substances against the civilian
population of Syria in the context of the armed conflict
in that country. Those facts and other recent events
in Libya underscore that the best way to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction will harm no one is to
pursue their total ban and elimination.

We need greater coordination and regulation of
States parties and relevant international organizations
in order to prevent non-State actors from gaining
access to biological materials and toxic chemical
substances. We must also promote a prevention and
response approach in case those actors try to utilize
chemical substances or pathogens as weapons of mass
destruction. The ability of terrorist groups to evolve
and adapt to the efforts of the international community
to contain and counteract their impact on peace and
security, including in the area of non-proliferation, has
heightened the importance of efficiently addressing the
underlying causes of terrorism.

Accordingly, 10 years after the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we
have seen how it has become a genuine instrument for
coordinating cooperative efforts by the international
community to prevent and combat this scourge in
a holistic way. However, we must at last adopt a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
which would have a positive impact on efforts to
meet the challenges posed by non-State actors to the
non-proliferation regime.

Efforts to strengthen national capacities against the
risks associated with weapons ofmass destruction must
be also be addressed in a holistic manner and without
overlooking the need to strengthen nuclear security.
Mexico therefore reaffirms that nuclear safety can be
understood only within the broad context of indivisible
security for all, which must be enshrined in the full
implementation of existing international commitments
on nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
safeguarding of the inalienable right of States to
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

