Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his briefing.

The massive earthquake that hit Haiti in January
this year dealt a heavy blow to the common efforts
being made by Haiti, the United Nations and the
broader international community. It is heartening to
see, however, that eight months after the earthquake,
the security situation in Haiti has remained generally
calm, recovery and reconstruction efforts continue to
be carried out smoothly, and the national Government
is gradually coming back to life. In addition,
presidential and parliamentary elections will be held in
November.

We note with concern that the country is still
facing multiple challenges and difficulties in the areas
of security, national reconstruction and economic and
social development. What is worth noting is the slow
progress in restoring national capabilities, especially in
the police, judicial and correctional systems. Indeed, in
some areas, crime is on the rise.

The period between now, through the November
elections to the transfer of power next year will be a
rather sensitive time for Haiti. We hope that the
Government of Haiti, with the support of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and regional organizations, will accelerate its
strengthening of police and judicial capacities and
remove hidden dangers in order to ensure that free,
credible and fair elections can be held in a secure and
stable environment.
Protracted abject poverty and the lack of
economic and social progress are the root causes of
Haiti's difficulty in achieving long-term security. The
key to achieving long-term security in Haiti lies in
making substantial progress in reconstruction and
attaining the Millennium Development Goals.

In China, we say that one man's distress is a
rallying cry for others to come to help. China, together
with the international community, has provided
assistance to the Government and the people of Haiti in
the aftermath of the earthquake. Reconstruction is a
long-term, complex and arduous process. Therefore,
the reconstruction plan needs the continued support
and assistance of the international community.
Accordingly, we expect the parties to fully respect the
need for the Government and people of Haiti to take
ownership of and bear the primary responsibility for
the process and to take fully into account the country's
current conditions and requirements.

The United Nations should, on the basis of the
distribution of responsibilities, bring into full play the
roles of the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and the United Nations Development
Programme; strengthen its cooperation with relevant
regional organizations; and, at the appropriate time,
consider the involvement of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.

Over the past six years, MINUSTAH has played
an important role in the maintenance of stability in
Haiti. We appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Mulet,
MINUSTAH and the rest of the United Nations
personnel in very difficult conditions. While the
situation in that country remains fragile, we support the
continued presence of MINUSTAH. In turn,
MINUSTAH should focus on fulfilling its mandate,
which is the maintenance of security in Haiti, so as to
ensure that its limited resources will achieve maximum
results.

We agree with the ideas outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/446) and hope that, in
connection with the security situation following the
transfer of power next year, the Secretariat and
MINUSTAH will carry out an assessment of the
strength, composition, resources and requirements of
the Mission.

