Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I wouldl like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing.

The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned
by the worsening security environment in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. With tensions already
high following the conflict in Gaza last summer,
both Israel and Palestine must do everything in their
power to de-escalate the situation in order to avoid
another confrontation, which will only lead to further
destruction on both sides. In that regard, we strongly
oppose the recent announcements of settlement
expansion plans, including one on Monday to construct
an additional 1,000 apartments in East Jerusalem. Such
actions are not only dangerous at this volatile time, but
also undermine the long-term prospects for building
peace in the region through the two-State solution.
We are also concerned that settlement expansion will
further deepen Israel's international isolation, inflame
radicalism and ultimately be counterproductive to
Israel's legitimate long-term security concerns.

We appeal to both sides to refrain from all unilateral
measures, especially those that could prejudge the final
status of Jerusalem. We condemn recent attacks on
civilians in Jerusalem and the West Bank, including the
reprehensible targeting ofIsraelis on 22 October, which
resulted in the tragic death of an infant and injured
eight others, as well as the hit-and-run car attack on
two Palestinian children on 19 October, whicht killed
a five-year-old and severely injured an eight-year-old.

We are also deeply troubled by the increased
incursions at key holy sites in East Jerusalem. We appeal
for calm and reiterate that maintaining the status quo at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and ensuring access to all places
of worships for all faiths are of paramount importance.
We commend Jordan's administerial role in that regard,
and appeal to the Israeli authorities to do their utmost
to prevent provocations by extremist groups and ease
limitations on the entrance of worshippers moving
forward.

Finally, we call on both sides to return to the
negotiating table and redouble their efforts towards
establishing the necessary conditions for a future
accord. To break the vicious cycle of violence, we hope
that negotiations will resume soon and that they will
eventually lead to the realization of the vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace,
with secure and recognized borders, as called for by the
Security Council.

