Mr. Okamura (Japan): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this meeting. I would also like to convey
my gratitude to the Secretary-General; to Ms. Liu,
International President of Medecins Sans Frontieres;
and Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings and, of
course, their appeal to the Security Council.

Even in times of peace and stability, medical
facilities and medical care save lives every day, but in
the context of armed conflict, access to medical care
becomes an immediate life-or-death concern for all
innocent civilians caught in the grips of war. Hospitals
represent the last, and sometimes only, hope for survival
for those that are injured. Attacks on medical facilities
threaten or even dash that hope.

We believe that attacks on medical facilities
for strategic purposes are malicious, beyond human
decency and absolutely unacceptable. In service of
that belief, Japan took the lead, along with Egypt, New
Zealand, Spain and Uruguay, in drafting and ensuring
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) in May. The
adoption of the resolution by consensus demonstrated
the firm commitment of the Security Council to
ensuring that medical facilities are fully protected and
secured, even under combat.

However, as briefed by the representatives of
Medecins Sans Frontieres and the International
Committee of the Red Cross earlier, attacks against
medical facilities have continued in those conflict
areas even after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
The lives of medical workers remain under threat, and
their deaths continue. We share our grief and anger
with Medecins Sans Frontieres and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We would like to express
our profound respect for the courage and devotion of all
medical staff working in the field during the conflict.

We thank those who helped draft the Secretary-
General's recommendations to the Council, detailing
various practical measures. Japan would like to once
again urge all parties to armed conflict to take concrete
actions in furtherance of the recommendations before
us and the briefings delivered today, in order to protect
medical care in armed conflict. I fully agree with the
Ambassador of Malaysia in believing that one of the
main factors behind the failure to prevent the recurrence
of attacks against medical facilities is the lack of
accountability. When such attacks are conducted, the
facts of the attack are difficult to ascertain, different
sides of the conflict cast blame on each other, no
thorough investigation is ever conducted and therefore,
ultimately, accountability cannot be enforced.

In that context, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the Secretary-General's recommendations.
Recommendation 11 indicates that Member States

"should develop protocols and processes to ensure
full, prompt, impartial, independent and effective
investigations into allegations of serious violations
of international law relating to the protection of
medical care in armed conflict." (S/2016/722, annex, para. 28)

The recommendation goes on to state that

"[w]hen Member States fail to carry out such
investigations, the Security Council should consider
establishing international fact-finding missions
or commissions of inquiry, or have recourse to
the International Humanitarian Fact Finding
Commission established pursuant to Article 90 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions."
(ibid., para. 30)

It further reads that

"Member States and parties to armed conflicts
should provide support to, and facilitate the work
of, fact-finding missions" (ibid., para. 31).

Here, Japan emphasizes the important role of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
in ensuring the objective and fair application of
international humanitarian law. Hence, Japan has
contributed and will continue to contribute to that body,
both financially and with personnel. Here, I would like
to underline that the Security Council should play an
active role in fact-finding and ensuring accountability
in that regard. Japan is determined to collaborate with
the United Nations and all the parties concerned on
that issue.

