Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): First, I want to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his very thorough briefing on the difficult humanitarian situation in Syria. We remain gravely concerned about the developments in the north-west of Syria. The military operations carried out by the Syrian army, and supported by the Russian Federation, have unleashed a mass exodus. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), over past two months more than 350,000 people have left their homes in the southern parts of Idlib. Most of them are now heading towards the Turkish border. Turkey is already the largest host country for Syrian refugees, with over 3.6 million Syrians residing there. As the Syrian Government consistently violates former ceasefire and de-escalation agreements, the pressure of displaced people will only grow further. Taking these concerns into account, Estonia joins the humanitarian co-penholders Belgium and Germany in their calls for the establishment of an emergency humanitarian ceasefire in Idlib and across Syria. The fight against terrorism should not lead to the violation of human rights and dignity. Regarding the situation in the north-east of Syria, initial reporting by OCHA indicates that there are serious concerns about the potential lack of health supplies in the area after the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing earlier this month. Besides scarce aid, one of the immediate results of the closure of Al-Yarubiyah has been that the humanitarian organizations are increasingly looking to work through local partner networks. Essentially, if earlier the United Nations and Security Council had had more control over the movement of aid and goods into Syria, that is now decreasing. The help will always find the most direct way to those in need, the only difference being that we now have less information about it. The challenges of the north-east are most visible in Al-Hol camp, where recent winter floods have caused substantial damage. Close to 3,000 tents had to be replaced in the aftermath of these heavy rains in recent months. Worsening living conditions have led to new tensions. These are highlighted by the fact, that in January alone, two murders and three attempts to kidnap children have been reported in Al-Hol camp. Similarissues apply to the southern parts of Syria, despite getting less media attention. Waves of assassinations and kidnappings threaten renewed violence in the area. Finally, the solution to the Syrian crisis has already been well-articulated in the resolution 2254 (2015). A nationwide ceasefire, followed by a meaningful political process, would enable the international community to engage with the Syrian authorities and bring on the reconstruction of the country full swing. Unfortunately, that road map to peace remains neglected by those in power in Damascus.
