Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
to join previous speakers in conveying to you,
Mr. President, my delegation's appreciation for placing
the question of conflict prevention on the Security
Council's agenda. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his important statement. The
recommendations he made earlier this morning deserve
our very close attention.

The end of bloc confrontation at the beginning of
1990s, the aspiration of peoples for greater freedom
and democracy and the emergence of nationalism
across continents have, in recent years, given rise to
grave crises which have resulted in the forced
displacement of entire peoples, the targeting of
civilians and massacres of all sorts. As the Secretary-
General said, at least 5 million people have lost their
lives in recent years.
In keeping with its universal vocation, the United
Nations has done and is doing its utmost to find
adequate solutions to these crises wherever they arise.
It has considerably strengthened its capacity to tackle
such challenges. But this mission should not be
confined solely to conflict settlement. The Secretariat
now needs to consider ways of bolstering its conflict-
prevention capacities and to give prevention all the
attention it deserves. We are very pleased, therefore, to
note that a focal point for conflict prevention issues has
been designated.

My delegation would like to confine itself to
making three brief comments.

First, with regard to support for conflict-
prevention mechanisms and regional cooperation, a
number of initiatives have been taken in recent years at
the regional and subregional levels. Although these
conflict-prevention mechanisms have not all been
successful, they nonetheless deserve support. At the
subregional level, in the West African region, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has set up a peace and mediation
committee with responsibility for examining matters
affecting States, and it is contributing to peacekeeping
through the Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). Cooperation
between ECOMOG and the United Nations has
contributed not only to re-establishing peace in Liberia
but to preventing the resurgence of conflict in that
country.

Furthermore, the satisfactory initiative of the
Group of Eight, as reflected in the Miyazaki document,
is very welcome. We look forward to its effective
implementation.

My delegation would like to stress that there is a
need for the United Nations to support the efforts of the
various regions in the context of the conflict-
prevention mechanisms that they have established. In
this regard, the Security Council should provide all
necessary support.

Secondly, with regard to the proliferation of
weapons and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, it is incontestable that the illicit and
unbridled accumulation of small arms and light
weapons is fuelling and worsening conflicts. The West
African subregion, which saw the danger of this
phenomenon, established a moratorium on light
weapons after my country launched an initiative to
collect such arms. In this context, it set up a
community assistance programme for security and
development, whose principal mission is to reduce the
number of light weapons and control their
proliferation.

Measures to collect light weapons and reduce
their numbers, to strengthen controls over the legal
trade of such weapons and to promote transparency in
this area should be undertaken at the regional level in
order to prevent conflict. Furthermore, the link
between the illegal accumulation of small arms and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources has been
clearly demonstrated. Recent events are an eloquent
testimony to this fact. The entire international
community, especially those that profit from this trade,
needs to work together to take appropriate measures to
ensure that the trade in natural resources, particularly
diamonds, is ethical.

Thirdly, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration at the end of a conflict must be accorded
priority if we are to ensure that hostilities do not break
out again. In his report on the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the Secretary-General
highlighted a number of key elements necessary for the
success of that process and proposed measures that the
United Nations could take for the more effective
support of future efforts. In this context, we share the
view that the bases for an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme must be
established in the peace agreement that brings a
conflict to an end.

It is also important to ensure adequate technical
and financial support for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the participation of financial
institutions in the process under way and supports the
increasingly constructive attitude of the private sector.

Lastly, the question of child soldiers must be
taken into account at all levels in long-term
programmes, including economic development
programmes. The success of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration activities is vital if we
are to avoid further conflict.

Economic development remains the surest
foundation for lasting peace and security. Conflict
prevention therefore needs to be underpinned by
balanced development assistance programmes
involving the active participation of civil society.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
advocate the emergence of a genuine culture of
prevention based on preventive diplomacy, respect for
international law and democratic norms and the
reduction of poverty. My delegation fully supports the
presidential statement that will be issued later.

