Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are grateful to Sweden
for convening this open debate and for its leadership of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We are very glad to see you, Mr. Prime Minister, as
you preside over this debate, which demonstrates the
significance you attach to this important topic. We are
grateful to all the briefers for sharing their thoughts,
which we have found very useful. We very much
appreciate the contribution of all three.

In our consideration of the various reports of
the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
around the world at the level of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, as well as our
discussions on various conflicts here in the Council,
so many instances of continued grave violations of
international humanitarian law committed by parties
to armed conflicts continue to be extremely alarming.
In that regard, we welcome the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2427 (2018) and we thank Sweden for its
efforts as the penholder in facilitating the negotiation
of the draft text. We hope that the resolution will make
a substantive contribution to the protection of children
in armed conflict. The large number of sponsors is a
testament to the level of concern of Member States about
the fate of children in conflicts and to the very effective
way Sweden has been discharging its obligation.
However, it is very clear that much more needs to
be done to ensure the protection of children affected by
armed conflict and prevent the grave violations against
them, which have reached very worrying levels. In that
context, we believe that there are a few considerations
that should be taken into account to help ensure the
protection of children in the context of armed conflict.

First, since the adoption of the groundbreaking
resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict,
there has been significant progress in the protection
and rehabilitation of children affected by armed
conflict in different parts ofthe world. The engagement
with parties to an armed conflict, the signing of action
plans with countries concerned and close follow-up of
the situation by the Security Council and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict continue to play a critical role
in further strengthening the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts. On the other hand,
reports of continued grave violations against children
in the context of armed conflict require all of us to
further strengthen those efforts. In other words, more
enhanced international cooperation is becoming vital
to protecting children facing this tragedy.

Second, it is important to recognize the proximity
and strategic advantage of regional organizations in
addressing the impact of armed conflict on children.
It is therefore important for the United Nations, in
particular the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and other actors, such as
UNICEF, to further strengthen their cooperation and
coordination with regional organizations, such as the
African Union, including in their engagement with
parties to an armed conflict and the implementation of
action plans.

Third, as much as possible, peace processes and
ceasefire agreements should ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict, in particular by ensuring
access to humanitarian assistance as well as formal
separation and reintegration of children recruited by
parties to an armed conflict. It is therefore necessary
to encourage relevant parties to take into account the
needs of children affected by armed conflict in the
negotiation of ceasefire agreements and other peace
processes.

Fourth, peace operations continue to have a
significant role in the protection of civilians, including
children affected by armed conflicts. In that regard,
ensuring that peace operations have the capabilities and
force enablers necessary for the full implementation of
their mandates on the protection of civilians is of the
utmost importance. Furthermore, the deployment of
child protection advisers in peace operations is also
critical and should receive the utmost attention, as it
contributes to mainstreaming child protection and
leading monitoring, reporting and prevention efforts in
peace operations.

Fifth, Ethiopia recognizes the importance of strict
compliance with international humanitarian law by
all parties to an armed conflict in relation to their
means and methods of combat, including by protecting
civilians from the effects of hostilities. However, it is
a matter of concern to note the increased incidents of
grave violations against children in different parts of
the world and the protection challenges associated with
serious disregard for international humanitarian law by
parties to an armed conflict. That is why it is important
that the Council follow this matter and urge parties to
an armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.

Sixth, it is necessary to ensure that children
formerly associated with armed groups or forces not
be deprived of their liberty and are treated primarily
as victims Furthermore, it is vital to strengthen our
investment in rehabilitation and reintegration projects
to comprehensively address the needs of children
formerly associated with armed forces or groups
as soon as possible, in full respect of their rights as
children and as victims.

Seventh, Ethiopia recognizes the role of the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism in tracking
the six grave violations against children in armed
conflict, including in the context of peace operations.
We also note some of the concerns that have been
raised in relation to the Mechanism, particularly in the
procedures related to reporting of alleged violations in
the context of peace operations. There is need to take
concrete steps to address those concerns, particularly
by aligning the reporting standards with those under
peacekeeping operations.

Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating the
firm commitment of Ethiopia to ensure the protection
of children in an armed conflict. We will continue to
work with all the relevant actors in that regard

