Mr. Rupel: Let me first thank you, Mr. President,
and the rest of the Security Council for inviting me and
giving me this opportunity to speak before this
distinguished group of representatives.

It is a pleasure and an honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

This is not the happiest of times to be the OSCE
Chairman-in-Office. As the Council undoubtedly
knows, the OSCE still does not have a budget for 2005,
some 10 weeks into the year. Nor does it have an
agreement on a new scale of contributions. There is a
lively high-level discussion going on about the future
of the organization. All this comes during a year when

the OSCE is supposed to be celebrating its contribution
to promoting security and cooperation in Europe,
reflecting on the 30 years since the signing of the
Helsinki Final Act and the 15 years since the Charter
of Paris set out a vision for a Europe whole and free.

One might ask whether it is true that the OSCE is
in crisis. Let me answer that it is certainly in transition.
Some participating States have complained of double
standards and have called for a review of how the
OSCE monitors elections. There was no agreement on
extending the mandate of the border monitoring
operation in Georgia. There was no consensus among
Foreign Ministers of OSCE States at the conclusion of
the last two Ministerial Council meetings.

In response to the calls for reform, I have
appointed a panel of eminent persons to make
recommendations on strengthening the effectiveness of
the OSCE. That will be followed by high-level
consultations and, subsequently, a Ministerial Council
meeting in Ljubljana. There is a working group on
reform that is looking at, among other things, updating
the organization's rules of procedure. A decision has
been taken that clarifies and strengthens the mandate of
the Secretary General, and I am currently in the
process of finding a successor to Jan Kubis, whose
term expires this June. We are also looking at how to
improve the effectiveness of our field operations.

I see this process as an opportunity rather than as
a crisis. I believe that challenges to the OSCE's
relevance and strategic direction have shaken some
States out of their complacency and brought into the
open some issues that had been festering below the
surface for some time. If there are strong differences of
opinion about security in Europe, the OSCE is the ideal
place to talk about them. So let us talk. And if things
need to be improved, let us do it.

One of the OSCE's strengths is its ability to adapt
to the challenges of the day. Changes in the European
Union (EU), NATO and the Council of Europe reflect a
Europe in transition, partly as a result of the
enlargement of the European Union and NATO but also
because of the need to cope with new threats to
security. Organizations must remain dynamic to remain
relevant, and the OSCE is no exception. So, I welcome
the reform debate and initiatives to further strengthen
the organization, not to kill it.

As the Council knows, the OSCE is a regional
arrangement in the sense of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. We therefore read with interest the
report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change (A/59/565) and hope for bold decisions,
such as to make greater use of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter and further to enhance United
Nations cooperation with regional organizations.

The OSCE went through a similar process two
years ago, when it drew up the Strategy to Address
Threats to Security and Stability in the Twenty-first
Century, which was adopted at the Maastricht
Ministerial Council meeting in December 2003. I
believe that, by implementing the Strategy, the OSCE
can take on some of the burden of the United Nations
in the OSCE area. As the United Nations Panel noted,
the Security Council's ability to more proactively
prevent and respond to threats could be strengthened
by making fuller and more productive use of regional
organizations. The OSCE is well positioned and well
equipped to participate.

The Panel also concluded that the United Nations
should take fuller advantage of the early warning
mechanisms of regional organizations and draw on
their normative standards to guide preventive efforts.
The OSCE has a well earned reputation in early
warning, early action and conflict prevention. There
are areas, such as preventing inter-ethnic conflict and
regulating the marking and tracing and the brokering
and transfer of small arms and light weapons, where
our standards are even more progressive than those of
the United Nations. The OSCE also coordinates
assistance on the ratification and implementation of the
12 United Nations anti-terrorism conventions and
protocols. And we work with the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe on addressing
economic and environmental threats to security. We
complement each other well in our work, and there is
scope for further cooperation.

In Kosovo, the OSCE is an integral part of the
pillar structure of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). That is a
good example of how a regional organization can
complement the efforts and enhance the capability of
the United Nations. In this important year for Kosovo,
I believe that the OSCE can play a key role in the
standards review process and can remain part of the
international presence in Kosovo. The OSCE has
considerable expertise in national minority issues,
policing and the building of effective public
institutions, which are so essential for the peaceful and
sustainable development of Kosovo. The OSCE's
potential should be used to the fullest.

The case of Kosovo highlights an issue that we
need to come to terms with in the international
community, including in the OSCE area, namely,
reconciling the desire for self-determination with the
preservation of the territorial integrity of States. In
parts of Moldova and Georgia and in the disputed
territory of Nagorny Karabakh, the OSCE is actively
trying to resolve conflicts that are sometimes referred
to as frozen, but which have recently started to thaw.

In those cases the OSCE has clear mandates and
is one of the lead agencies on the ground. There may
be other examples of disputed autonomy where the
OSCE could play a role.

I am encouraged by the slow, but steady, progress
being made in the dialogue between Armenia and
Azerbaijan.

I hope that the recent changes in Ukraine and the
new post-election environment in Moldova will make
possible a new attempt to resolve the Transdniestrian
conflict.

In addition, the OSCE is working with the parties
concerned to reduce tensions in South Ossetia,
Georgia, and to promote demilitarization, build
confidence and achieve a lasting settlement.

In all of those cases, I urge the members of the
Security Council - in particular those who are
mediators in those conflicts or who have influence over
the parties - to support the OSCE's efforts. It is
difficult for inter-State organizations to deal with non-
State actors, even if, in some cases, they are the de
facto authorities. There are times when the leverage of
powerful States - including permanent members of
the Council - can be crucial. I urge the Council to
exert that pressure in the context of OSCE mediation
efforts to help resolve those long-standing conflicts.

Another important issue in the Panel's report is
the clash between the concept of the responsibility to
protect and the principle of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of a State. That is a matter on which the
OSCE is very clear and progressive, at least when it
comes to human rights. In 1991, at a meeting in
Moscow, OSCE States agreed that

"the commitments undertaken in the field of the
human dimension of the [OSCE] are matters of
direct and legitimate concern to all participating
States and do not belong exclusively to the
internal affairs of the State concerned".

That legitimate intrusiveness is the basis on
which participating States hold each other accountable
for the implementation of their commonly agreed
commitments. It is the justification for having OSCE
missions in participating States helping host States to
deal with specific challenges. And it is the reason the
OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities and
the Representative on Freedom of the Media can,
respectively, go to any State throughout the OSCE
region to prevent inter-ethnic conflict and ensure
respect for free media. I believe that that type of deep
engagement is unprecedented; it needs to be preserved,
all the while ensuring that this is done in a cooperative
spirit.

The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change highlighted threats to
international security from which no State or region of
the world is immune. In our interconnected world,
security is indivisible. Multifaceted challenges require
a multilateral response that takes a comprehensive
view of security. The OSCE is doing its part. As I have
already noted, it is a leader in early warning and
conflict prevention. It has a limited, but focused, role
in conflict settlement. And it has a proven track record
in post-conflict rehabilitation and peacebuilding. It is
an inclusive and truly regional organization that
provides a valuable forum for dialogue on security
issues of common concern. It has unique institutions
with strong mandates that deal with national
minorities, freedom of the media, democratic
institutions and human rights. The OSCE is the lead
election-monitoring body in Europe, and its reports are
seen as an important quality-control stamp. The 18
OSCE field missions represent an invaluable on-the-
ground presence and offer concrete assistance to
participating States. And the OSCE has quickly
developed capabilities to deal with new threats to
security, including in anti-trafficking, counter-
terrorism, border management and policing.

When addressing new threats to security, the
bottom line for the OSCE is to uphold the rule of law.
For example, we have to be sure that efforts to combat
terrorism are not carried out in a way that violates
human rights, that border guards learn sophisticated
techniques and a proper code of conduct and that

human trafficking is tackled by effective investigation,
law enforcement and prosecution.

Policing is a classic example. In many tense
situations, one does not need Blue Helmets; one needs
effective policing. Good policing has a vital role to
play in the prevention of conflict, the preservation of
social stability during political crises and the post-
conflict rehabilitation of societies. Without effective
law enforcement, respect for the rule of law and the
operation of institutions responsible for upholding it,
there can be little likelihood of social, political or
economic development in any State. The OSCE runs
police development units in the western Balkans. A
police assistance programme has been launched in
Kyrgyzstan, and others are in preparation in Armenia,
Azerbaijan and Georgia. No other international
organization currently possesses the potential to
strengthen long-term law enforcement capacity and
institution-building in the OSCE region in the States
most susceptible to crime, corruption and human rights
violations.

I have highlighted policing because it is a good
example of the type of programmatic, hands-on work
that the OSCE does in addressing the needs of States
and communities across Europe. States should not
underestimate or take for granted the quiet, but useful,
work that organizations like the OSCE do to make the
world a safer place. We can do things better, and I
welcome the reform debate on both sides. But in the
process we should not lose sight of the good things that
we do, the important commitments that have been
agreed to by consensus and the merits of effective
multilateralism.

Europe is not yet as whole and free as was
envisioned at the OSCE's Paris summit in 1990. There
is plenty of work to do, and we must remain vigilant
that the progress that has been achieved in the past few
years is not reversed. I am confident that the reform
process will make even more people and, in particular,
States aware - or remind them - of the usefulness of
the OSCE and spur them to invest the necessary
resources and political will to make it even more
effective.

The OSCE should also be more open to sharing
its experience and expertise with others. In 2004 the
OSCE, at the request of the Afghan authorities, sent an
election support team to Afghanistan. Earlier this year
the OSCE sent a needs assessment team to the
Palestinian territories to see what help the OSCE could
offer on elections. Mongolia is now an OSCE Partner
for Cooperation. The Council will thus note that the
OSCE has an impact beyond its vast region, and that it
could develop such relations even further.

The world has changed dramatically in the past
30 years since a group of 35 heads of State came
together at Helsinki on 1 August 1975 to sign a Final
Act devoted to improving and intensifying their
relations and to contributing to peace, security, justice,
cooperation and rapprochement in Europe. The OSCE
has also changed dramatically in that time, evolving
from a conference into a highly sophisticated
organization. But the challenge remains the same for
the States that participate in the OSCE: to promote
better relations among themselves and to ensure
conditions in which their people can live in true and
lasting peace. We must continue to work together
towards that goal.

