Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Sweden voted in
favour ofresolution 2414 (2018), adopted today, because
of our support for the Secretary-General's ambition to
relaunch the United Nations-led political process and
our firm belief that that must be our main priority.
Indeed, the aim of reaching ajust, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara,
remains as valid as ever. It is now time to turn that
vision into a reality.

First, the resolution provides an opportunity
to break the political deadlock that has plagued the
question of Western Sahara for a decade. For many
years, the Security Council has recognized that the
status quo is not acceptable. However, there has been
a lack of political will to move the political process
forward. We believe that the resolution signals that
business as usual is no longer an option.

Secondly, the resolution expresses its full support
for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which plays a key
role in a challenging environment. It also supports
the efforts of President Horst Kohler, Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. Since
his appointment, he has impressed all of us with his
dedication, knowledge and experience.

Thirdly, the resolution makes clear that women and
youth must be fully included in the political process
and that they have a meaningful role to play.

Fourth, the resolution calls on the neighbouring
States to make important contributions to the political
process and to increase their engagement in the
negotiation process.

Fifthly, the resolution encourages the parties to
cooperate further with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. It also highlights
the plight of the Sahrawi refugees, the insufficient
funding and the risks associated with the reduction of
food assistance. The resolution urges the international
community to provide more funding to that end.

Finally, the resolution strongly encourages the
enhanced cooperation of the parties with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, including visits to the region, as none have
taken place since 2015.

That having been said, there are new elements in
the resolution with regard to actions taken by the parties
that we find lack sufficient balance and do not fully
reflect the developments on the ground. The situation
must be properly re-evaluated after six months, when
the Security Council will again review the mandate
of MINURSO.

On procedure, as members know, we think that
the Council is always stronger when it speaks with
one voice. We seek unity not for the sake of unity but
because our decisions will resonate more strongly.
If the concerns of some delegations, which were of a
relatively minor character, had been considered, we
may well have reached consensus on the resolution.

Over the past couple of weeks, we have witnessed
an escalation of rhetoric and tensions on the ground.
It is crucial that the parties show restraint and avoid
taking provocative actions. We urge them to de-escalate
and to redirect their attention towards advancing the
political process.

We need to resolve one of the most long-standing
disputes on the agenda of the United Nations and to
address the plight of the people of Western Sahara
once and for all. The vision of reaching a just, lasting
and mutually acceptable political solution, which will
provide for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara, now seems a little more within reach.

Despite the shortcomings of the text, we believe
that the resolution is a step in the right direction
towards a resumed negotiation process. Without any
doubt, much hard work remains, in particular for the
parties, which will face tough choices ahead. In order
to advance the political process, the parties need to
renew their commitment in a spirit of realism and
compromise. They now have a window of six months
to resume negotiations without preconditions and
in good faith. We hope that they will shoulder that
important responsibility.

Today we have sent a clear signal that the Council's
patience cannot last forever and that appropriate
conclusions must be drawn in the case of an absence
of progress. In that regard, we note that all possible
solutions must be kept on the table, including the
holding of a free and fair referendum.

