Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for thie month of June and to express my delegation's
satisfaction at the great skill and professionalism
with which you have steered the work of the Council
this month. I would also like to thank you for having
given me this opportunity to take the floor before the
Council during this meeting, dedicated to the adoption
of resolution 2360 (2017), which renews the sanctions
regime for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I should also like to express once again to the
Council the gratitude of the Congolese Government and
people for the efforts of the United Nations with a view
to safeguarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of my country, and to provide for and guarantee its
peace and stability.

My delegation takes note of the Council's adoption
of the resolution that renews the mandate of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo until
1 August 2018.cMy delegation takes this opportunity
to thank the Group of Experts, which continues to
dedicate itself to the cause of the country, and extends
its encouragement and sympathy in honouring the
memory of two of their colleagues who tragically lost
their lives in our country. As the High Commissioner
for Human Rights said yesterday at the thirty-fifth
session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the
Government of my country is determined to ensuring
that light be shed on these heinous murders and to
ensuring that the perpetrators be held to account.

With respect to resolution 2360 (2017) just
adopted, I would like to revisit some aspects that, in my
delegation's opinion, deserve some comment.

Generally speaking, my delegation believes that,
insofar as the Group of Experts is due to present its
report in two months, the resolution could have been
limited to extending the Group's mandate to two months
in order to allow it to finalize its report. In our view,
the report could have served in principle as a basis for
the drafting of the resolution. In so doing we could
have avoided the adoption of a plethora of resolutions
that, at first blush, are unwarranted in the present case.
Council members will agree that adopting a resolution
in March, a second one in June and a third in August
or September is not an approach that would facilitate
their implementation.

Furthermore, we believe that political issues,
such those related to the 31 December 2016 political
agreement and to the elections, which are already duly
reflected in the resolution adopted in March (resolution 2348 (2017)), need not have been referred to in a
resolution of the Sanctions Committee. My delegation
has already lamented this situation, which was the
subject of its note verbale of 20 June 2016, which was
conveyed to various member States of the Council
at the time. However, important security issues that
require an urgent response, such as the South Sudanese
combatants, have been cast aside.

Turning to the sanctions regime, my delegation
believes that resolution 2360 (2017) spells out no
measure that could stabilize the situation with regard
to the plundering of natural resources being exported
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo through
bordering countries. The same holds true for weapons
and munitions trafficking. Council members will agree
with us that armed groups do not sell the products of
their looting to so-called little people, that is, people
without resources. We believe that, in order to put an
end to this situation, sanctions must be imposed against
multinational companies. They are well known and
supply these criminals with weapons. Sanctions should
also target transit and host countries of transit for these
blood minerals.

In view of the fact that resolution 2360 (2017) refers
to the situation in the Kasais region, my delegation
deems it wise to inform the Council that the Government
has undertaken joint investigations to shed light on the
events that took place in the there. Contrary to what
I have heard here, the Government of my country
has never refused to cooperate with investigations
relating to events in the Kasais. It is working jointly
with the United Nations through the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office. In that regard, one
should note the adoption last month of a road map and
the establishment of a task force in which MONUSCO
and the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office
are members. The Government also hopes to receive
technical and logistical assistance from the two
United Nations agencies for the joint investigations.
Furthermore, it expects from them frank collaboration
devoid of any political interference.
With specific reference to mass graves, reports of
their existence were made here at Headquarters, mainly
by MONUSCO. We deplore the contrast between the
speed with which MONUSCO spreads rumours and the
slow pace of informing the international community
when those rumours turn out to be groundless. My
delegation would flag as proof the recent cases of
reported mass graves that were dismissed by our Human
Rights Minister in Geneva. It is confounding to note
that MONUSCO up until now has failed to announce
the results of the joint MONUSCO and military justice
representatives' visits on the ground.

Indeed, in a number of these alleged mass graves,
what these joint missions found was something other
than what was expected, namely, a l2-calibre hunting
weapon in one, a motorcycle in another, two decapitated
bodies in a third and a body in a fourth. And today it
is the Congolese military judiciary that has begun to
insist that MONUSCO show the other mass graves for
them to pursue their joint work.

With respect to the judicial proceedings on the
death of the two experts, as we mentioned before, an
investigation was initiated by the Congolese military
judiciary, with MONUSCO and the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office both lending support. The
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation has also
become involved at the request of the Government of
the United States of America. The Government of my
country is open and willing to follow suit ifthe Swedish
Government issues a request to that end.

Since 5 June 2017, the trial of these murders
has been under way in Kananga, in Central Kasai.
MONUSCO and the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office havc bccn attending every day, as have
all other non-governmental organizations that wish
to do so. To date, nine suspects, four of whom are in
the grim video showing the savage murder of the two
experts, have been arrested and are currently being
tried. The military judiciary in my country is counting
on the assistance of MONUSCO, which states that it
has information about areas where fugitives are hiding
in order to help it arrest and try these criminals.

I would be rcmiss it'I were to conclude without
once again reassuring the Council of my country's
determination to carry out these investigations to the
very end, in a transparent way, so as to punish, as we

mentioned, the guilty parties.

The meeting ruse at 3.35 p.m.
