Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a great
pleasure, Sir, to see you preside over the Council's
meeting this morning. At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Konuzin on his assumption
of the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and to convey to him our best wishes in the
discharge of his important task. We thank him in
particular for having upheld the principle of
transparency during his first weeks in that position, and
we are thankful for his intention to continue regularly
to brief interested Member States on the work of the
Committee.

Our congratulations also go to Ambassador
Ruperez in his capacity as the new Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) Executive
Directorate. We are confident that Ambassador
Ruperez will provide the new, enhanced structure with
the necessary leadership, and we pledge our full
support in that respect. We look forward to receiving
the forthcoming organizational plan for the CTC
Executive Directorate, and we hope that the Committee
will soon be in a position to move on from the
transitional arrangements to the new structure, in order
to deal with the challenges lying ahead.
We continue to believe that the CTC's greatest
strength lies in the field of the coordination of
technical assistance, thereby complementing the
substantial efforts of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, based in Vienna. As the Committee
is making preparations and arrangements for a first
State visit, it is important to underline the consensual
nature of such technical assistance, as well as the need
for a balanced approach integrating human rights
concerns. While assessing the assistance needs of
States and advising them on necessary action, the CTC
and its experts should always be aware, and also
actively raise awareness of, the fact that, in the fight
against terrorism, respect for human rights and the rule
of law is not an impediment to its success, but a
necessary precondition.

It is thus crucial that, in the upcoming recruitment
process within the Executive Directorate, due
consideration be given to any relevant human rights
experience of future staff members. We also hope that
the new arrangements will include an institutionalized
liaison with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in line with
resolution 1535 (2004).

In recent months, the Council has stepped up its
efforts to deal with the activities of non-State actors
that are determined and have the capability to threaten
international peace and security. The strengthening of
the CTC through the establishment of its new
Executive Directorate, including a strong increase in
expert capacity; the strengthening of the sanctions
regime against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, in resolution
1526 (2004); and the adoption of new measures on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the
hands of non-State actors, in resolution 1540 (2004),
bear witness to the renewed commitment of Member
States to prevent indiscriminate and terrorist attacks
against their populations.

Those efforts, however, need to be accompanied
by improved coordination between the Committees and
expert bodies involved, in order to use the available
resources in the most efficient manner possible and not
to overburden the administrative resources of Member
States. Such synergetic effects are especially pertinent
between the CTC and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban, as both Committees have
developed outstanding capacity and expertise over the
last two years.

The consideration of States' reports remains an
important pillar of the CTC's work. Liechtenstein is
one of the 40-odd countries which have already
submitted their fourth report to the Committee. We are
thus aware of the considerable burden that increasing
reporting requirements place on Member States and on
small States in particular. While we encourage the
Council and its various sub-organs to take such
restraints into account, especially in the adoption of
new reporting requirements, States themselves can also
take measures to render reporting on interrelated topics
more efficient.

The Liechtenstein Government recently adopted a
basic document on facts and figures covering
Liechtenstein's political, legal, economic and social
characteristics, as well as the general framework of
international cooperation within which Liechtenstein
operates in countering terrorism, crime and money-
laundering. Such a basic core document can serve as a
point of reference for various reporting requirements
and thus considerably alleviate the burden placed on
administrations.

Finally, let me once again express Liechtenstein's
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and to cooperation with the Council,
the CTC and other relevant United Nations bodies in
this field.

