Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to thank
you, Madam President, for putting this very important
issue on the Council's agenda today. I want to thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful words.
I also want to thank Mr. Prendergast. I was very
interested in what he had to say about the three primary
issues that need to be addressed, about how sanctions
need to be extended to networks and about system
change. As the Council considers some of the issues
before it, I hope we will be able to follow some of his
prescriptions and debate how we can more productively
tackle corruption.

Corruption is pervasive. We agree with those who
spoken so far that it causes and exacerbates conflict.
But even more importantly, it is a major obstacle
to economic growth and poverty alleviation. It is a
subterranean current that perniciously undercuts efforts
at peace, reconciliation and community rebuilding, and
in many cases it causes those efforts to collapse.

From my own experience in Kabul, I know what it
does to the willingness of individuals to go along with
Governments trying to do the right thing when they see
lower-level officials trying to shake them down for the
most basic human services. Losses from corruption total
some $1 trillion dollars a year. Corruption holds back
economic development, it undermines the provision of
public services and it stokes grievances and, ultimately,
conflict. Kofi Annan, in 2003, called it an "insidious
plague" (A/58/PV50, p. 12).

The links between conflict and corruption are well
established. We heard some examples of that today. In
Syria, we have seen how a corrupt Government can
generate grievances that lead to discontent and then
to violence and then to conflict. In the Balkans, much
ethnic tension has been fuelled by leaders not living up
to their responsibilities. Studies of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Iraq, Nigeria
and Afghanistan show how, once a conflict begins, it
creates even more opportunities for bribery and other
corrupt practices. That, in turn, undermines the rule
of law, which fuels further conflict. Terrorist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham or

Al-Qaida, take advantage of corruption both to fund
their operations and to attract recruits and promote
their ideology.

No country is immune from corruption, and I
include my own country. The fight against corruption
therefore needs to begin in our capitals. I would like
to highlight three steps that the United Kingdom has
taken recently to strengthen our own defences. In 2017,
we passed the Criminal Finances Act, which establishes
new anti-corruption tools, such as unexplained wealth
orders. This year, we announced that we would establish
a public register listing the beneficial ownership
of overseas companies, including in our overseas
territories. That will help ensure that the United
Kingdom is not used as a refuge by corrupt leaders,
businessmen and officials. We have also established
the National Economic Crime Centre, hosted by our
National Crime Agency to task, and coordinate our
overall law enforcement response.

But in today's interconnected world, as we have
heard, it is vital that there be a properly coordinated
international response. We are a very strong supporter
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
and I would like to take this opportunity to urge all
the countries that have not ratified the Convention to
do so because it provides an excellent international
framework to guide collective efforts. Fifteen years after
its adoption by the General Assembly (resolution 58/4),
we need to ensure that we maintain our momentum and
focus on implementation and that the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly all ensure that their efforts in that regard are
mutually reinforcing.

In 2016, we hosted an anti-corruption summit in
London in the hope of stepping up global action. One
of the most important outcomes of the summit, we
believe, was the establishment of the International
Anti-Corruption Coordination Centre. It brings together
specialist law-enforcement officers from six countries
to trace the assets and individuals involved in cases of
grand corruption.

Asset recovery is a critical part of efforts to
tackle corruption and a fundamental principle of the
Convention against Corruption. In 2017, we co-hosted
the first Global Forum on Asset Recovery with the
United States, the World Bank and UNODC. The Forum
helped to move forward arrangements for returning
stolen assets of more than $300 million to Nigeria. The
Convention, in chapter VI, highlights the importance
of technical assistance and information exchange. The
United Kingdom is proud to be working in partnership
with several countries to share best practices and develop
capacities. In Nigeria, we provide technical assistance
and equipment to key agencies fighting international
and domestic financial and economic crime, and we
work to raise public awareness of corruption.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom will continue
to support a concerted international response to end
impunity for those engaged in corruption, to recover
stolen assets and to empower citizens to stand up to
and report corruption. That, in turn, will help prevent
and resolve conflict. The United Nations has a crucial
role to play in that response. We hope that all Member
States will work together in order to get the better of
corrupt leaders, businessmen and officials and ensure
that there is no safe haven.

