The Secretary-General: I am pleased to attend
this meeting on Somalia and to have this opportunity to
share with the Security Council my perspectives on the
situation based on recent developments and on my own
visit to Somalia last Friday.

I travelled to the region from Durban. As the
Council discussed climate change in July (see S/PV.6587), let me say very quickly that leaders in
Durban showed once again that multilateral
negotiations on climate change can deliver. We agreed
on a clear target and timeline for reaching a legally
binding deal; a recommitment to the Kyoto Protocol;
and significant advances on technology and financing,
including the Green Climate Fund. Now we must
implement those decisions and keep the Durban spirit
of cooperation and progress alive.

Since I took office, Somalia has been a priority. A
few years ago, people tended to think of Somalia only
as a place of famine or bloodshed. Often, when I spoke
about Somalia, people wanted to change the subject; I
wanted to change the way we saw Somalia. We finally
face a moment of fresh opportunities, and we must
seize it. That is why the President of General Assembly
and I travelled together to Mogadishu on 9 December.
That was the first visit by a United Nations Secretary-
General in more than 18 years and, of course, the first
2

time ever in the history of the Organization that the
President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General travelled together to Somalia. That my visit
was even possible is a sign of improved security and
the investment that the United Nations has made in
supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).

All city districts are now effectively under the
control of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG),
with the support of AMISOM. I congratulated the
brave TFG and AMISOM. soldiers and extended my
condolences to the families of the fallen soldiers and to
the Governments of Somalia, Burundi and Uganda.

The AMISOM. Force Commander, Major General
Fred Mugashi of Uganda, explained the difficult
circumstances they faced and the need for adequate
military assets to fight an asymmetric terrorist war. In
an urban environment, we must secure gains and
extend them beyond Mogadishu. That requires
AMISOM. to deploy at its full strength of 12,000
troops. It also demands the necessary force enablers,
including air assets, such as helicopters, and military
engineering capabilities.

During my visit, I announced that the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) would
relocate to Mogadishu in January 2012. That will begin
with my Special Representative, Mr. Mahiga, and his
core team and expand gradually as more resources
become available. I also asked the United Nations
country team to work more closely with UNPOS to
support the TFG's efforts in governance, recovery,
development and capacity-building. For all of that to
be possible, we must expedite arrangements for
protecting United Nations and AMISOM. civilian
personnel. I also renew my appeal for supporting the
United Nations recovery and stabilization plan.

In Mogadishu, we were welcomed by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, Prime Minister Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali, Speaker Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden and
other leaders. They thanked the United Nations and
urged that continued assistance be provided.

The leadership has heeded the Security Council's
call to work together. Nonetheless, despite some
progress, important deadlines have been missed. I
asked the leadership to intensify its efforts to
implement the road map. I made clear the fact that the
transition must end in August 2012. In particular, I
urged them to accelerate constitutional and
11-63462
parliamentary reforms, which require not financial
resources, but political will.

I echoed the Council's statement that continued
international assistance rests on continued reform. I
encouraged them to build trust by ensuring
accountability and transparency. I warmly welcomed
the active engagement of civil society and of the
Somali diaspora. President Sharif assured me of his
Government's commitment to a broadly inclusive
implementation of the road map. He cited the
upcoming meeting on the constitution-making process
as an important step.

Beyond Mogadishu, the Islamist insurgents in
Somalia are retreating under mounting pressure from
Government forces and their militia allies, backed by
Kenyan and Ethiopian forces. This represents a unique
opportunity to help stabilize the country at large.

The United Nations is helping the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to develop coherent military planning in the country.
We must ensure that the military strategy is aligned
with political objectives. As more territory is liberated,
the TFG must strengthen its outreach to the local
population and form new regional entities in line with
the Transitional Federal Charter.

On the military front, we must not exclude the
incorporation of new forces and the expansion of
AMISOM. We are undertaking a joint assessment on
the ground and will revert to the Council with a
proposal. In the meantime, I echo African Union and
AMISOM. troop contributors and ask the Council to
reconsider the financial and logistical arrangements for
supporting AMISOM. operations in the next phase.

We must also boost our efforts to safeguard
civilians and the safety of the relief supply route. I
have urged the Government of Kenya, AMISOM. and
the TFG to uphold the rights of civilians, refugees and
Somali asylum-seekers.

Prior to my visit, I travelled to Kenya and met
with President Mwai Kibaki in Nairobi. I expressed my
11-63462

gratitude for his leadership and asked for his continued
generosity to and support for those fleeing Somalia. I
also visited the Dadaab refugee complex in Kenya. It
now hosts almost half a million Somali refugees,
including more than 190,000 people who have fled
famine and insecurity in the past year. I met one family
that had lost two children during their hard journey. I
was deeply moved and saddened by their suffering. I
assured all parties of our strong commitment to ending
the transition so that these refugees can return home
and rebuild their lives.

Generous donor contributions and concerted
relief efforts have saved hundreds of thousands of
lives. Parts of southern Somalia have been lifted out of
famine. However, millions are still in crisis. To add to
the suffering, on 28 November Al-Shabaab occupied
the compounds of 16 organizations operating in areas
under its control in south-central Somalia. I condemn
those actions and once again call on all parties to
immediately allow unimpeded humanitarian access and
to refrain from actions which threaten the safety of
Somalis and those assisting them.

Recent developments and our work in Somalia
are detailed in the report before the Council
(S/2011/759). I renew my thanks to my Special
Representative, Mr. Mahiga, and to all our colleagues
and partners who serve in such difficult and dangerous
circumstances. I look forward to attending the high-
level meeting on Somalia that Prime Minister Cameron
of the United Kingdom intends to organize in London
early next year.

This is a crucial moment for the international
community. We must seize this moment for the sake of
the people of Somalia and the stability of the region.

