Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate. We would like to thank
Ms. Hannelore Hoppe of the Office for Disarmament
Affairs for her introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/258).

We are glad to note that the issue of small arms
has received full attention from the Security Council.
Several open debates have been held and a number of
presidential statements adopted. The Security Council
has always stressed the importance of addressing this
problem as it reviews such issues as the protection of
civilians, women and children in armed conflict. This
emphasis has played an important role in effectively
reducing illicit trafficking of small arms and enhancing
regional peace and stability.

China supports the Security Council's continued
important role on the small arms issue, in accordance
with its mandate. In addressing this issue, the Security
Council should coordinate with other United Nations
bodies so as to complement and promote the work of
all actors.

The excessive accumulation and illicit trafficking
of small arms have exacerbated conflicts in many
countries and regions, disrupted peace processes and
post-conflict reconstruction and abetted terrorism, drug
trafficking and other criminal activities, thus causing
negative political, economic and social impact.

The issue of small arms has drawn increasing
attention from the international community. In recent
years, the international community has made many
efforts and achieved some progress in seeking
solutions. The Firearms Protocol, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects were
both concluded in 2001. They have provided a legal
and policy basis for addressing this problem. Since
then, international efforts to combat the illicit trade in
small arms have intensified, as evidenced by the
successful Biennial Meetings, the timely conclusion of
the International Instrument on marking and tracing
small arms and light weapons and the report of the
Group of Governmental Experts on illicit brokering in
small arms and light weapons (see A/62/l63).

Although no final document was adopted at the
2006 United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of
Action, the Programme of Action still provides
important guidance for international endeavour to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Parties concerned have also made continued
efforts to promote comprehensive implementation of
the Programme of Action.

The third Biennial Meeting on small arms and
light weapons will be held in July this year in New
York. The meeting will review the implementation of
the Programme of Action at the international, regional
and national levels and that of the International
Instrument on marking and tracing illicit small arms
and light weapons. This represents an important
opportunity for the parties concerned to share
experiences and promote comprehensive
implementation of the Programme of Action. We look
forward to a successful outcome of the meeting.

The Chinese Government has all along attached
great importance to combating illicit trafficking of
small arms. We have taken an active part in
international endeavours in this field. In recent years,
China has adopted a series of specific measures in the
areas of domestic legislation, law enforcement and
capacity- and institution-building. We have earnestly
implemented the Programme of Action.

At the same time, we have actively participated in
international exchanges and cooperation by holding
international seminars, providing assistance, within our
capabilities, to countries and regions concerned and
maintaining regular operational contacts with the
relevant departments of other countries and
international organizations.

China is of the view that comprehensive and
effective implementation of the Programme of Action
and other relevant international instruments,
strengthened capacity-building of countries in the areas
in question and continued promotion of multilateral
processes for combating the illicit trade in small arms
are of great significance in maintaining regional
stability, promoting economic development and
building a harmonious world of lasting peace.

China will continue to increase dialogue and
cooperation with parties concerned and will work for
the early eradication of the scourge of the illicit trade
in small arms.

