Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome Mr. Adnan Terzic,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to thank them for their briefings on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That wounded country left behind the scourge of
war a decade ago, and has now gotten back on its feet.
There have recently been positive developments in the
country, most notably the transfer to the State of all
defence responsibilities, the reform of the intelligence
services, the formation of the Directorate Police
Restructuring Implementation and the establishment of
the rule of law. That has led to the conclusion of the
work of the Anti-Crime and Corruption Unit of the
Office of the High Representative, which was set up to
guarantee the rule of law.

Turning to the political sphere, we have been
encouraged by the agreement reached between eight
political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina with regard
to enacting constitutional changes this year, including
their agreement in principle on measures pertaining to
human rights and reducing the authority of the
presidency. However, political actors should continue
to implement the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the results of the
1995 London Peace Implementation Conference and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. They
must also cooperate with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and apprehend
indictees at large. Unresolved border issues must also
be addressed, as must the situation in Kosovo and
relations with Serbia and Montenegro with regard to
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A current issue in Bosnia and Herzegovina
pertains to non-serving police officers who were
decertified by the International Police Task Force
(IPTF), including some who have been brought to
justice. Given that the measures taken by the IPTF did
not provide an independent and neutral manner to
address the issue of the rights of decertifled officers, as
well as the fact that there is currently no way to appeal
the decisions taken by the IPTF, the situation of those
officers has become extremely difficult. A possible
solution would be for the United Nations to establish a
new mechanism to review these cases. We look
forward to further discussions on this outstanding
matter.

Once again, we hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will one day live in peace, security and
stability, so that it may attain prosperity for its people.

