Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I, too, would like to
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at this
meeting. We would like to make a few comments
relating to our vote.

The resolution just adopted takes up important
concerns of the post-war order in Iraq. It further
develops the preceding resolutions 1483 (2003) and
1500 (2003), on Iraq, and contains new emphases. In
our view, the sponsors of resolution 1511 (2003) have
undertaken commendable efforts to reach a text that
accommodates important claims we have made. That
we expressly recognize, and that was one of the factors
for our approval.

Another factor was that we and the sponsors
share the same goals in Iraq: to contribute to a swift
stabilization of the conditions in Iraq, to support the
political and economic reconstruction process in Iraq,
and to promote the restoration of the Iraqi people's
sovereignty through a Government democratically
elected by them. That can succeed only when the
Security Council appears as unified as possible. We
therefore did not want to stand in the way of Council
unity.

Although we consider the resolution to be an
important step in the right direction, we remain of the
View that integration of the amendments presented by
Germany, France and the Russian Federation could
have led to a better resolution.

We miss the clear signal that the transfer of
sovereignty to the Iraqis will be accelerated. The role
of the United Nations, and in particular of the
Secretary-General, could have been strengthened even
more. The Council, too, is incorporated rather
sparingly into the development.

Finally, we would have wished for clearer
guidelines also with regard to timing. The latter seems
important to us because only in this way can it be made
clear that the current political status of Iraq is a
temporary one. In this context, I refer to the joint
statement of Russia, France and Germany explaining
our common position. We therefore cannot envisage
any military commitment.

We remain, however, firmly optimistic that an
even broader involvement of the United Nations - and
in particular of the Secretary-General - the Iraqi
people and the neighbours in the region in the
reconstruction process in Iraq will succeed.

