Mr. Williamson (United States of America): We
join in commending you, Sir, and your entire team for
your outstanding tenure as our Council President.

We feel the Security Council did a good job in
January, taking significant steps in several important
areas. We have built a sound basis for the next couple
of months. I will not review everything that we did, but
want to cite a couple of major items which point to the
future. We have set in place further new ideas and
procedures for developing a more transparent,
interactive relationship with troop contributors. This is
important for United Nations peacekeeping and for the
Council's continued effort to do its job well. We will
keep trying to improve the usefulness of consultations
under resolution 1353 (2001), and develop the new
mechanism we have put in place. This will unfold over
the next couple of months.

We appreciate Ambassador Strommen's
willingness to take on the responsibility of chairing our
Working Group on peacekeeping and look forward to
his leadership. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Chairman reported to the Council, and its work is very
well in hand. This will be a major component of our
work in the coming months. This is a real success for
the Council and for the international community.

We also heard from Afghan Interim Authority
Chairman Karzai in a meeting that was a model of
efficiency. Afghanistan will be much on our minds in
the next months as we build on the success, which the
Chairman described, and address the challenges of
which we are all aware. Again, we have a strong basis
for further United Nations actions and Council
involvement.

Finally, we have just finished a major discussion
on Africa and how the Council can better engage with
and support our African friends. As a result of that
discussion, under the leadership of Mauritius, we have
adopted today a significant statement looking to future
steps we can take. We have also agreed to consider
establishing a working group to help us continue this
effort and to enhance coordination with the Economic
and Social Council. The United States wants to be sure
that it has focus, is substantive and makes a concrete
contribution to the Council's work. Last year the
Security Council had 83 formal meetings on Africa. We
hope in the future that we can all find a way to have
fewer speeches and more results.

Again, this is an excellent beginning to the new
year, a very heavy agenda. We did many things well.
My delegation looks forward to building on and
improving the Council's work, to maintaining
transparency and interaction and to making the Council
more effective.

