Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, for his
introduction of the report on United Nations activities
in Iraq (S/2006/706). I also thank Ambassador Bolton
for his briefing.
My delegation notes that further to the launching
of the security plan for Baghdad in June 2006, a second
phase was initiated at the beginning of August 2006
with the redeployment of additional troops of the
Multinational Force to the capital. In addition, the
Government of Iraq made efforts to promote national
reconciliation and dialogue through the unveiling of
the National Reconciliation Plan which, inter alia,
called for a qualified amnesty, the release of detainees
and the reform of the legal and judicial systems. We
hope that those measures will yield positive results and
reduce the level of violence and insecurity that
continues to afflict Iraq.

We welcome the launching of the International
Compact with Iraq, which should provide an effective
framework for Iraq's economic transformation and its
integration into the regional and global economy. The
Compact must, of necessity, reflect the
interconnectedness of political and security
developments and Iraq's recovery, which is deemed a
prerequisite for sustainable regional investment. The
active involvement of the United Nations Development
Group, United Nations agencies and other international
multinational financial institutions is very
commendable; we expect that their guidance and
support will make a large contribution to the
sustainability of the Compact.

It is our expectation that the meeting of Foreign
Ministers on 18 September 2006 to review progress in
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1546 (2004) and to engage in a strategy dialogue on
the future of Iraq will come off successfully. The
meeting should enable the Government of Iraq to
present its programme for the reconstruction of the
country within the framework of the International
Compact and for the United Nations to make concrete
proposals for the consolidation of its assistance to Iraq.

My delegation is pleased to note the ongoing
efforts by the Office of Constitutional Support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to play a leading role in promoting dialogue and
building consensus on the constitution of Iraq. It
successfully completed its programme to promote
multiparty dialogue, which engaged senior political
leaders, technocrats and members of civil society in
discussions on critical and relevant issues. Further, we
note that it continued to provide advice and assistance
to the Government and the Council of Representatives
on issues relating to the establishment of the
constitutional review committees.

UNAMI's activities in providing the Government
of Iraq with guidance in addressing the needs of
internally displaced persons as regards shelter and
assistance are commendable. We are also gratified to
note that UNAMI has, through numerous missions and
regular dialogue, helped address the specific needs of
communities in various regions and has enhanced
coordination and interaction between the provincial
and central authorities in meeting reconstruction and
development challenges.

We note with concern, however, that United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes have heavily
depleted the resources earmarked for emergency
humanitarian activities. That inadequacy is
compounded by the inability of the Government of Iraq
to respond effectively to the plight of the rapidly
increasing number of internally displaced persons. The
request by the Secretary-General for substantial new
funding to meet the needs of those persons should
therefore be urgently addressed to enable the United
Nations to contribute effectively to lessening the
suffering of those persons.

The acute human rights and humanitarian crisis in
Iraq, characterized by indiscriminate killings, targeted
attacks, crime and corruption, is indeed very worrying
and of great concern to my delegation. It is apparent
that State institutions are unable to protect individuals
or address the needs of victims of gross human rights
violations, who include women, children and members
of ethnic and religious minorities. Indeed, the
Secretary-General's report notes that the impact of
violence on those vulnerable persons has been
particularly alarming.

We acknowledge the work done by UNAMI in
the development of a strong human rights system and
wish to encourage it to sustain its support for the Iraqi
authorities in the drafting of a law for the
establishment of a national human rights commission,
and also to the Rule of Law Sector Working Group to
develop a comprehensive strategy on the rule of law.

We wish to place on record the exemplary work
being done in Iraq by the United Nations, whose staff
are often exposed to considerable risks. The presence
of the United Nations and its ability to operate
effectively in Iraq remain constrained, but the
Organization has been able to provide assistance to the

Government of Iraq in the several key areas I have
mentioned. We hope that UNAMI will soon develop
adequate self-reliance mechanisms that will enable it to
operate safely and therefore more effectively in Iraq.

