Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to start by welcoming you
to New York. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement.

Mr. President, I thank you for having organized
this debate, following upon the adoption on 20 July in
New York of the Programme of Action of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. I would like to
warmly congratulate Mr. Camilo Reyes of Colombia,
who presided over the Conference with much
determination and efficiency despite all the difficulties
encountered and the occasionally profound differences
between the positions that were defended throughout
the Conference. Today's debate enables us to take stock
of this issue in the Security Council almost two years
after the public ministerial-level meeting held in
September 1999.

In a few moments, Belgium will speak on behalf
of the European Union. I would just like to make a few
comments on the items that seem important to us.

The threat posed by the proliferation of and illicit
traffic in small arms is not a new issue. The Council
notes on a daily basis the devastating effect of this
traffic, particularly in Africa. The proliferation and
illicit circulation of these weapons fuel and prolong the
conflicts. They also make the maintenance and
consolidation of peace very difficult.

Action is required at all levels - national,
regional and international - to combat this scourge.
We were gratified to see the outcome of the first United
Nations conference on this subject, which was able to
adopt a Programme of Action that identifies a good
number of measures to be taken and efforts to be made.
I shall reiterate the appeal made on that occasion by
Minister Charles Josselin with respect to the
responsibility of every State to ensure that the
international community's response to this problem is
commensurate with the hopes placed in it, particularly
by countries directly threatened and affected by the
excessive accumulation and illicit traffic of small arms,
particularly in Africa.

I would like to underline a few priorities and
explore a few possible avenues of thought for the
Security Council. First, the Council must call upon all
States to take the required measures to rapidly
implement the Programme of Action adopted on 20
July and to follow up on the efforts under way, in
particular as regards marking weapons and
international cooperation to investigate the networks
used for trafficking in small arms. We have seen the
scope of this problem in the Council, in particular in
the very detailed reports we have examined on the
violations of embargoes in Angola and Sierra Leone.

We must draw the required lessons at a global
level and set up a mechanism for cooperation among
States that could thwart the action of the traffickers.
France and Switzerland have developed a draft
international instrument to that end which has received
broad support from the international community and
which is taken up in the follow-up mechanism of the
Programme of Action. We are determined, on the basis
of the provisions of the Programme of Action dealing
with traceability, to pursue our activities to take this
project forward, for it is at the heart of collective
efforts to prevent illicit trade in small arms and to
enhance the responsibility of States in this field. The
next step will be in the General Assembly's First
Committee in October on the launching of the United
Nations study on the draft international instrument on
the traceability of small arms.

The Security Council must be aware of the scope
of the damage caused by the proliferation and illicit
traffic of small arms in countries undergoing domestic
conflict or experiencing tension with their neighbours.
As the weapon of all guerrilla forces, light arms are the
easiest to use; military forces and civilians, children as
well as men and women, are all in turn users -
sometimes under compulsion - or Victims. In societies
that are already rendered vulnerable by a lack of
political stability and a lack of equitable and lasting
economic development, where conflicts have
unfortunately not been prevented by political solutions,
the accumulation of these weapons, in particular
through illicit traffic, has the worst consequences.

Small arms, often ridiculously low-priced, are
easily obtainable. Traffic in arms not only fuels the
conflict under way but is also the spark that sets off the
powder keg and is the instrument of a cultural violence
that undermines any peaceful attempt to settle conflict.
The countries concerned and the international
community that tries to help have the greatest difficulty
in getting rid of these weapons by means of
programmes for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. That is why it is
important, as the European Union has done in the
context of its common action, that States abstain on
principle from supplying weapons to non-State entities
or groups.

It also seems indispensable to develop preventive
disarmament action. The recent report of the Secretary-
General on preventing armed conflict is a timely
reminder for States of their primary responsibility for
prevention under the Charter of the United Nations.
Practical disarmament measures undertaken for the
collection and destruction of stocks of illicit small arms
are of crucial importance and deserve to be developed
further.

The Security Council could ask the Secretary-
General to prepare, within six months, a report, based
on recent concrete experience, on the principles,
modalities and possible recommendations as regards
the collection of weapons, disarmament and the
destruction of the small arms collected. The Council
could thus envisage the possibility of supporting this
type of project in the context of its conflict prevention
activities.

The Security Council might also benefit from
information compiled by the Secretary-General, under
paragraph 36 of section II of the Programme of Action,
on measures taken by States and, if possible, on
statistics available to him on the number of illicit small
arms in circulation. The Secretary-General could be
invited to provide this information, in particular in the
reports that he will be periodically submitting to the
Security Council on regional or subregional situations
in order to draw its attention to potential threats to
international peace and security.

Finally, I should like to underscore the crucial
importance of strict respect for arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council, and I would recall
also the need to develop a comprehensive approach, as
the illicit trade in small arms is inherently linked to
other kinds of trafficking - for instance, trafficking in
high-value commodities, such as diamonds.

France would like to recall its proposal for the
establishment of a standing monitoring mechanism for
targeted sanctions and the illicit trade in high-value
commodities in armed conflicts. The experience of the
panels on Angola and Sierra Leone has demonstrated
not only the usefulness of such monitoring
mechanisms, but also the limitations of ad hoc bodies
that deal only with certain targeted sanctions regimes
and that are of limited duration.

A single standing mechanism would provide the
Council and the sanctions committees with a reservoir
of expertise and an institutional memory that could
enable them to better understand the complex nature of
trafficking and the interlinkages involved and to
monitor compliance with embargoes, in particular as
concerns small arms and the resources that allow for
their acquisition.

The Programme of Action adopted on 20 July in
New York must be fully and urgently implemented by
all States. The Security Council and its members have
a particular role to play in this area, in View of the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security assigned to this organ
by the Charter. We hope that today's debate will enable
us to undertake and support effective and collective
action in this field.

