Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I wish to thank Kuwait,
Belgium and Germany for having called for the
convening of this very timely and important meeting.
I should like also to thank our briefers, Under-
Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lowcock.

It goes without saying that we are very much
concerned about the dangerous developments in Syria,
particularly the deadly escalation of violence in north-
western Syria over recent weeks. As Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock rightly pointed out, a humanitarian
catastrophe is unfolding there right now.

The conflict in Syria has already brought about
enormous suffering for the Syrian people, with more
than 10 million Syrians in need of humanitarian
assistance. Yet again, we have observed with great
concern an increase in air strikes over Idlib governorate
and in northern Hama over the past weeks and days.
Everyone has underlined that it is essential to avoid
a full-scale battle in Idlib. Otherwise, we might face
the worst humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first
century. Despite all those warnings, our worst fears are
now coming true. It is no longer a risk of a dangerous
escalation in Idlib; that escalation is happening as we
speak. Sadly, it is the civilian population who will pay
the highest price for this.

Attacks on densely populated areas, homes, medical
facilities and settlements for internally displaced
persons are unacceptable and must stop. All parties
must, as their top priority, protect civilians in Idlib. I
should like to reiterate once again that all parties are
obliged to comply with international humanitarian law:
it is not a matter of choice; it is simply a legal obligation.
In that context, all counter-terrorism activities must be
conducted fully within international humanitarian and
human rights law.

I should like once again to underline the significance
of the agreement between Russia and Turkey on the
Idlib de-escalation zone as a crucial move towards
avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe. All parties to
the conflict should ensure the full implementation of
that agreement. We call on all parties to return to the
ceasefire line as set out in Sochi agreement.

Ongoing fighting is resulting in the further
displacement of over 300,000 persons. Our utmost
concern is, first of all, that those people should be safe,
and, secondly, that the United Nations should have full
access to them. Unconditional access must be provided
as a matter of principle. In that connection, let me also
salute the heroic work of humanitarian workers in
these particularly difficult circumstances. The United
Nations and its partners continue to deliver life-saving
humanitarian assistance based on humanitarian
principles, including through cross-border assistance,
in accordance with resolution 2449 (2018), which is a
lifeline to millions of people in north-western Syria.

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) remains the
only way towards achieving peace.

