Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to address the Security Council on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for having been present here this
morning for our debate. I also would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

As is known, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory continues to deteriorate, marked
by deadly violence, instability and high tension. In
grave breach of international law and in contradiction
of the peace process, Israel, the occupying Power,
continues, inter alia, to launch military attacks against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip. It continues to
expand its illegal settlements and to construct the wall
in the West Bank, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem. It also continues to impose closures
and restrictions on movement, including via the siege
of the Gaza Strip, where the isolated and imprisoned
Palestinian civilian population continues to suffer from
a dire humanitarian crisis. At the same time, the
situation in Lebanon remains complex, and the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan continues.

All of these realities affect not only the Middle
East region, but the entire international community, for
they seriously impact the prospects for peace, security
and stability both in and beyond the region.

While aware of the recent efforts to advance the
cause of peace, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
strongly believes that the lack of respect for
international law by the occupying Power and its
ongoing illegal occupation continue to be the major
obstacles to the success of efforts to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. The Movement
reiterates its deep regret that for more than 40 years the
Palestinian people have been suffering under the brutal
Israeli military occupation and colonization of their
land since 1967 and that they continue to be denied
their fundamental human rights, including the
inalienable right to self-determination and the right of
the Palestine refugees to return to their lands, in
accordance with international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions.

The toll in human lives, injured, displaced,
homeless, impoverished and those without access to
basic services in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues to increase at an alarming rate. The poverty

rate is currently 65.8 per cent in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and in the Gaza Strip it is more
than 79 per cent of the population. The continuing
Israeli closures and restrictions on freedom of
movement and on access to persons and goods,
including humanitarian and medical goods, have made
the Palestinian economic recovery nearly impossible
and continue to aggravate the prevailing humanitarian
crisis and to further destabilize the situation on the
ground. Such violent and illegal actions have deepened
the suffering of the innocent and defenceless
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, who are already
suffering great poverty because of the continuing
imposition of the crippling Israeli siege and the
ensuing humanitarian crisis.

Moreover, Israel, in violation of numerous
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and of General Assembly
resolution ES-lO/15 of 20 July 2004 - which
reaffirms the illegality of the construction of the wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem - continues to build the wall and to impose
an associated permit regime and to construct and
expand its illegal settlements.

The NAM. remains seriously concerned by
Israel's recent decisions to continue the illegal
construction of settlements and the wall. We are also
concerned by the great physical, economic and social
devastation caused by those illegal and destructive
colonization practices, which are dividing the occupied
Palestinian territory into separate, walled-in enclaves
and severing East Jerusalem from the rest of the
territory, undermining the unity, integrity and
contiguity of the Palestinian territory. Furthermore, this
construction destroys entire communities, displacing
thousands of Palestinian civilians and isolating tens of
thousands more Palestinians into isolated cantons.

The continuation of those illegal actions threatens
the prospects for peace, as they will make the two-
State solution and peace physically impossible to
achieve. This requires the urgent attention of the
Security Council, for the extremely negative
consequences for the peace process are undeniable.

The peace process is not a sideline to the
situation on the ground. Just as positive actions and
progress in the peace process can benefit the
aforementioned situations, the negative events and
illegal actions by Israel have a very detrimental impact
not only the situation on the ground, but the peace
process itself.

The NAM. reiterates its call for Israel, the
occupying Power, to cease all its violations against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and to abide scrupulously by
its obligations under international law, particularly
humanitarian law and human rights norms.

The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation in its territory
following Israel's brutal aggression and serious
violations of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The NAM. reiterates its satisfaction with the steps
undertaken by the Lebanese Government to implement
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), particularly
through the deployment of the Lebanese armed forces
in the region south of the Litani River and along the
Blue Line. The Movement also welcomes the
deployment of the Lebanese armed forces along the
northern and eastern borders of Lebanon in order to
ensure security and stability at the borders.

The NAM. remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land violations of the Blue Line in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly call on
Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar, on the northern side of the Blue Line, and to
immediately refrain from any violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006), as well as
to refrain from any provocation of the Lebanese armed
forces or the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

The NAM. calls for the prompt settlement of the
question of the Shab'a Farms in full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated in resolution
1701 (2006). We call upon all parties to cooperate in
protecting Lebanon's sovereign rights in that area, and
we note the important endeavours of the Secretary-
General in this regard.

The NAM. is acutely aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its attack on
Lebanon in 2006. The Movement once again condemns
the use of such weaponry by Israel and deplores the
death toll resulting from them. The NAM. strongly calls
upon Israel to provide the exact location of those
deadly weapons and the maps of landmines planted
during its occupation of southern Lebanon.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its
support for the integrated plan of action contained in
the statement on Lebanon issued by the foreign
ministers of the Arab League on 5 January, and in that
regard the Movement commends the efforts by the
Secretary General of the Arab League to carry out that
plan.

The Movement reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, which purport to alter the legal, physical and
demographic condition and institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as the Israeli
measures to impose jurisdiction and administration
there, are null, void and without legal effect.

We also reaffirm that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of the Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the United Nations Charter
and resolutions, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981), the Fourth Geneva Convention, and a
challenge to the international community. The
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw completely from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June 1967.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its hope
that current efforts will ultimately bring an end to the
occupation of all of the Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967 - the Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan - and
will lead to the establishment of the independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as a just solution of the question of refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). The
Movement also hopes that recent international efforts
will effectively contribute to the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement in the
Middle East, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and in accordance with the rules and
principles of international law.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its support
for the Middle East peace process on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) and the
principle of land for peace. Likewise, we reject
attempts to alter the mandate of the peace process and
the imposition of unilateral measures and strategies
aimed at the imposition by Israel, the occupying
Power, of an illegal unilateral solution.

The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support and contribute in all possible ways to the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East based on all relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab peace initiative and the road map.

