I would like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov, Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki for their briefings. First, Estonia would like to express its solidarity with the Israeli and Palestinian people in the fight against coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Unity and solidarity are even more important during this challenging time, and we underline the importance of continued cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian authorities to tackle the pandemic. Estonia remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution based on internationally agreed parameters and relevant United Nations resolutions, taking into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns. We have taken note of the announcements on the readiness of the Palestinian Authority to resume peace negotiations as well as the counterproposal submitted to the Middle East Quartet. It is now essential that both parties take steps towards resuming direct and meaningful negotiations to resolve the final-status issues and achieve a just and lasting peace. We also urge the regional and international players, including the Middle East Quartet, to continue efforts towards those negotiations. Estonia calls on the parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that would undermine the efforts towards peace. A possible annexation by Israel of parts of the occupied West Bank would undermine the prospects for a negotiated two-State solution and threaten the stability of the region. We are also concerned about Israel's continued settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem. Furthermore, we are concerned about the announcement by the Palestinian leadership with regard to the suspension of agreements with Israel, including in the area of security cooperation. We call on the Palestinian Authority to reconsider this decision. Both parties must prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, incitement or provocation, as called for in resolution 2334 (2016). We condemn the continued firing of rockets from Gaza towards Israel and any other form of violence targeting the civilian population. An escalation of violence would be negative for all sides and further undermine the prospects for a resolution to the conflict and the common fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage all Palestinian factions to work towards reconciliation. This would enable them to address common challenges and the needs and expectations of the Palestinian population; it is essential for reaching a two-State solution. Also, in order to engage in direct negotiations, both parties need Governments with legitimate and democratic mandates. We therefore strongly encourage Palestinians to announce elections. I would also like to reiterate the important role played by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the region, in particular its efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Palestinian refugees. Estonia will continue supporting the work of UNRWA. Finally, I would like to state that Estonia aligns itself with the statement submitted by the delegation of the European Union (EU) on behalf of the EU (annex 28).
