The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Angola in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), document
S/l995/1012.

Members of the Council have also received
photocopies of a letter dated 21 December 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/1995/1052.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's report of 7 December 1995

 
(S/1995/1012 on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) pursuant to
paragraph 21 of Security Council resolution 1008
(1995) of 7 August 1995.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern at
the slow progress in implementation of the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. The Council
stresses the importance of full implementation of the
political and all other aspects of the peace process.
It underlines that several important tasks that were
to have been resolved in the early stages of the
peace process remain incomplete, including the
exchange of detailed military information, the
release of all prisoners, the redeployment of those
government troops near UNITA quartering areas,
and the final resolution of the issue of mercenaries.
In this respect, the Council welcomes the recent
announcement by the Government of Angola that it
will terminate the contract and repatriate the
personnel of the firm involved and will release all
remaining prisoners.

"The Security Council notes that the
deployment of UNAVEM. III troops is nearly
complete and that four quartering areas are prepared
to receive troops. The Council expresses its
disappointment at the slow pace at which the
quartering process has proceeded. It calls upon
UNITA and the Government of Angola to fulfil their
commitments regarding the expeditious quartering
and demobilization of former combatants, the
quartering of the rapid reaction police and the return
of the Forcas Armadas Angolanas (FAA) to the
nearest barracks.

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
at the delays in establishing modalities for the
integration of the armed forces which is vital for the
process of national reconciliation. The Council notes
with dismay the series of disruptions in the military
talks between the parties. It urges the parties to
continue the military talks without interruption and
to conclude an equitable and practicable agreement
without further delay.

"The Council underlines that such an agreement
should give particular attention to the expeditious
completion of the demobilization and integration of
former combatants. It recognizes that the prompt and
complete exchange of military information is vital to
the success of these talks and urges the parties to

 
provide the information required by the Lusaka
Protocol without further delay.

"The Security Council is gravely concerned by
continued violations of the cease-fire and military
offensives, in particular events in the northwest. The
Council calls on both parties to refrain from military
activities or troop movements which lead to increased
tensions and resumed hostilities and to implement
without delay the disengagement plan being prepared
by UNAVEM.

"The Security Council deplores the recent threat
to the safety of UNAVEM. III personnel. The Council
reminds the parties, in particular UNITA, that they
must take the steps necessary to ensure the safety and
security of all UNAVEM. III and other international
personnel. The Security Council expresses regret that
UNAVEM. radio is not yet operational. The Council
calls upon the Government of Angola to facilitate its
immediate establishment. It also calls upon both
parties to cease the dissemination of hostile
propaganda.

"The Security Council is concerned at delays in
implementing mine-clearance programmes planned by
the United Nations and by Member States, and calls
upon the Government of Angola to facilitate issuance
of necessary authorizations to relevant personnel. The
Council calls upon the Government of Angola and
UNITA to intensify their individual and joint
de-mining efforts. It underlines that the opening of
roads within Angola, including the clearance of mines
and the restoration of bridges, is vital not only to the
peace process and the complete deployment of
UNAVEM. III, but also to the effective delivery of

 

humanitarian assistance and future peace-building
efforts. The Council is gravely concerned at the
reports of re-mining in violation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
Angolans themselves bear ultimate responsibility for
restoring peace and stability in their country. The
Council stresses that concrete actions are urgently
needed from the parties to put the peace process on
an irreversible course. It notes that continued support
for UNAVEM. III will depend on the extent to which
the parties demonstrate their political will to achieve
a lasting peace.

"The Security Council notes the important role
played by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by the three observer
countries in the promotion of the peace process in
Angola and calls upon them to further contribute
appropriately to the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol within the agreed time framework and to
assist UNAVEM. III in the successful fulfilment of
its tasks.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to update it on the progress of the Angolan
peace process and the deployment and activities of
UNAVEM. III at least on a monthly basis."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/62.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.15 pm.

