Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Let me say at the outset
that Japan strongly condemns the new wave of violence
in Kosovo, which erupted yesterday and has already
resulted in many injuries and deaths. My Government
calls for an immediate end to the violence and demands
that the perpetrators be brought to justice. We also
strongly deplore the attacks on KFOR soldiers and on
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It is particularly
regrettable that those incidents occurred and that so
many were killed or injured at a time when concerned
parties from the international community - especially
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri - have been making sincere efforts
aimed at constructive peace-building. We also wish to
extend our sincere condolences to the families of the
victims.

The people of Kosovo have endured massive
losses in precious lives and property in the past.
Moreover, the international community has invested
enormous resources, in terms of personnel, diplomacy
and financial resources, in the hope of resolving this
tragic situation. Japan considers that all parties to the
conflict must keep those facts fully in mind. We
strongly urge all parties concerned to make a
determined effort to resolve the issue on the basis of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
"standards before status" policy, through strengthened
dialogue and without further escalating this tense
situation.

On the other hand, my Government believes that
the international community must continue its efforts in
the areas of the consolidation of peace and economic
development - which is a precondition for peace - in
order to ensure that this kind of violence does not break
out again. In that connection, we hope that there will be
a useful exchange of opinions at the ministerial
conference on peace consolidation and economic
development of the western Balkans, which we plan to
hold in Tokyo in April. Japan also would like to
underscore, as a concrete measure to prevent such
incidents, the importance of enhancing security in
Kosovo through initiatives such as the illicit small
arms control projects of the United Nations
Development Programme, which my Government has
been supporting.

Japan intends to maintain its commitment to
achieving the stability and prosperity of the South-
Eastern European region, in cooperation with the
international community, in the firm belief that the
stabilization of the situation in Kosovo is essential for
attaining that goal.

