Mr. Mahmoud (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Mr. President, for quickly convening the
Security Council this morning. We thank the Secretary-
General for his renewed appeal for an immediate
ceasefire and his call on the Security Council to take a
position on the current situation.

We meet today as innocent blood continues to be
shed, as we hear mothers cry, awaiting the burial of the
children-victims of Qana. We have come to ask, "When
will the killing machine stop?" This week is the third
3
in which acts of killing and destruction have continued.
Now, the hamlet of Qana once again meets its fate with
Israel, 10 years on - Qana, that peaceful, quiet
hamlet, where children, women and old people sought
refuge, attempting to keep their spark of life alive in
the darkness of the shelters.

Israel's shells do not recognize the innocence of
children or the sanctity of life. Rescue workers have
pulled more than 60 corpses from under a residential
building. More corpses continue to be pulled from the
ruins, mostly women and children, and thus the final
number of victims of the latest Israeli massacre has yet
to be tallied. Undoubtedly, in their conscience, in their
deepest heart of human hearts, the members of the
Council all know that Israel is committing war
massacres. Israel is committing atrocities against
humanity. The regrettable fact that such massacres
have yet to be addressed by resolutions of the Security
Council does not mean that the truth is to remain
hidden.

This tragedy came at a time when the
Government of Lebanon, in consultation with friendly
States, was seeking a window to resolve the crisis
raging in Lebanon. The Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Fouad Siniora, on behalf of the united Lebanese
Government, set forth Lebanon's understanding of the
seven-point plan, beginning with an immediate
comprehensive ceasefire. However, it seems that Israel
has other solutions: solutions of shells and aircraft
bombing children; solutions of siege preventing
medication and food from reaching civilians in their
villages; solutions of collective punishment and
collective killing; and challenging the will of the
overwhelming majority of the countries of Council
members, and all countries of the world, calling for an
immediate ceasefire.

Now, after the massacre - after many massacres,
after the second Qana massacre - in respect for the
dignity and the will of the Lebanese people, in memory
of the martyrs who fell today and who have fallen
during the past three weeks, we believe that it is
neither viable nor acceptable to consider solutions
before an immediate comprehensive ceasefire.

The Lebanese people who demonstrated in the
streets and squares of Beirut last year, who called for
truth, independence and freedom - the Lebanese
people that the Council supported in its many
resolutions, whose democracy and vitality the Council
proclaimed and welcomed - are today, with one voice,
mourning their martyrs. Together with their
Government, they are calling upon the Council to bring
and end to the firing immediately, without delay, and to
undertake an effective and serious investigation of this
massacre and of the massacres that Israel has
perpetrated on the land of Lebanon over the past three
weeks.

We are committed to the United Nations. We
believe it to be a haven for the weak and the victims of
injustice, more than a podium for the strong. Will we
find in the Security Council what the wounded
Lebanese people seek?

The Lebanese Government, through its Prime
Minister, has addressed the diplomatic corps. I will
now read out the Prime Minister's statement.

(spoke in English)

"I shall be brief. This is the time for action,
not talk. With the backing and support of the
entire nation, we have left no stone unturned and
no avenue unexplored in our sincere desire for a
rapid and comprehensive ceasefire and an end to
the lethal rampage and carnage carried out by the
Israeli army over the past 18 days in their
systematic determination to destroy Lebanon. We
were confident that the seven-point plan I
proposed at the Rome Conference would be
supported by all peace-loving Nations.

"Instead, the Israeli response has been yet
another massacre of innocent women and
children in the town of Qana, which suffered a
similar human tragedy 10 years ago, when Israel
cold-bloodedly murdered more than 100 civilians
who had taken refuge at the United Nations
outpost there. They called it 'Grapes of Wrath'.
What principle of warfare will they invoke this
time? Why, we wonder, did they choose Qana yet
again? Perhaps this time we should call it 'Grapes
of Hatred'.

"We can only reassert that there is no place
on this sad day for any discussion, other than our
call for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire
and withdrawal to behind the Blue Line, as well
as an international investigation, without delay,
into the continuing Israeli massacres in Lebanon
in violation of international laws and conventions
and basic human decency. We cannot be expected
06-44873
to negotiate or discuss anything else while the
ruthless, pitiless sword of the Israeli war machine
continues to drip with the blood of innocent
women and children.

"I also ask you - and this is why I called
you here today - to urge your Governments,
especially those who are members of the Security
Council, to back our request for an immediate
meeting of the Security Council and our call for
an unconditional ceasefire.

"Finally, I would like to assure you that,
while we can understand the anger being
expressed during the spontaneous demonstration
at United Nations House that you have been
witnessing on your televisions, we deplore the
attacks against the building and ask the
demonstrators to express themselves peacefully.
United Nations House is a house for all Lebanese.

"Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, I know
that, deep within you, in your heart of hearts, you
know that Israel is committing atrocities on a
scale that your conscience cannot tolerate. So do
pass on the truth - the whole, unadulterated
truth - to your Governments and organizations
and urge them to move swiftly to ensure an
immediate, unconditional ceasefire and
withdrawal to the Blue Line and to back our call
for an immediate meeting of the Security
Council."

(spoke in Arabic)

I express the hope that Security Council members
will support Lebanon's call for an urgent Council
meeting and the call for an immediate ceasefire and for
an immediate investigation into the massacres
perpetrated in Lebanon by Israel.

