Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by expressing my deep appreciation to
Mr. Gambari for his briefing, and in particular for his
efforts to broker a process of national reconciliation in
Burma. His hard work and his tireless travel in the Asia
region have helped to maintain high-level international
engagement, which will be vital to bringing about real
progress inside Burma.

His latest visit to Burma was clearly not easy. As
he was confined for most of the time to Nay Pyi Taw,
unable to choose who he would see and denied access
to the Senior General, the approach of the Burmese
authorities was not in line with the expectation of the
Security Council, as set out in our presidential
statement of 11 October (S/PRST/2007/37). We are
also concerned at the effective expulsion of the head of
the United Nations country team on the eve of
Mr. Gambari's visit.

The biggest step forward came following
Mr. Gambari's meeting with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
We welcome the statement that Mr. Gambari delivered
on her behalf, in particular her commitment to pursue
the path of dialogue constructively and her invitation to
the Government and all relevant parties to join her in
that spirit.

Now it is the turn of the regime in Burma to
reciprocate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's readiness to
cooperate. Initial meetings between her and the
Government liaison officer and meetings with her party
leadership are important, but are only first steps. We
support Mr. Gambari's call on the authorities to
unconditionally release Aung San Suu Kyi. The regime
must remove the restraints on her access to her party
and allow other opposition leaders, ethnic minority
leaders and other stakeholders to meet with Aung San
Suu Kyi and with one another freely and without
impediment in order to ensure a genuine, inclusive and
meaningful dialogue. We share Aung San Suu Kyi's
view that the dialogue should be time bound, not least
so that we can measure the results.
5
We welcome Special Rapporteur Pinheiro's
current visit. We remain very concerned about the fate
of those who participated in peaceful demonstrations in
September and about the ongoing arrests and long
sentences issued. It is important that we do not lose
sight of the continuing arrests taking place. I
understand that Suu Suu Nway, who has campaigned
bravely and resolutely to rid Burma of forced labour,
has recently been arrested by the authorities, a move
that raises a question mark over the regime's
commitment to Mr. Gambari to make no further such
arrests.

We believe that Mr. Pinheiro should be allowed to
address fully all these concerns and we look forward to
his report to the Human Rights Council.

We would welcome Mr. Gambari's early return to
Burma, and for him to be able to pay repeat visits on an
unrestricted basis, as indicated to him by the Prime
Minister of Burma. It is important that he be given
freedom of movement and access to facilitate the
process of reconciliation, not only with those he saw
this time but also representatives of other civil society
groups such as the 88 Generation students, the ethnic
minorities, the monks and those still detained. Moves
by the Burmese authorities to control Mr. Gambari's
activities raise questions about their sincerity in
engaging with the good offices mission.

The solution to Burma's problems will remain
one for all Burma's people to find, with assistance
from the United Nations and the international
community. We, the international community, will need
to continue to pressure and persuade the regime to
make progress. The small steps forward described by
Mr. Gambari today are welcome and could be the
beginning of a process that achieves peace, prosperity
and stability.

But they could also be a false dawn. Previous
meetings and discussions failed to yield the results
needed, so it is important that in pursuing the present
opportunity, we stay united and focused on this issue to
bring about the changes we all want to see.

