Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Malaysian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this annual public debate on peacekeeping
operations. Iwould also like to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and the Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) for
their briefings. Finally, I welcome the presence of the
other Force Commanders, including the Commander of
the African Union peacekeeping force in Somalia, who
join us today.

Chad would like to pay homage to the 123,560
members of the 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations currently under way around the world.
Peacekeeping soldiers spare no effort to fulfil their
mandates, despite inadequate resources and the
difficulties of all kinds that they face, including the
security environment that confronts them. I would like
to make several additional observations.

With respect to the protection of civilians, Chad
rejects the abusive use of the concept of using force
against States without regard for their political and
sovereign independence. A number of countries,
particularly in Africa, continue to suffer from that
situation.

We recognize that the presence of the United
Nations in failed States or those that are about to
become so, constitutes a guarantee of security for
defenceless civilian populations that faces all manner of
threats. Protection of civilians is an essential task that
is part of the mandate of virtually all United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That protection must also be a
moral obligation. However, we must ensure that we have
a common understanding of the concept at all levels,
including strategic, operational and tactical ones. It is
also important that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and regional organizations, especially the
African Union, strive to elaborate and, if need be,
reach agreement on the principles for the protection of
civilians for their respective organizations.

Providing a peacekeeping operation with a mandate
for the protection of civilians is insufficient unless that
operation possesses the necessary human, logistical and
material resources to discharge its mission. A number
of operations are finding it very difficult to implement
their mandates due to insufficient human, material and
intelligence resources, as well as weak deployment in
the main areas where tensions prevail. That is the case,
for example, with UNMISS and with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, but it also applies to many
others. In addition to providing a physical presence
that enables them to protect thousands of civilians, as
we have seen in South Sudan, the United Nations can
and must do better by investing more in prevention
and mobility. Nor should robust intervention to protect
civilians be excluded. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the early warning and rapid intervention
mechanism of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose effectiveness has been proved.

Today, the circumstances on the ground mean
that we have to be proactive. We have to understand
that when the United Nations is unable to carry
on with the task expected of it, namely, to protect
defenceless civilians, it will not avoid criticism, such
as that levelled against it following the genocides in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Rwanda. In addition,
peacekeeping operations - without undermining
traditional principles such as the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in cases of legitimate self-defence or defence of the
mandate - must undertake offensive operations when
the situation so requires. That is important for disarming
armed groups that are attacking and harassing civilians,
as is unfortunately the case in a number of countries,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Mali.

Furthermore, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, peacekeeping operations are
authorized to utilize force to protect both the assets and
staff of the United Nations. Therefore, when required,
they have to use such force to prevent attacks against
their facilities, soldiers and supply lines.

With regard to sexual violence and abuses against
women and children, we wish to underscore the
importance of increasing the number of female staff
in peacekeeping operations, including in positions of
responsibility. We wish to welcome the appointment
of a woman, Major-General Kristin Lund, as Force
Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus, and we urge the Secretariat to appoint more
women at similar levels of authority.

Concerning Mali and the asymmetric landscape
in which the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is operating, the list established and updated by the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee in accordance with
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) indicates that
there are 24 entities associated with Al-Qaida in Africa,
including 7 that are active in Mali.

Given the realities on the ground, we wonder if
MINUSMA is undertaking a fight against terrorism
instead of peacekeeping. Moreover, MINUSMA's
contingents do not have the training or the materiel,
logistics or intelligence neceessary to tackle the
current situation in northern Mali. It is urgent
that States possessing the necessary capacities
provide the resources just mentioned to troop- and
police-contributing countries so that they will be
capable of discharging their mandate. The credibility
of the United Nations and the whole of the international
community is at stake there.

The work carried out by the international forces and
MINUSMA must be time-limited, because their mission
is not to remain in Mali forever. Therefore, in keeping
with the principle of national ownership, the focus
should be on strengthening Mali's national defence and
police forces, which bear the primary responsibility
for the defence of the country. In addition, in terms of
regional ownership, emphasis should be placed on the
Nouakchott Process on the Enhancement of Security
Cooperation and the Operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan
Region. The will of African States, especially those of
the group of five Sahel States - Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger and Chad - is not lacking. The
assistance of partners such as the United Nations could
be decisive.

Moreover, trouble-makers and those who attack
the United Nations must answer for their actions.
Therefore, the Malian authorities should spare no effort
to undertake investigations to identify and bring to
justice the perpetrators of attacks against MINUSMA,
whether they be rebels or terrorists. We know it is very
difficult to distinguish between a rebel and a terrorist in
northern Mali. However, through intelligence work and
strengthening of human intelligence-gathering within
MINUSMA, we can assist Mali in achieving this and
punish those who should be punished.

My country has paid a heavy price in Mali, but
nothing can stem our resolve to continue to help this
fraternal country. We are getting ready to deploy 335
additional soldiers and one constituted formed police
unit there in the near future.

With regard to UNTSO, we welcome the work of the
military observers and encourage them to continue to
fulfil their mission of observation. We know that many
troop-contributing countries are experiencing great
difficulties when it comes to deploying their experts to
certain areas because of security concerns. No doubt
this has a considerable impact on the implementation of
the mandate of the military observers. Peacekeeping is
not a risk-free activity. Unfortunately, many countries
contributing to peacekeeping are not ready to evolve
and adapt to unforeseen and dangerous situations. We
regret that attitude, which must change.

I would like to pay tribute to United Nations
peacekeepers and to express my sympathy and
condolences to the Governments and the families of
those who have lost their lives during their mission.

I conclude by asking three questions directed at the
Major-General Lollesgaard of MINUSMA. What do we
need to do to improve the situation in northern Mali
and to prevent asymmetric attacks against MINUSMA?
Does he believe that the idea of a rapid intervention
force by the Sahel States could be useful to MINUSMA?
MINUSMA is the second-most-dangerous United
Nations operation, after that deployed to Somalia
during the 1990s. Given this, what does he intend to
do and what does he expect of the United Nations to
minimize the risks in terms of loss of human lives?

