The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 8/1995/720, which contains the
text of a letter dated 21 August 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Tajikistan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the Protocol on
the fundamental principles for establishing peace and
national accord in Tajikistan signed by the President
of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the
Tajik opposition on 17 August 1995 (8/1995/720, annex). It commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy and all countries
acting as observers at the inter-Tajik talks, which have
significantly contributed to reaching the above
agreement between the Tajik parties.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
implement fully the commitments contained in the
Protocol. It supports the agreement of the parties to
conduct the continual round of talks due to begin on
18 September 1995, with the aim of concluding a
general agreement on the establishment of peace and
national accord in Tajikistan and urges the parties to
agree as soon as possible on the venue of the
negotiations. It reiterates that the primary
responsibility rests with the Tajik parties themselves
in resolving their differences.

"The Security Council welcomes the agreement
reached by the parties to extend the Agreement on
a Temporary Cease-Fire and the Cessation of Other
Hostile Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within
the Country signed in Teheran on
17 September 1994 (S/l994/1102, annex l) for a
period of six months until 26 February 1996, and
calls upon the parties to comply strictly with the
obligations assumed under this agreement, including
cessation of all hostile acts on the T ajik-Afghan
border and within Tajikistan. The Council calls upon
all States and others concerned to discourage any
activities that could complicate or hinder the peace
process respecting fully the sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of Tajikistan and the inviolability
of the Tajik-Afghan border.

"The Security Council urges the parties to
implement as quickly as possible the confidence-
building measures agreed upon during the fourth
round of inter-Tajik talks held in Almaty.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
continue the existing close contacts of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) with the parties to the conflict as well as
its close liaison with the CIS Collective
Peace-keeping forces, with the Russian border forces
and with the OSCE Mission in Tajikistan.

"The Security Council welcomes the
contributions by some Member States to the
voluntary fund for contributions established by the
Secretary-General in accordance with its resolution
968 (1994), and reiterates its encouragement to other
Member States to contribute thereto.
"The Security Council expresses its readiness to
consider in due course the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding the possible role of the
United Nations in the context of the present and future
agreements between the Tajik parties."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/42.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.55 pm,

