Mr. Motomura (Japan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to welcome Mr. Jan Petersen,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, and to
congratulate Norway on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Allow me as well
to extend my congratulations to Ambassador Aguilar
Zinser of Mexico and his team for their excellent work
last month.

Following the Norwegian practice, I will keep my
remarks brief.

Japan welcomes the comprehensive report of the
Security Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea,
headed by Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of Norway.
The report itself demonstrates the success of the
mission on the eve of the final and binding decision of
the Boundary Commission. Japan hopes that the views
gained by the members of the Security Council during
their visit to the field will be reflected in the upcoming
consideration of the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE).

We commend Ethiopia and Eritrea for choosing to
resolve their differences through an international
conflict-resolution mechanism and welcome recent
statements by both sides reaffirming that the decision
of the Boundary Commission is final and binding. In
the expectation that all necessary steps for the
implementation of the Boundary Commission's
decision will commence immediately following the
Commission's announcement, Japan welcomes this
positive development and hopes that our contribution
of approximately $1 million to the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of the Delimitation and
Demarcation of the Ethiopia/Eritrea Border will be
utilized effectively. I would like to take this
opportunity to appeal to both parties to refrain from
any action that could have a destabilizing effect,
including the movement of peoples as well as troops.

As stated in the report of the Security Council
mission, the successful implementation of the
Boundary Commission's decision will depend in large
part on the demining of the border area. This is also
crucial for confidence-building in order to resolve
localized disputes and rebuild community relations,
particularly through the promotion of cross-border
contacts at the local level. In view of the importance of
mine clearance, the Government of Japan has decided
to earmark approximately $560,000 of its contribution
to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Action for the project in the
Temporary Security Zone.

Let me conclude by commenting on Security
Council missions in general. Security Council missions
to the field can be a useful tool, as demonstrated by
this latest mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea. In order to
ensure that future missions are fruitful, Japan believes
it worthwhile to consider establishing criteria for
sending missions and ensuring transparency with
regard to budgetary basis.

