Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to express my congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
as well as thank you for devoting our deliberations
today to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I
also thank you for the concept paper that you
distributed to inform our discussion of this issue.
We should note that 12 years have passed since
the Secretary-General presented his first report
(S/1999/957) to the Security Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We continue to hope that
the ongoing deliberations of the Council on this subject
will eventually lead to a clear, comprehensive and
holistic approach and an objective vision of the best
means to protect civilians. The most important thing is
to deal with the root causes of armed conflict. That,
along with supporting comprehensive and sustainable
political solutions, is the best way to ensure the
protection of civilians.

We note that all previous reports of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including the most recent (S/2010/579), have
focused primarily on ways of activating the role of
United Nations peacekeeping missions in the area of
protecting civilians. In that connection, we would like
to draw attention to an important fact that must be
borne in mind. In many areas of conflict, the targeting
of civilians is now being used by insurgents and armed
groups in a premeditated way in order to inflict
casualties among civilians, including women and
children, so as to turn the international community
against Governments and to appeal to it to intervene.
Various armed groups and movements are currently
deliberately attacking populated areas and using
civilians as human shields - for example, in Darfur
and in the recent situation in the Nuba Mountains and
Blue Nile State regions, where forces of the Sudan
People's Liberation Army have attacked various cities
and other populated places.

The priority should always be successfully
implementing peacebuilding efforts and political
settlements by compelling armed groups to enter into
peace negotiations and political processes to achieve
their demands, rather than resorting to military action
and attempting to deceive international public opinion
by causing casualties among civilians. Needless to say,
practical experience in various countries has clearly
proven that peacekeeping missions, however capable
they may be when it comes to providing protection,
will not be able to achieve their desired goals in the
absence of peace itself. Peace provides the primary
protection for civilians.

Further protecting civilians entails swiftly
implementing development projects, relief and
reconstruction efforts, carrying out demilitarization and
reintegration, and quickly restoring public services, so
as to allow for the return and resettlement of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). Such steps also contribute to
encouraging civilians to leave IDP camps, return to
their homes and resume normal activities. In that
context, we appeal to the Security Council, and
through it to all members of the international
community, to support the peace efforts of the
Government of the Sudan through the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, whose implementation has already
begun in order to achieve lasting peace in Darfur.

The principle of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, to which we all aspire, is a noble one.
What is troubling, however, is that efforts are being
made to use this principle to achieve specific political
objectives - such as in the case of the current
propaganda for the so-called responsibility to protect.
We would like to emphasize in this forum that,
although the principle of the responsibility to protect
was incorporated into the Outcome Document of the
Millennium Summit in 2005 (General Assembly resolution 60/1), it remains, as the Council well knows,
subject to varying interpretations by Member States in
the light of the solid foundations established in the
Charter of the United Nations concerning respect for
Member States' sovereignty, legitimacy and primary
full responsibility for the protection of their civilians. I
should also like to remind the Council that the right of
civilians to protection in armed conflict is only one
component of the comprehensive and closely linked
host of rights and duties that were reaffirmed in the
Outcome Document of the Millennium Summit.
Primary among those are achieving development,
combating poverty and preventing conflicts by dealing
with their root causes and, as I explained earlier, by
having the Security Council play an active role in
supporting and leading efforts for political
reconciliation and resolution. That role should be
complemented by the parallel role of the Secretariat
and the various agencies dealing with humanitarian
issues, and include the promotion of economic growth,
reconstruction, recovery and sustainable development.

Lastly, I would like to comment on some points
made in various statements. We have heard about the
human rights situation in Abyei. I would like to
emphasize that the current state of affairs in Abyei is
the best it has been in the terms of human rights and
the humanitarian situation, if we compare the situation
now to what it was before May, when the forces of the
popular movement were present. Since the restoration
of order in May and the arrangements that were put in
place, I can assure the Council that not a single
incident conducive to instability in the area has taken
place. This should not be overlooked by anyone. We
hope that the internally displaced persons will return to

11-5866]
their villages once order and security are completely
restored - a process that has already begun.

I should also like to refer to another point raised
in the statement by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights that also is contrary to the facts. Referring to
disturbing reports, the High Commissioner called for
an inquiry into the human rights situation in Blue Nile
and Southern Kordofan States. I would like to inform
the Council that this is not true. And I would also like
to remind the Council of the national committee that
was established by the Ministry of Justice, which has
accomplished much of its work. We will soon inform
everyone about its results. Any call for an inquiry
outside the national context would then be illogical and
unrealistic. The current situation in those two areas is
stable. Internally displaced persons have returned to
their homes following the defeat of the insurgents.

Finally, I would advise the staff of international
agencies to seek out the facts in order to preserve the
credibility needed to support, and ensure respect for,
their work in all areas of conflict.

