Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
update on recent developments in the Middle East. We
also thank the Palestinian Foreign Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel for their statements and their
presence here today.

Austria fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union.

Peace negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians must be urgently resumed. That was one of
strongest messages that came out of the general debate
of the General Assembly this year. We appeal to Israel
and the Palestinians to remove the remaining obstacles
to negotiations by acting on their previous agreements
and obligations. As Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger stated during the general debate and
reiterated today at his meeting with Israeli Foreign
Minister Liberman in Vienna, Israel's right to exist in
security and peace and the realization of the rights of
the Palestinian people are not in contradiction; on the
contrary, both are crucial elements of a comprehensive
and just solution.

The creation of an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State comprising the
West Bank and Gaza - a State of Palestine that lives
in peace and security with the State of Israel - is
indispensable for stability and peace in the wider
region. After decades of violence and hostility, partners
in the region need to shoulder their respective
responsibilities in the interest of a credible and
sustainable solution.

We need to see an immediate end to all
construction of settlements, including in East
Jerusalem; the dismantlement of the outposts erected
since 2001; and an end to all other activities that may
prejudge the outcome of negotiations. In view of recent
incidents around the holy sites in Jerusalem, incidents
to which others have already referred in the course of
this debate, we urge all sides to seek to defuse tensions
by exercising the utmost restraint both in deeds and in
words.
Implementing the vision of a Palestinian State
requires unity of purpose among the political
leadership of the Palestinian people, and common
renunciation of violence. Palestinian reconciliation is
vital. We urge Palestinian leaders to work together to
overcome the separation between the West Bank and
Gaza in order to preserve the chance of viability for a
future homeland for the Palestinian people. The
viability of a future Palestinian State also depends on
continuous, vigorous efforts by the Palestinian
Authority to strengthen its institutions and enforce the
rule of law, both in the interests of the citizens of a
future Palestinian State and in order to address the
legitimate security concerns of its neighbour Israel.

We welcome the national plan presented by Prime
Minister Fayyad for the build-up of Palestinian
institutions and infrastructure over the next two years.
Austria will continue to help establish the economic
foundation and institutional infrastructure of a future
Palestinian State, both bilaterally and in the framework
of the overall efforts of the European Union. Normal
economic activity in both the West Bank and Gaza is
essential for funding these self-empowerment efforts.
This is another reason why we call on Israel to stop the
construction of the separation barrier on occupied
territory and to reinforce the removal of obstacles to
movement and access in the West Bank. It is also
imperative that access to Gaza be opened urgently.

Let me add that violent incidents such as the
indiscriminate firing of rockets and mortars at Israel
must come to an immediate and sustained end, as
called for in resolution 1860 (2009). We respect the
legitimate Israel security concerns on this point. At the
same time, we also believe that continuing to prevent
access to Gaza may also turn out to be
counterproductive from a security point of View, since
people in Gaza are required to live a life that does not
satisfy basic conditions of human dignity. A life of
continued desperation, hopelessness and deprivation
provides a breeding ground for further extremism.

As the Human Rights Council prepares to
reconvene tomorrow to discuss the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory and East Jerusalem, I
would like to make the following observations
regarding the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict, from an Austrian point of View.
Rebuilding trust and respect for the rule of law, in all
contexts of conflict, requires thorough and credible
investigation of all allegations of grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Measures to ensure accountability are an essential part
of a comprehensive approach to preventing future
violations, avoiding their recurrence and seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation.

The Fact-Finding Mission's report (A/HRC/12/48)
contains allegations of grave violations by all sides of
international humanitarian law, including deliberate
attacks on civilians. Austria remains committed to a
serious assessment by the Human Rights Council of the
report and its recommendations, which are addressed to
Israel and to Palestinian actors. The Goldstone report
should be used as the starting point for appropriate and
credible investigations by all parties in accordance with
international standards. The Human Rights Council will
have to decide on the appropriate follow-up, and we
believe it should take this very important and sensitive
decision on the basis of the broadest possible consensus.

Regarding Lebanon, we hope that the process of
the formation of a new Government will soon come to
a successful conclusion. Austria is concerned about
reports regarding the incident in Tayr Filsi on
12 October. While awaiting the results of the
investigation launched by the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the Lebanese Armed
Forces, we wish to reiterate the importance of full
compliance with resolution 1701 (2006) by all parties.
In this context, we strongly encourage the
reinforcement of efforts to ensure that the area south of
the Litani River is kept free of unauthorized armed
personnel, assets and weapons.

In concluding, we wish to reiterate our sincere
hope for the early success of international efforts to
relaunch peace negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians, and for progress towards a comprehensive
peace between Israel and all its neighbours. Austria,
both nationally and within the framework of the
European Union, is ready to support this process
actively.

