Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Madam, and your team on your able
leadership of the work of the Council during the month
of March. I would also like to thank the briefers, Under-
Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov; Mr. Marshall
Billingslea, President of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF); and expert Ms. Mercy Buku for their
valuable inputs.

I would also like to congratulate France and all
the sponsors on the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019)
today.

Our world today continues to face grave peace and
security challenges, yet terrorism has probably become
the defining security challenge of our time. Lebanon
reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. Recent tragic, deplorable
terrorist acts - most recently in New Zealand - have
testified to our collective belief that terrorism is not to
be associated with any particular religion, nationality
or ethnicity. It is a global disease afflicting humankind,
threatening the core values of humanity, and thus
requires a global remedy.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a policy tool of paramount importance that
guides the global battle against terrorism. In its four
pillars, it reflects the international conviction that an
effective response to this threat needs to be inclusive
and comprehensive. One key battlefield is countering
the financing of terrorism.

My country has been on the forefront of the
fight against terrorism. Our armed forces succeeded
in defeating Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
Al-Qaida-affiliated groups militarily, and in disrupting
hundreds of terrorist cells. We joined the Global
Coalition against Da'esh on its inception, and have been
active members of several of its working groups. In the
process, Lebanon has put combating the financing of
terrorism at the core of its counterterrorism efforts.
We have taken concrete actions on all fronts, including
the legislative front. Lebanon co-chaired the Working
Group on Countering the Financing of Terrorism of
the Global Coalition. In that capacity, Lebanon played
a crucial role in devising measures to disrupt the
financing networks of that notorious terrorist group.
On 27 October 2016, the Lebanese Parliament adopted
Law No.77, which amended article 316 of the Penal
Code to cover the financing of activities mentioned in
Security Council resolution 2178 (2014), in relation to
foreign terrorist fighters.

In response to the efforts and demand of the Prime
Minister, we have put into effect two targeted financial
sanctions mechanisms, based on the new Anti-Money
Laundering/Counter-Financing of Terrorism Law, with
respect to resolutions 1267 (1989), 1373 (2001) and
successor resolutions. The mechanisms were adopted
by the Lebanese National Committee on Suppressing
Terrorism Financing. The internal security forces now
retain and issue the national list of designated names
on its website.

I am also glad to announce that Lebanon has
acceded to the United Nations International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism of
1999. The Special Investigation Commission of the
Lebanese Central Bank, which is our national financial
investigation unit, has been prioritizing terrorism-
financing cases. It is noteworthy that there has been
a considerable increase in the number of terrorism-
financing convictions issued by the relevant courts
in Lebanon.

In terms of capacity-building and awareness-
raising, the Special Investigation Commission has been
steadily conductingjoint training on terrorism financing
with the General Prosecutor's Office and other relevant
stakeholders. In parallel, the Lebanese National
Committee on Suppressing Terrorism Financing
continues to meet on a regular basis to discuss the latest
terrorism-financing threats and recommend mitigating
measures. That Committee includes representatives
from relevant judicial, law enforcement and financial
agencies in Lebanon.

Terrorism financing is a transboundary, collective
threat and, as the Secretary-General has rightly said,
transnational threat that cannot be defeated by any single
Government or organization. That is why our response
should be collective and global. The importance of
establishing multilateral resources and forging strong
partnerships at the international and regional levels
cannot be overemphasized. Significant work has been
done in that regard by relevant intergovernmental
agencies, such as the Financial Action Task Force,
INTERPOL and EUROPOL, to name a few. Their
efforts should be commended and supported.
However, we should never forget that
comprehensive and sustainable action against the threat
of terrorism should seek to address its root causes. We
should work hard to foster economic development and
social inclusion and counter oppression and foreign
occupation. Recent cases have shown that failed States
have constantly provided fertile soil for terrorism.
Bolstering democratic governance and the rule of law
is one effective, preventive way to guarantee a world
free of terrorism and the violent extremism that gives
rise to it.

