Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to express our great satisfaction at
the fact that today's meeting of the Security Council is
taking place under your presidency. Your personal
participation underscores the significance that your
country and the Security Council as a whole attach to the
problems of the protection of children in armed conflicts.

 

A little more than a year has passed since the previous
meeting of the Security Council on the problem of children
in armed conflicts. Our returning to this most tragic subject
shows that children suffering from wars are not being
overlooked by the Council, above all in the context of
fulfilling its major obligation under the Charter: to maintain
international peace and security.

It is significant that all members of the Security
Council are united in their deep concern regarding the
misfortunes suffered by the littler inhabitants of our world.
Such unanimity shows that humanity is making its way
towards the dawning of the next millennium with a clear
desire to put into practice, for current and future
generations, the lofty humanitarian ideals and to pay
attention to individuals, their problems and sufferings, their
rights and freedoms.

In the very first lines of the United Nations Charter
we find proclaimed a lofty goal: to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which to this very day
continues to kill and maim our children. War deprives
children of what is most valuable and dear to them in life:
parents, health, childhood, homeland and life itself. The
figures we have heard today tell us how far we remain
from this noble goal enshrined in the Charter.

In this connection, we have deep respect for the
tireless work of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, who has done a great deal to combat this problem.
The views he expressed today and his recommendations as
to what the international community might do to relieve the
sufferings of children and prohibit their participation in
conflicts are deserving of the greatest consideration by the
relevant United Nations bodies.

It should be pointed out that some progress has been
made in our struggle to ensure children's right to a peaceful
life. The Governments of virtually all the world's countries
have fully recognized their responsibility to children and
have become parties to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which as a result is the most universal international
treaty. Throughout the world there has arisen a powerful
movement in support of the effective banning of the use of
child soldiers.

Russia fully supports the recommendations adopted in
the fall of 1998 at the nineteenth session of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child, at which the Committee
expressed the hope for the early adoption of the optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a
protocol that concerns children in armed conflicts. We
welcome the intention of the Working Group of the
Commission on Human Rights to conclude its work on
this draft document by the year 2000.

On 20 November of this year we will observe the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. The inclusion of this item on the
agenda of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly gives us a good opportunity to have an in-depth
discussion of a whole range of problems pertaining to the
younger generation, first and foremost the issue of how to
remove children from the context of armed conflicts.

Along with this, both within the United Nations and
outside of it, we see a broad range of authoritative bodies
and institutions that are dealing competently with the
problems faced by children in emergency situations.
These organs include the Economic and Social Council,
the Commission on Human Rights and its special
mechanisms, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Children's Fund. The International Committee of
the Red Cross also has accumulated solid resources and
a wealth of experience in working in the area of
international humanitarian law which has special
provisions for the protection of children in armed
conflicts and for providing them assistance.

The Security Council is considering these issues first
and foremost in the context of specific volatile situations
for which it must find settlements. Any hot spot
inevitably involves tragedy for children, and,
unfortunately, one need not look far for examples. Last
week, the Secretary-General expressed concern at the
involvement in the hostilities in Afghanistan of
participants as young as 14 years of age. The need to
coordinate the achievement of peace with the
establishment of priorities for resolving the problems of
children scarred by war was reflected in the Lome Peace
Agreement for Sierra Leone. In its recent resolution on
Sierra Leone, the Security Council welcomed the Peace
Agreement and the commitment by the Government of
Sierra Leone to cooperate with the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and
Armed Conflict. This is a very important new
development.

In its efforts to settle armed conflicts and to prevent
new ones, the world community should do its utmost to

 

lessen their harmful effect on children, both those who
accidentally find themselves at the epicentre of hostilities
and underage soldiers. They all require assistance, first and
foremost, for reintegration into society, but that is obviously
not enough. It is time to address preventing the involvement
of children in hostilities. Measures to that end could
include, at the national level, the formulation and
implementation of programmes to inculcate children with
the spirit of peace; enabling children to obtain a good
education and to find civilian employment; and
disseminating information about international legal norms
governing the rights of the child. At the international level,
they could include efforts to provide early warning about
conflicts; the use of preventive diplomacy; stricter controls
on illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons; and
limiting arms shipments to areas of conflict.

The inauguration of the work of the International
Criminal Court should provide a serious deterrent to the use
of children in armed conflict. The subject of children and
armed conflict should also be highlighted during the 27th
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, scheduled to take place at Geneva in November
1999.

My country was among the first to ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Legal and practical
guarantees of the rights of the child form a basic element
of Russian policy in the sphere of child protection, which
is conducted in the context of a single national plan of
action for children. Here, priority attention is being given
to the problems of children in dire circumstances as well as
to their physical and psychological rehabilitation.

The national efforts of Russia and of its partners in the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) also have
regional ramifications. One result of the CIS review of the
problems of children, including those suffering in armed
conflicts, was the adoption at the twelfth plenary meeting
of the Inter-parliamentary Assembly of States Which Are
Participants in the Commonwealth of Independent States,
held in December 1998, of a decree on the protection of
children in CIS States.

I wish in conclusion to express the hope that today's
wide-ranging discussion and any decision that the Security
Council may adopt at its conclusion will give needed
impetus to international cooperation in protecting the
younger generation from the violence of armed conflict.

