Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, as well as your entire team for the
excellent manner in which the Swedish presidency is
conducting the work of the Security Council in the first
month of its mandate. I should also like to express by
best wishes for success to the other new members of
the Council.

The renewal of sanctions is entire justified by the
ongoing pressing threat posed by armed groups and
those who continue to attempt to do everything they can
to derail the stabilization and reconciliation process.
Resolution 2339 (2017) includes new provisions,
especially with regard to the implementation of the
travel ban and the identification of sexual violence
as a separate criterion. Other provisions pertain to
the Government of the Central African Republic,
specifically with regard to the arms embargo and
exemption requests.

The Security Council has a crucial role in preventing
conflict, as was forcefully underscored during the open
debate held on 10 January (see S/PV.7857). We believe

that the adoption of sanctions regimes is part of that
role. The proliferation of armed groups - I might even
say "well armed groups" - is an ongoing cause of
serious concern, for we know that the Central African
Republic is prone to relapse into conflict. Clearly, it is
difficult to get people to understand that sanctions are
not punishment, but instead a necessary evil. Reactions
calling for the lifting of the embargo reflect a lack
of understanding when it comes to the uncontrolled
circulation of weapons in the Central African Republic.
I welcome the outstanding work done by the Panel
of Experts on the Central African Republic, Whose
mandate was renewed under resolution 2262 (2016)
with a view to the drafting of the Panel's final report
(see S/2016/1032), which includes important, relevant
and very useful information in support of the renewal
of the sanctions.

I would like to thank the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic,
for organizing the meeting held on 25 January, which
allowed for representatives of neighbouring and other
countries to pronounce themselves on the measures
taken by their respective Governments to better ensure
the implementation of the sanctions. The conclusion
that emerged from that exchange of views was that it is
difficult to achieve the expected results so long as there
continues to be a lack of cooperation in this area.

Lastly, I would like to thank all the delegations
that contributed to the drafting of resolution 2339
(2017), which the members of the Council just adopted
unanimously. On behalf of the delegation of the Central
African Republic, I express my deepest gratitude.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
