Mr. Lucas (Angola): On behalf of the Angolan
delegation, I should like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for the update presented to the Council, which
has been enriched today by the reports of firsthand
field experiences presented by the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

With the adoption today by the Security Council
of resolution 1483 (2003), the international community
has taken a tremendous step forward towards resolving
the security, humanitarian, political, economic and
social situation in Iraq. From today on, we have at our
disposal a blueprint to deal with the situation in Iraq
and to begin resolving, in a sustained manner, the
immense problems caused by the international
sanctions imposed on Iraq as well as healing the
wounds of war.

The appeal to Member States to respond to the
humanitarian and other needs of the Iraqi people by
providing food, medical supplies and the resources
necessary for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Iraq's economic infrastructure has already had a very
positive response from the international community. It
is our belief that the adoption of resolution 1483 (2003)
will give fresh impetus to what we believe can become
a great movement of solidarity with the suffering Iraqi
people.

The picture that was painted of the situation in
Iraq is of great concern. Nevertheless, it is our
conviction that the international community can further
mobilize the goodwill and resources to advance in the
reconstruction of Iraq at all levels. Iraq has
resources - both human and material - that, if
properly directed to the right objectives - could, in a
relatively short period of time, enable the Iraqi people
to overcome their difficulties.

In our view, efforts and resources should be
concentrated on rehabilitation efforts in order to
provide, as soon as possible, improved living
conditions for the population and to avoid the most
acute social-infrastructure-related problems.

A decisive effort should be directed to the
rehabilitation of the electricity network, given its direct
implication in the normal functioning of hospitals,
schools and particularly sewerage systems, whose
malfunction affects water and sanitation, causing grave
health problems. The rehabilitation of the electricity
network will greatly improve the quality of citizens'
daily lives.

The repair and rehabilitation of the basic
infrastructure - mainly in areas critical to
humanitarian needs, such as health, education, water,
sanitation and electricity - in a strategy framework
devised by the United Nations Development
Programme is a sensible approach to the situation in
Iraq.

This will enable the creation of jobs, providing
employment to vulnerable groups. Furthermore, this
approach can rely on the expertise of Iraqi
professionals, whose competence and qualifications are
well known, and is a concrete contribution to the
building of peace through community participation in
those activities.

It is our deepest hope that the Iraqi people, after
too many years of sanctions and of war, will seize this
opportunity for a new beginning, and, since this
beginning has its roots in a very rich cultural heritage,
all hopes have the possibility of coming true. It is also
hope that the international community will keep its
pledge to the Iraqi people and that the Security Council
will remain seized of the Iraqi issue, so that the rights
of the Iraqi people can be fully respected.

To conclude, I should like to address a few
questions to the panellists, and specifically to the
representative of the United Nations Development
Programme. We would like to ask to what extent the
adoption of resolution 1483 (2003) will strengthen
UNDP's mandate for reconstruction work in Iraq, and
we would like to know what the assessed funding
needs are for the short and medium term. We would
like also to ask how long, according to UNDP
assessments, it will take to complete the rehabilitation
of the basic infrastructure.

