Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Foreign
Minister Coulibaly for taking time to join us today. I
should like to join colleagues in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and my Swedish colleague for his report and
the expeditious work of his Committee.

Like other speakers, we condemn the recent
attacks against the peacekeepers in Mali, and we
offer our condolences to the families of the three
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
who were killed last week, to MINUSMA, and to the
Governments and the people of Chad and the Niger. I
would just like to say how much I agree with what the
Ethiopian Ambassador said about the greatest reward
being progress on the ground. I think we all want to
help MINUSMA to that end.

The United Kingdom strongly supports the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is
the primary basis for sustainable peace and stability in
Mali, and we need progress also in order to deny space
to extremists. As other speakers have noted, at the
Security Council's last meeting on Mali in January (see S/PV.8163) and also in its subsequent press statement
(SC/13177), we welcomed the renewed commitment
of the Government and the signatory armed groups
to actually implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation by the end of March, and that was
agreed in the revised timetable of 16 January.

However, and disappointingly, it has been common
theme of all interventions today that the persistent
delays that tested the Council's patience in January are
still continuing to frustrate us today, some time after
the original deadline. There has been some positive
progress, and I do not want to underplay that, but it is
also clear that this just has not been enough. The parties
have agreed yet another new road map, rather than
focusing on implementation of the existing timetable.
There have been numerous revised deadlines and
they have not been met. The delay to implementation
will, unfortunately, have an impact on Mali's ability
to conduct peaceful and inclusive presidential and
parliamentary elections this year, and that, in turn,
risks further destabilization to the security and
humanitarian situation.

In January, the Council noted the tools available
under the Mali sanctions regime and expressed its
intention to respond with appropriate steps should the
parties not implement the commitments they made. In
view of the lack of progress, the United Kingdom now
supports action to identify those obstructing, delaying
or threatening the implementation of the Agreement,
with a view to imposing sanctions on those actors.

As I have stated, it is down to the parties themselves
to implement the Agreement; but, like others, I would
like to note the key role played by MINUSMA in the
implementation. We commend the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and all the staff,
especially considering the challenging circumstances
in which the military and civilian components are
operating. As we look forward to renew MINUSMA'S
mandate in June, we must ensure that its mandate is
clear, it focuses on supporting the implementation of
the Agreement and it is adequately equipped to support
peace in Mali.

With that in mind, I have another call on all
Member States to ensure that the continued shortfall
of troop numbers and equipment, including the need
for further air cover, reconnaissance capability and
armoured personnel carriers, is generously met. The
United Kingdom is committed to tackling threats in
the Sahel. Following the Anglo-French summit in
January, we have contributed Chinook helicopters to
support Operation Barkhane, and those are aligned and
working closely with MINUSMA. That is all designed
to promote stabilization in a bid to enable MINUSMA
to carry out its core mandate.

Finally, let me say that we too are disturbed by
reports of summary executions by the Forces Armees
Maliennes, and we strongly encourage the Government
to investigate those reports and ensure accountability
for those responsible. Ijoin the French Ambassador in
stressing how important that is. Human rights reporting
and monitoring should be prioritized in the MINUSMA
mandate, and we hope that it will be able to address
those and other important human rights violations by
signatory armed groups.

