Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mexico for choosing the
topic under discussion today. The rule of law at the
international level is a cornerstone of the maintenance
of international peace and security, and the Security
Council must retain it as a method of work and a goal
in view at all times.

I would like to thank Ms. Migiro for her presence
here today and her important remarks, and Ms. O'Brien
for her comprehensive statement.

International law is the accumulation of written
and unwritten rules that regulate international relations.
Notwithstanding the differences between States in
terms of population, geography, national culture,
identity, religion and political, economic and social
considerations, we are all united by the obligation to
abide by the provisions of international law. That is the
common element that unites us all. We have all
contributed to establishing this system on the basis of
our belief in the importance of creating an international
framework that guarantees the sovereignty,
independence and security of States, provides for
stability in relations on the basis of justice and
equality, and guarantees respect for basic human rights.

This law has been expanded and developed over
previous decades so that it now includes, in addition to
international legal norms and the United Nations
Charter, international humanitarian law, the law of
treaties, international trade law, the law of the seas, the
outer space law, various counter-terrorism agreements,
and numerous conventions on economic, social,
cultural, civil and political human rights.

The core objective of the establishment of the
United Nations at the end of the Second World War
was to maintain international peace and security, as
stated in Article 1 of the Charter, and to deter and
punish any State that chooses the military option
except in cases involving collective security and
legitimate defence.

For this purpose, Article 33 of the Charter lists
the peaceful means for conflict prevention and
resolution. These options must remain the alternatives
to war and violence. In that regard, we commend the
role of the Secretary-General, the International Court
of Justice, the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea, the Permanent Court of Arbitration and other
international, regional and local mechanisms that also
contribute to the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

However, we continue to witness a selective
application of the principle of preventing the use of
force. This reality threatens to render that concept
meaningless. It also constitutes a blatant violation of
the rule of law. Unfortunately, there are many examples
of this, the most serious of which are such Israeli
practices as the annexation of territory, the building of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian West Bank and
in the occupied Syrian Golan, the various
transgressions against holy sites, the identity of the
land and its history, such as in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the
policy of collective punishment and siege practiced in
Gaza, the various threats of war and destruction against
Lebanon, and the daily violations of its sovereignty by
land, sea and air.

This reality is extremely dangerous because it
creates the public perception that the international
community is incapable of preventing these practices,
which violate the principles of the United Nations and
of international law, specifically the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, the right of peoples to
self-determination, and the non-use of force. It also
suggests that Israel is a State with no accountability
and above international law and that the United
Nations is an incompetent and incapable entity. This
harms the Organization's image, reputation, efficiency
and role in the service of peace.

Lebanon, like many other States, refuses to
employ discretion and double standards. Lebanon
believes that it is its right and indeed its duty to
question why certain international resolutions are
implemented while others are ignored. Why are
sanctions enforced against some but not all States that
do not comply with international resolutions? Does not
Article 25 of the Charter oblige everyone to respect the
resolutions of the Security Council? Where is the
actual implementation of the principle of respect for
contracts - pacta sunt servanda - when certain
countries do not abide by the Charter? What is the
value of legal opinions issued by the International
Court of Justice when not all countries abide by them?
For how long will war criminals and those who commit
crimes against humanity be punished in some States
and not in others?

Equality among States is one of the main
principles of the United Nations and a pillar of the
concept of the rule of law. The international scene
today is vastly different from that of 1945.
Accordingly, the credibility of the Security Council is
being tested today because, although it calls for the
spread of democracy and justice, there is no review of
the structure of the Council itself and its practices
aimed at making the Council more democratic in its
representation and more fair in its methods of work.

Despite all this, Lebanon cannot help but
welcome the role that the Security Council is currently
playing in the protection of civilians in conflict and
war situations, especially women and children, and in
ensuring compliance with the rules of international
humanitarian law. We hope that the Council will firmly
abide by these rules, because they have now become
binding for everyone.

Lebanon also welcomes the other significant
steps taken by the Council, including the creation of
international tribunals to prosecute those who commit
the most heinous crimes and to contribute to ending
impunity. This is an inseparable part of the
implementation of the rule of law and the maintenance
of international peace and security.

The Lebanese people therefore look forward to
the activation and work of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon aimed at finding truth and delivering justice
and equity to the victims, healing wounds and deterring
criminals without resorting to the logic of vengeance or
politicization.

Lebanon commends the role that the Security
Council plays in post-conflict situations. This role
involves establishing and building peace by achieving
national reconciliation, strengthening national unity,
enabling countries to move on and to leave the painful
past behind, building national capacities and creating
the legislative and institutional foundations to
guarantee good governance, democracy and respect for
human rights. These are the fundamentals of the rule of
law at the national level.

Sanctions are a tool to be used for the
maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter. The
Security Council, in abiding by the principles of
justice, transparency and basic human rights in the
work of its sanctions committees, will enhance the
effectiveness of these committees and will not hinder
them from achieving their objectives. The appointment
of an Ombudsman to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
consideration of humanitarian exceptions in sanctions
are two very important steps. However, we need to do
more because if we were to agree to combat terrorism
at the expense of respect for human rights law,
terrorism would have won the fight.

In conclusion, Lebanon reiterates its conviction
that the basis for maintaining international peace and
security and for guaranteeing justice and equality
among States and respect for basic human rights is the
might of the law and not the law of might. International
law is a social contract between States; we are all its
legislators and we all must respect it.

