A few days ago, on 31 August (see S/2020/870), the Security Council voted on a draft resolution on combating terrorism (S/2020/852). The draft resolution was supposed to contribute to addressing one of the weaknesses and to close an important gap in this field by calling on Member States of our international Organization to repatriate, prosecute or rehabilitate their nationals - "terrorists without borders", or what some like to call "foreign terrorist fighters" - and by ridding the countries in which these terrorists are active of their evils and crimes. Unfortunately, the negotiation process on the draft resolution confirmed that some European countries represented in the Council have adhered to their selfish and irresponsible position of refusing to repatriate and hold accountable their hardened terrorist nationals. These countries have also persisted in their unethical attempts to evade their relevant responsibilities, to our great dissatisfaction. It is well known to everyone that my country, Syria, has been targeted in recent years by a brutal terrorist war in which the Governments of known countries have recruited foreign terrorist fighters, provided them with various forms of support and facilitated their infiltration into my country, mainly across our common borders with Turkey, in order to destabilize Syria's security and stability; undermine its sovereignty, territorial unity and integrity, and its role in the region; and pave the way for the perpetration of acts of aggression and occupation under the delusional pretext of fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). My delegation reiterates its condemnation and categorical rejection of the selective approach adopted by the Governments of some Member States regarding the issue of confronting the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security. These very same Governments consider terrorism to be a legitimate tool in which to invest as long as it does not target their countries, and describe the 2 66. terrorists as the "moderate armed Syrian opposition", "non-State armed groups", "revolutionaries", "jihadists" or "freedom fighters" who do not pose any threat to the peace and security of any country or region of the whole world, provided that they never think of returning to their countries of origin to continue spreading democracy and human rights there. Consequently, Western countries that have been consistently flooding some poor and developing countries with their nuclear and non-nuclear waste to protect their local environment from pollution are bent on flooding certain countries with their human waste of terrorists, extremists, mercenaries and murderers after they have used them to target certain countries, including my own. What confirms the relevance of what we say is the fact that some Western Governments still refuse to repatriate their terrorists, together with their families and children. They are also taking illegal and illegitimate measures to evade their responsibility for and duties towards their nationals, including by repatriating, prosecuting or rehabilitating them. For example, in recent years we have seen an effort by but not limited to the United Kingdom to revoke the nationality of British terrorists operating in my country if they should even dare think of going back to the United Kingdom. The same thing has happened in other countries. The Belgian Government - which shares with Germany the so-called humanitarian penholdership and claims to be concerned about the humanitarian situation in my country - refused to take back the Belgian wives of ISIS fighters and was content with expressing its readiness to receive children exclusively under the age of 10, despite the decisions issued by the Belgian judiciary demanding that children not be separated from their mothers. In the reports of the Secretary-General and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the United Nations has confirmed the existence of tens of thousands of terrorist fighters who came to my country from more than 100 Member States. The International Centre for Counter-Terrorism in The Hague indicated years ago that there were some 4,300 European terrorists fighting in Syria and Iraq, including 2,838 terrorists from France, Britain, Belgium and Germany - in other words, more than 700 terrorists for each of the four countries that I mentioned, all of which are currently members of the Security Council and NATO. Of course, these numbers have been manipulated and reduced to cover up the practices of the Governments of the four countries. The statistics of the Syrian Government show much higher numbers. My delegation reaffirms that the success of any political solution to the crisis that would restore security and stability to the entirety of the Syrian Arab Republic and improve the humanitarian situation requires that terrorism be combatted and that the concerned Governments repatriate their cannibalistic nationals from Idlib, which is controlled by the Al-Nusra Front and its affiliated multi-labelled and multifaceted entities. These Governments must also withdraw their monsters from Al-Hol Camp, which is run by the American occupation forces and their affiliated separatist militias, and avoid making this issue the subject of barter or suspicious deals aimed at trying to legitimize or recognize those militias involved in smuggling some ISIS terrorists or children to neighbouring countries, as happened a few days ago when more than 25 children were suffocated and poisoned after consuming excessive doses of sleeping drugs during preparations to smuggle them out of Al-Hol camp in water tanks and boxes. I do not want to name the Western countries and others that have paid huge sums of money to the armed separatist militias in exchange to take back some of their children or terrorists, in addition to the political statements they have issued in favour of these militias. As we thank our colleague, the Permanent Representative of Indonesia, for his efforts during the negotiating process related to the draft resolution on repatriating, prosecuting and rehabilitating foreign terrorist fighters, my country demands that the efforts of the Security Council to adopt an alternative and firm draft resolution under the Chapter VII of the Charter be pursued. Such a draft resolution would oblige Member States to cooperate in eliminating the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and to ensure the commitment of the Governments of the countries concerned to repatriate their nationals, hold them accountable for their crimes and take deterrent measures against them in order to assume their share of the international effort to rid the whole world of the scourge of terrorism. I would like to draw the Council's attention to the availability of information indicating that a number of terrorist members of the White Helmets and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist organizations, under the supervision of some Turkish officers, are working to prepare for the commission of a new chemical crime in the coming days in the city of Ariha and the Basames area in north-western Syria. They have also prepared the crime scene, kidnapped a number of children and prepared hostages and detainees to use in their crime, in order to lay charges against the Syrian Arab Army and provide a pretext to openly occupy the city of Idlib and its countryside and target all Syrian airports. The Syrian Government reiterates its commitment to a political solution that is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, without any foreign interference, and facilitated by the United Nations, with the indisputable commitment and firm respect of all Member States inside and outside the Council to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Syrian Government also reaffirms that it continues to work to combat terrorism and restore all Syrian territories, thereby achieving security, stability and prosperity for the Syrian people. The Syrian Government also recalls the need to fully adhere to the terms of reference and rules of work of the Constitutional Committee, and that there should be no foreign interference in its work or attempts to impose artificial timetables or deadlines for its work. In conclusion, we all heard the American President, Donald Trump, confirm days ago that his Administration was planning to assassinate the President of the Syrian Arab Republic. This confirms the level to which that Administration's reckless political thinking and behaviour have descended. Here, I pose a question to the Secretary-General and my colleagues in the Council. When it comes to the United States Administration's claims of support for a peaceful political solution to the crisis in my country that is facilitated by the United Nations, does such a hostile American position directed against the Head of a State Member of the Organization make any sense at all?
