Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing. We commend the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for its significant contributions
to the development of substantive and procedural
international criminal law. We also recognize the
important contributions of the Court to the promotion
of the rule of law.

Nigeria commends the Libyan Prosecutor General
and the Libyan representative to the ICC for their
close cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor.
We welcome the exchange of information between the
Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office and the Office
of the Prosecutor and commend the commitment and
professionalism of the Libyan national investigators. We
encourage the two sides to strengthen their cooperation
and work together to end impunity in Libya.

With regard to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, we note
the Pre-Trial Chamber's decision of 31 May 2013,
confirmed by the 21 May 2014 decision of the Appeals
Chamber, that his case is admissible. Therefore, as
a State party to the Rome Statute, Libya has a legal
obligation to surrender him to the Court.
Concerning Abdullah Al-Senussi, we note the
decision of the Court that his case is inadmissible.
We also note the ongoing efforts by the Office of the
Prosecutor to monitor his trial in Libya for new facts
that may support a reversal of the Court's decision
concerning the admissibility of his case.

We note the progress that the Office of the
Prosecutor has made in the ongoing investigation in
Libya. That is particularly significant in the light of
the difficult security situation in the country and the
limited resources available to the Office. We commend
the Office for investigating the crimes committed by
different parties in Libya, including those committed
by terrorist groups that are taking advantage of the
political and security vacuum in the country. That is
consistent with resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2238 (2015).

We condemn all mass executions, including that of
30 Ethiopian Christians, by the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS). We also condemn the abductions by ISIS
and other terrorist groups. We call for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire across Libya. Parties involved
in the conflict should refrain from targeting civilians
or civilian targets and should desist from committing
atrocity crimes. We call on all Libyan militias to disarm
and participate in the efforts to restore peace, law and
order in the country. We support the political dialogue
and the formation of a Government of national accord
in order to meet the aspirations of the Libyan people,
establish the rule oflaw, end the conflict and safeguard
Libyan unity. That is vital to stabilizing the country and
ending the impunity of terrorist groups and militias.

On the issue ofresources, we note with concern that
resource constraints might hinder the Office's ability to
conduct additional investigative activities in 2016. We
therefore call upon States parties to provide the funding
required by the Office to undertake the necessary
investigations in accordance with its mandate.

Finally, we call on key partners of Libya to provide
the necessary support to the Libyan authorities for the
purpose of restoring security in the country, protect
civilians and strengthen capacity in the areas ofjustice
and the rule of law.

