Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome the Chairman-in-Office and
thank him for his comprehensive overview of the
activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) under Finland's
leadership. The Chair's presentation touched on the
OSCE's multifaceted approach to security, which
includes the political and military aspects as well as the
economic, environmental and human dimensions. We
commend the OSCE's efforts to further the principles
of the Helsinki Final Act and we strongly support the
Chair's statement on the importance of OSCE-United
Nations cooperation.

We strongly commend the OSCE's work in
Georgia and appreciate the organization's ongoing
efforts to contribute to a comprehensive solution to the
conflict. I want to commend Foreign Minister Stubb
personally for the leadership he has demonstrated
throughout the Georgia crisis. The OSCE responded
quickly to the crisis, sending an additional 20 military
monitoring officers to Georgia. We regret that the
Russian Federation has blocked the OSCE monitors'

08-5232]
access to South Ossetia. Furthermore, Russia's position
regarding the monitors' area of responsibility is now
holding up the deployment of an additional
80 monitors. International monitors must have access
throughout all of Georgia - the OSCE in South
Ossetia and the United Nations in Abkhazia - to
verify the implementation of the 12 August ceasefire
agreement and to shed light on human rights and
humanitarian concerns.

Turning to Kosovo, this year has been one of
transformation. Kosovo institutions that were built by
the Kosovars with the assistance of the OSCE and the
United Nations have become fully functional, and the
Kosovo people have rightly taken control of them.
Since independence, Kosovo has adopted a new
constitution, implementing legislation that enshrines
the rights of minorities. The OSCE mission in Kosovo
has played an important role in reaching out to
minorities, and we look forward to continued OSCE
engagement there.

Regarding Afghanistan, we are very pleased to
hear that concrete projects related to policing and to
the fight against drug trafficking will be under way by
the end of the year.

The OSCE also plays a critical role in promoting
democracy and reform through election observation.
The OSCE Office of Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights has set the gold standard for election
observation methodology. Its strong credentials and
expertise in that area are respected worldwide. The
OSCE will observe presidential elections in the United
States in November, and we welcome that effort. An
autonomous elections watchdog can contribute overall
to strengthening democratic institutions in countries in
transition and in established democracies.

I want to assure Mr. Stubb of the full support of
the United States in his efforts.

