President Ramos-Horta: May I first introduce
my delegation. I am accompanied by the Minister of
Finance, Mrs. Emilia Pires; Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs Alberto Carlos; my deputy Chief of Civilian
Staff, Mr. Hernani Coelho; and, of course, our
Permanent Representative, Mrs. Sofia Borges, whom
all members of the Security Council know.

Deputy Minister Alberto Carlos has 11 years'
experience with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, including two and a half
years in emergency operations in the Sudan and eight
years in Timor-Leste, with two years as head of the
office.

Mr. Hernani Coelho served four and half years as
a policy adviser with the United Nations Development
Programme in Timor-Leste, and three years as our
Ambassador in Canberra. Mrs. Emilia Pires worked for
years in the donors coordinating unit of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) in the donors coordinating unit. After
studying at the London School of Economics, she
served at the World Bank in Gaza, Palestine. With no
party affiliation, Mrs. Pires was invited and accepted
the challenge of heading the Ministry of Finance for
Timor-Leste, and has served in that position for nearly
five years.

As members can see, like others in my country,
those compatriots have had long and rich experience in
both the national and international arenas and have
served in challenging field missions.

At this juncture, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative and Ambassador of South
Africa for agreeing to serve as coordinator of the Core
Group for Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank
Brazil for its previous leadership of the Group.

The year 2012 will mark another milestone in our
history with the United Nations. I have lost count of
the number of times I have walked the halls of the
United Nations since 1975. As a point of curiosity,
when I first came to the United Nations, Yakov Malik
of the former Soviet Union was here. Members can
therefore imagine how long I have known the United
Nations. I also knew many others who have since
passed from the scene or passed away.

Between 1975 and 1999, many of my trips to
New York were discouraging, but we continued our
struggle. Finally, after many years, the vast majority of
the population chose independence in the popular
consultation administered by the United Nations
Mission in East Timor. That was followed by
UNTAET, led by our dear and terribly missed friend
Sergio Vieira de Mello, and subsequent United Nations
missions.

In 2006 it was with much regret that I had to
return to the Council to ask once again for assistance
after civil disturbances affected Timor-Leste. That was
a difficult time for me and for our people. However,
the events of 2006 have to be put into context. Barely
four years had passed since the restoration of
independence in May of 2002. Nearly all States
undergo those types of traumatic experiences at some
point in their histories. The mark of a successful State
is that it learns from such experiences and emerges
stronger and is determined to ensure that they do not
reoccur.

In that regard, the people of Timor-Leste are
committed to ensuring that the prevailing peace and
stability continue through 2012 and beyond. I can
confirm from my many travels across the country,
including to the most remote areas, that the Timorese
people are united in our commitment to peace and our
desire for a better future.

I am very pleased to once again address this
body, this time in much happier circumstances than
those that prevailed in Timor-Leste in the first half of
2006, when Timor-Leste appeared to be racing towards
the edge of an abyss. In May of that year, weeks into
the crisis, I hastily travelled to New York to address the
Council and to plead with it to urgently assist us in
restoring law and order. I said then, in describing the
atmosphere in the city, "Dili is a city on the edge; fear
is palpable". In retrospect, I can only say today that the
2006 crisis could have been averted. It had its origin in
minor but unresolved problems in the defence force
that were allowed to fester and then spilled over into
the police and ultimately into the streets. Today I speak
before the Council in very different circumstances. Dili
is a bustling city, full of life. Today it is peace that is
palpable. Peace has returned to our cities, our
communities, our streets, our schools and our homes.

My Office took a number of initiatives to address
the root causes of the 2006 crisis, and to foster a
culture of peace and non-violence, bearing in mind that
peace has to grow from within ourselves as individuals,
within families and communities. It cannot be achieved
by formal agreements and declarations or by
Government decrees alone or by police action. Peace is
a process, sometimes a long one - too long. It can be
achieved through a formal political process; but, to be
sustained, we have to deal with human beings as
individuals, communities and real people with traumas,
emotions and anger, but also with hopes, with hearts
and feelings.

In 2009 we launched the Dili-City of Peace
vision, an initiative built on a series of monthly
dialogues with communities in all regions of the
country. Under the slogan "The Road to Peace and
National Unity", it included major sports and cultural
initiatives - the Mount Ramelau Cultural and Music
Festival; the Tour de Timor, which is now in its fourth
year; and the Dili International Marathon in early May,
which is in its third year - among other initiatives
aimed at restoring hope, pride and faith in our people.
The peace campaign is enhanced by fast-tracked
anti-poverty initiatives, which include building simple
homes for extremely poor households, building or
refurbishing schools, and supporting income-
generating schemes for very poor families.

With humility we acknowledge and are conscious
that no single person or institution can single-handedly
deliver peace, security and stability. It is the work of
all of us in Timor-Leste - the Government, political
leaders, civil society, churches, and all who are
committed to lasting peace. Healing the wounds in
communities requires patient effort, with special
attention given to the wounds of the soul. Peace must
be built block by block, community by community, and
it requires unlimited patience and care every day, every
week, through working together, connecting with
common people, being accessible to them, listening
and communicating, making them feel that leaders do
care about their suffering, needs and dreams.

Almost five years into my mandate as President
and that of the Fourth Constitutional Government led
by Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao, I am both pleased
that much has been achieved but sad that too much
remains to be realized. I must also state here that we
would not have come this far without the generous
assistance of the international community, the United
Nations through the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), specialized agencies and
programmes, our many bilateral partners - large and
not so large - and our closest neighbours. Hence, I
wish to thank all for their generous and steady
engagement with us from 1999 to 2002 and again since
2006.

I wish in particular to reiterate our people's
gratitude to the Governments and peoples of Malaysia,
Australia, New Zealand and Portugal, who in 2006, in
response to our request for urgent assistance, promptly
dispatched to our shores a robust force that, working
closely with Timorese leaders, succeeded in preventing
the worst from happening. Malaysia, a fellow South-
East Asian neighbour, displayed true regional and
South-South solidarity, impressive professionalism and
preparedness in deploying in record time air and sea-
borne forces thousands of miles away from its shores.
At its peak in 2006-2007, the combined Australia-New
Zealand forces present on our soil totalled 3,500
servicemen and women.

Today that number is approximately 450. They
have not been engaged in operational policing duty
since 2009, but have been extremely effective in
assisting with humanitarian and engineering training
for our defence force. Within a week of our appeal for
assistance in 2006, from 20,000 miles away Portugal
deployed by air a company of its elite force, the
prestigious Guarda Nacional Republicana, with all the
required equipment, including armoured personnel
carriers, medical units and more. The Republic of
Indonesia has been a good neighbour and a good
friend, ensuring that our common borders are kept safe
even during the turmoil in Dili. To all, I reiterate our
sincere admiration and the eternal gratitude of our
people.

This is an eventful year for our people. We will
celebrate the tenth anniversary of the restoration of
independence and will be holding two major elections:
the presidential election on 17 March and the
legislative election in the last week of June. Ten years
on, we can draw some satisfaction from the fact that
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Human Development Report of October 2010 accorded
Timor-Leste a human development index value of
0.502, placing our country in the medium human
development category. This was an increase from 0.428
in 2005 and 0.375 at independence.

Since 2005, life expectancy at birth in Timor-
Leste has increased by more than two years and now
averages 62.1 years. The gross national product per
capita increased 228 per cent during the same period to
over $5,000. Average annual growth has been double-
digit for the past four years, and real non-oil gross
domestic product growth remains strong.

School enrolment in Timor-Leste has jumped
from a modest 63 per cent in 2006 to over 90 per cent
for basic education, according to the 2010 national
census. In the past three years, close to 200,000 adults
have graduated from illiteracy to functioning literacy,
and Timor-Leste will proclaim full adult literacy by
2015.

In the health sector, as in the adult education
sector, significant progress has been made, with much
of the credit going to Cuba. Infant mortality and the
mortality of children under five years old have all been
dramatically reduced. Incidences of malaria and
dengue and the prevalence of poverty have decreased.

There cannot be a nobler mission than that of
rescuing our fellow human beings from the centuries-
old illness of leprosy. With the support of the Nippon
Foundation and the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the commitment and dedication of its patron,
Mr. Yohei Sasakawa, WHO Goodwill Ambassador for
the Elimination of Leprosy, the incidence of the disease
in Timor-Leste is now less than one case per 10,000
people. Leprosy is considered by the WHO to have
been medically eliminated in Timor-Leste, for the first
time in centuries.

Here, I wish to duly acknowledge the generous
contribution of the European Commission, our second-
largest development partner. Other bilateral donors,
public and private, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and United Nations agencies have all
contributed generously, and we are forever grateful to
all.

However, as proud as we are of our achievements
thus far, we are also very aware of the daunting
challenges still to be overcome. Poverty has seen a
significant reduction as its prevalence declined from
49 per cent in 2007 to 41 per cent two years later,
according to estimates of the World Bank. But this
means that poverty is still high and remains a major
challenge. Child malnutrition is extremely high and is
an indictment of us all, we the Timorese leaders and
our partners. Tuberculosis remains rampant and is our
number one health problem.

While we acknowledge shortcomings and
failures, it is time that our bilateral and multilateral
partners, including international NGOs, accept their
share of responsibility for the failures in this very
critical field. Our public administration is still lagging
on procedures and lacking qualified human resources.
We are committed to improving efficiency in budget
expenditures and State investment in basic
infrastructure. Access to clean water, sanitation, public
health and education are key priorities that demand
more robust investment now and in the years to come.

As the UNDP Human Development Report and
other indicators show, we have rebounded strongly
from the brief periods of instability. The political
situation in Timor-Leste in recent years has been
remarkably free of tension. Ours is an open society.
Transparency in our public life is a process that we
have committed ourselves to promoting and to
deepening, with the assistance of the international
community.

As many here know, Timor-Leste is fortunate in
that it is relatively rich in mineral resources. We have a
petroleum fund that is carefully managed to ensure that
it shall benefit Timor-Leste for years to come. The
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative rates
Timor-Leste as the best performer in Asia and third in

the world in terms of accountability and transparency
in the management of our petroleum resources.

In the pursuit of good governance and
transparency, our National Parliament has enacted an
anti-corruption law. We have since created an
anti-corruption body. The offices of the Ombudsman
and the investigative powers of the Prosecutor-General
have been strengthened. Both have seen robust
investment in organization and training.

We have a dynamic multiparty democracy, with
nine parties represented in the National Parliament.
Almost 30 per cent of elected members of Parliament
are women. Several women hold key ministerial
portfolios. Thirteen candidates have now been
confirmed for the presidential election on 17 March. I
must have been doing a very poor job as President over
the past four years, since so many people now want to
take the job away from me. I am also a candidate
among the 13. Twenty-four political parties have
registered for the legislative elections - 24 political
parties in a country of 1 million. I always tell our
people that the United States, a country of 300 million
and a super-Power, has two parties. Indonesia, a
country of 250 million, has five parties represented in
Parliament. With 1 million people, we now have 24
parties registered.

I can only hope that the electorate is wiser than
the aspiring politicians and cast its votes on a handful
of the better known political parties in order to ensure
stable, functioning majorities. Because I have spoken
ad nauseam in my country about this issue, I have not
earned the sympathy of the aspiring politicians with
my frequent blunt appeal to voters not to waste their
votes on the new, smaller political parties.

We have ratified all major international human
rights treaties and complied with reporting obligations.
According to Reporters Without Borders, Timor-Leste
has some of the freest media in the region. We are
proud that we have a very liberal, humanist
Constitution that prohibits the death penalty and life in
prison. The maximum prison sentence in Timor-Leste
is 25 years.

Together, we have developed our vision for
national development, and last July we launched our
Strategic Development Plan, which will help us
translate our vision into reality. Timor-Leste's success
is also the United Nations success. UNMIT, led by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ms. Ameerah Haq, has made real contributions since it
was established in 2006, most obviously in the areas of
good offices and public security and policing. UNMIT
has also provided important assistance in the areas of
the rule of law, governance, justice and human rights.

By the end of this year, we would like to see
peacekeeping come to a close and to form a new
partnership with the United Nations. I wish to be clear.
We need and want international partnership,
underpinned by a modest United Nations mission in
line with our country's real needs and adjusted to the
evolving reality on the ground. To achieve that, we
have established a High-level Committee on
Transition, which I chair with the support of the Prime
Minister and the Special Representative. We meet
every other month and have developed a plan for the
transition, which the three of us signed on
19 September 2011. The level of engagement on the
part of both the Government and the United Nations is
steadfast, and I am confident that the plan will be
implemented.

In January, discussions began between the
Government and the United Nations on potential
options for the post-UNMIT United Nations role. The
emerging consensus is that the United Nations role
could include support to further enhance democratic
institutions, capacity-building of the security sector
institutions, in particular the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste, our national police force, and continued
support in areas such as governance, justice and human
rights. The Government and all stakeholders will
continue to be actively engaged in these discussions to
ensure that the best option that emerges is one that is
tailored to the specific needs and priorities of Timor-
Leste - bearing in mind that, by August 2012, there
will be a new Timorese Government that will make the
final decision on that matter.

In closing, I would like to invite everyone here to
Timor-Leste in 2012 to see for themselves how far our
country has come, to partake in the anniversary
celebrations we have planned throughout the year, and
to visit our mountains and swim in our pristine waters.
I pray every day to our God, the Almighty and the
Merciful, to bestow on the members of the Council the
unique qualities of leadership: vision, compassion and
courage.
This collective security body, set up after the
tragedy of the Second World War to spare humankind
the scourge of wars, is often called upon to prevent or
to end wars. Expectations are as high as the suffering
and desperation of those seeking help. Often those
expectations are not met in a timely fashion, and
people's faith in and illusions about the idealistic
United Nations they have imagined in their desperation
are shattered. But the sad fact is that too often, there is
not much that outside forces can do to influence the
course of events in a particular country. But the
Security Council can always offer words of support
and hope. The Council might not be able to mitigate
the suffering of all but it can help some. It might not be
able to offer shelter and safe haven to all, but it can
accommodate some. It might not be able to save 1,000
lives, but it can try to save at least one life.

Too often, regimes fail to seize the opportunities
offered them to walk away in safety and with some
semblance of honour, save themselves and spare the
further suffering of others. And too often, the parties to
a conflict miscalculate, underestimate each other and
overestimate their respective strength, believing that
they can outsmart and defeat their adversary if they
just persist, and all they achieve is further suffering of
the people.

At times, the Council is criticized for failing to
act. Sometimes the critics are right; sometimes they are
wrong and unfair in their sweeping judgments. But I
know that the Council does what it can and as much as
it can, because that is the reality of our world.

Before coming here - this is not part of my
prepared speech - I almost cancelled my trip because
a brother-in-law of mine passed away the day before.
But I decided to come to New York anyway to share
with the Council the good news of what is happening
in at least one corner of the world. As I watched the
nightly news on Al-Jazeera, the BBC or CNN, and saw
the Council try to manage many challenging conflict
situations around the world, I thought to myself that
maybe I should go, not only to ask for help but to bring
those people dealing with these challenges around the
world some good news. I do bring good news from
Timor-Leste, hoping that before the Council turns
shortly to manage other situations, such as that in the
Middle East, my news about what the Council and we
have achieved will be of comfort.

