Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and her briefing.
I wish to take this opportunity to reaffirm our full
support to her and to the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

There have been moments in history when the
Council has united to prevent or stop atrocities that, in
the terms of the Rome Statute, "shock the conscience of
humanity". The announcement in February 2011 by the
Libyan regime itself that it was preparing a bloodbath
triggered such unity. The adoption of resolution 1970
(2011) was one of those historic moments here in the
Security Council. There have been others since, with
the adoption of texts on the Central African Republic
and with the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham.

When we review the implementation of resolution
1970 (2011), there is a question that remains, by its very
nature, unanswered: how many lives were able to be
saved? Thousands, without a doubt, and history must
give credit for that to a unanimous Security Council,
to the United Nations and to the International Criminal
Court.

However, did we solve everything? No. Libya is
going through a transition, with its difficulties and
uncertainties. Violent acts continue. Instability persists.
But despite the catastrophic legacy of the Al-Qadhafi
regime, Libyans must show determination and must
continue to come together around a shared political
project to bring the democratic transition to fruition.
The Council has mobilized to help them to do so.
Bernardino Leon has been appointed by the Secretary-
General to assist the political process.

In that regard, we are concerned about the
consequences of the decision taken on 6 November
by the Supreme Court invalidating the election results
of 25 June. We believe it is essential that an inclusive
political dialogue be initiated without delay, as the
Libyan crisis can be solvedb only by political means.
There is an urgent need to establish a Government of
national unity that can quickly return to Tripoli. We
stand ready to use individual sanctions as provided for
by resolution 2174 (2014) to target those who obstruct
the political transition. The designation of Ansar
Al-Sharia as a terrorist organization is also part of this
political context, aimed at separating terrorists away
from the moderate Islamists, who do have a role to play
on the political stage.

Libya's cooperation with the International Criminal
Court is crucial to end the era of impunity in the country,
which emerged from 42 years of dictatorship in 2011.
How can we prevent armed groups continuing their
abuses if they feel free to act without consequences?
Libya, despite its difficulties, requested to try the
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the Abdullah Al-Senussi
cases in its own courts, in accordance with the Rome
Statute and resolution 1970 (2011). The Court, as the
sole competent authority in this matter, declared itself
competent to try Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
called for his delivery to the Court. It found the case The
Prosecutor against Mr. Abdullah Senussi" inadmissible
and thereby granted Libya's request to try the accused.
Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), must comply
with the judges' decision. Compliance by Libya with
its international obligations is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law. There is no competition
between national justice systems and the International
Criminal Court, be it in Libya or elsewhere, but a
principle of complementarity. Libya has obligations
under resolution 1970 (2011), the Council has requested
it to comply therewith, it is as simple as that.

Regarding the other abuses, as Ms. Bensouda
recalled, the signing ofa memorandum ofunderstanding
on burden-sharing between the Court and the Libyan
authorities represents an innovative and positive
approach. We must continue on this path despite the
current crisis, which has slowed efforts significantly.

The challenges are immense. We must make shed
light on alleged crimes, such as those committed in
Misrata and Taourga during the armed conflict of 2011
and in Bani Walid in 2012. We regret, in that regard,
that the return of communities of Taouerga to their
villages remains to be achieved.

Finally, we express our deep concern at the use
of torture and at the deaths in detention centres under
the control of armed brigades in Libya. There remain
some 7,000 illegal detainees, including children.
These practices must stop. Like the Prosecutor, we
encourage the Libyan authorities to implement the law
passed in April 2013 that criminalized torture, forced
disappearances and discrimination. Armed groups
must recall that the fight against impunity also applies
to them.

As I said at the outset, resolution 1970 (2011)
continues to serve as an example of how the Security
Council can take swift and united action. Faced with
the abuses committed by the Libyan leadership at the
time, the United Nations and regional organizations
were united in their condemnation of the atrocities. For
its part, the International Criminal Court was central
to the process of isolating the criminals, regardless of
their rank and regardless of their side.

Today, we must ensure the follow-up to these
steps. The fight against impunity requires both the full
cooperation of Libya with the Court, the improvement
of the security situation, full consideration by the
Secretariat and the Mission to Support the United
Nations in Libya, and the activities of the Prosecutor.

