Mr. Nishida (Japan): On behalf of the Japanese
Government, I wish to express my gratitude,
Mr. President, for your organizing this thematic debate
to promote a fruitful discussion on counter-terrorism. I
also wish to extend my appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his informative and comprehensive
briefing.

Terrorism continues to be one of the biggest
threats to international peace and security. Despite the
fact that the international community, led by the United
Nations, has made progress in counter-terrorism, the
threats posed by terrorist organizations and individuals
remain very high. Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations and local extremists are still active, and
many areas in the world face a threat from such groups.
Last year the attempted bombing of a United States
commercial aircraft reminded us once again that
terrorism continues to be a global threat. Deep-seated
problems surrounding terrorism, such as radicalization
and safe havens, need to be addressed in an appropriate
manner.

To eradicate terrorism, multifaceted approaches
by all stakeholders are Vital. The Japanese Government
will continue to participate proactively in international
efforts led by the United Nations to combat terrorism.
In that regard, a recent review of the implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorist Strategy gave us an
important opportunity to renew our determination to
fight terrorism.

We expect that United Nations efforts in the field
of counter-terrorism will be strengthened by
coordination by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, avoiding overlaps and duplication of its
work.

To combat terrorism, Security Council leadership
is crucial. The Council has set out various effective
measures, including through activities by the three
counter-terrorism-related committees: those established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). We recognize that resolution 1904 (2009)
has contributed to ensuring a fair and transparent
procedure for the terrorist sanction regimes. We also
welcome the recent successful review of the
consolidated list of the Council's Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee.

Although we have taken positive steps for further
counter-terrorism measures, there are still capacity
gaps among Member States. From that standpoint, we
believe that country visits and the preliminary
implementation assessments conducted by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
play a vital role in determining the needs for support
and in coordinating capacity-building activities. We
hope that the Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED
will carry out further efforts to enhance counter-
terrorism capacity of all Member States by facilitating
technical assistance.

Counter-terrorism is one of the most important
national security agenda issues for the Japanese
Government. I wish to reiterate our strong
determination to continue to take an active role in the
international community's fight against terrorism.

