Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
would like to thank Mr. Annabi for his informative
briefing. I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Svilanovic to the Security Council and thank him for
his remarks as well. He raised a number of interesting
points.

I would like to assure the Foreign Minister that
the Council has very much heard the concerns of his
Government about violence in the ground safety zone
and in certain municipalities in southern Serbia. We,
too, are extremely concerned and have condemned
these acts of violence. Mr. Annabi has described some
of the steps taken by the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), including immediate steps to cut off the
material and political support for the armed ethnic
Albanian extremist groups and to enhance KFOR's
surveillance and monitoring of the border along the
ground safety zone. KFOR has interdicted weapons and
supplies and detained more than 30 individuals

S/PVAZA')

 

suspected of being involved in illegal activities. In
addition, Mr. Kouchner has signed new regulations that
increase the authority of KFOR and UNMIK to expel
or detain anyone suspected of aiding armed insurgents
in the border area.

My Government has joined KFOR and UNMIK
officials in urging the Kosovar Albanian leadership to
use its influence with these groups to encourage them
to cease all violent activity. In November Secretary of
State Albright sent a letter to the leading Kosovar
Albanian figures warning in the strongest terms against
further violence in Presevo region. North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) Secretary-General
Robertson also raised the issue with Kosovo's
leadership when he recently visited the area.

We welcome the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Government's expressed commitment to respect is
obligations under the military-technical agreement and
in Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). There is no
better sign of this commitment than the enhanced
cooperation between UNMIK, KFOR and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities through the Joint
Implementation Commission. In that connection, I note
that at a 17 December meeting of the Joint
Implementation Commission the Commander of KFOR
briefed Federal Republic of Yugoslavia officials on
what KFOR has done and is doing regarding the
Presevo Valley. He also stressed that the use of force is
not the solution. Clearly, the only lasting solution to
the problem is a political one. In that respect, we urge
all sides to continue to exercise restraint, and we
welcome the beginning of a dialogue with local
community leaders and the establishment of a joint
commission under Deputy Prime Minister Covic to
investigate the problem.

We recognize that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Government has shown considerable
restraint and responsibility in dealing with this
problem, especially during a hard-fought political
campaign in the run-up to elections on 23 December.
Not everyone has acted so responsibly, and we would
caution against exaggerated charges and calls for
military action that have emanated from some on both
sides of the Kosovo border.

In Kosovo itself, as the Secretary-General's
report makes clear, elections have opened the door to
continued progress on the political front. The
municipal assemblies have been constituted. Minority

representatives have been appointed. The Joint Interim
Administrative Structure is operational. In the coming
months, UNMIK should continue to press ahead with
regulations that will further define the responsibilities
of Kosovo's autonomous institutions. The United
States supports Kosovo-wide elections in the spring of
2001, with the participation of all groups in Kosovo.
Democratic changes in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have helped encourage this participation
and provide hope that a multi-ethnic, democratic
Kosovo governed by the rule of law will prevail.

Continued progress on the issue of the Kosovo
detainees will help promote reconciliation. We urge the
Government in Belgrade to press ahead with the
passage of an asylum law for the release of Kosovar
political prisoners, and we call for a full accounting of
the missing.

In closing, we would like to welcome the
Secretary-General's appointment of former Danish
Defence Minister Haekkerup as his new Special
Representative in Kosovo. We would also like to wish
Bernard Kouchner all the best, thank him for his
tremendous efforts and applaud his significant success
in implementing Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

