Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing, which demonstrates, if proof were still needed, that the Syrian regime continues to flout its international obligations. Why else would we meet again today after last Monday's meeting? Contrary to what some claim, the Syrian chemical dossier is not closed. I say in the strongest possible terms that this dossier will remain a priority for France until full light has been shed on the allegations of the use of chemical weapons and on the state of the Syrianstockpiles. The safety of the civilian population is at stake. The ongoing use of chemical weapons by the regime against its own people is an indisputable fact, repeatedly affirmed by teams of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations. Most recently, on 8 April, following a thorough investigation, the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team issued a damning report on chemical-weapon attacks by the regime's air force units. After Ghouta, Khan Shaykhun and Douma, there is now Ltamenah, but how many more? In 2013, the Syrian regime committed itself to cooperating transparently and in good faith with the OPCW. It has not kept its word, to say the least. Six years after the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), we still do not have clarity as to the state of Syria's chemical stockpiles. It is high time that the commitments made were finally honoured. That includes in particular allowing experts of the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team access to its territory. Moreover, that is the essence of the decision taken by the OPCW Executive Council in July, which was presented by France, on behalf of 40 delegations, and gives Syria 90 days to remedy the situation. For my part, I ask two simple questions. The regime claims that it has nothing to hide, so why does it not cooperate with the OPCW? The regime claims to have destroyed its stockpiles in 2014, so where do the chemical weapons that have been used in Syria since then come from? Last week, I attended an Arria Formula meeting whose sole aim was to continue to spread misinformation and undermine the OPCW. It is contemptible, let me stress emphatically, to seek to discredit that professional and rigorous organization on the pretext that its conclusions do not align with the version that Syria and certain permanent members of the Security Council wish to give of the facts. The professionalism and impartiality of the OPCW are proven once again by the publication of two reports of the Fact-Finding Mission on the incidents in Saraqib in 2016 and Aleppo in 2018. Having considered all materials available, it concluded that the use of chemical substances as weapons could not be confirmed. The use of chemical weapons is a crime that threatens humankind as a whole, and the re-emergence of chemical weapons remains one of the greatest threats it falls to us to address. The Council recalled in clear terms, in November 2019, that the use of chemical weapons anywhere by anyone under any circumstances is unacceptable and represents a threat to international peace and security. That is why there can be no impunity and why France, jointly with 39 other countries and the European Union, has since 2018 supported the International Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons. Restoring the credibility of the prohibition regime is also one of the conditions for just and lasting peace in Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). In conclusion, I must state my profound regret that you, Sir, decided to ignore a democratic vote of the Council. The fact you did not like the result of the voting does not authorize you to abuse your role as President. With regard to Mr. Bustani, who was presented to us as areliable, independent expert, I am not convinced that you did a great service to him or his credibility by serving as his spokesperson. The masks have now fallen, and I think he will now belong to the small cohort of your regular Arria Formula briefings.
