Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
thank the Secretary-General for the comprehensive
report before us (S/2010/630), and of course our thanks
go to his Special Representative, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his informative briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the holding of
the Afghan parliamentary elections on 18 September
and commends the Afghan people for their
participation in that important democratic exercise,
despite a challenging political, security and geographic
environment that saw an increased number of incidents
and civilian casualties on polling day. We commend the
Afghan electoral institutions and bodies for their hard
work. Despite all the difficulties, the accomplishment
of the election represents an important foundation for
building Afghanistan's future. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General's view that the international
community and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) need to continue lending
their technical and political support to the pursuit of
long-term electoral reform aimed at improving the
capacity of Afghanistan's electoral authorities.

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers the promotion
of peace and reintegration to be a very important tool
for building a brighter future for Afghanistan. We
welcome the inauguration of the High Peace Council
by President Karzai on 7 October, as well as UNAMA's
decision to establish an internal capacity for
responding to specific requests from that Council for
technical and practical assistance. We expect that such
practical steps will continue to multiply and help create
a firm path to the process of reconciliation in general.

It is also encouraging that the Afghan
Government has achieved targets for increasing the
size of the Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police, and adopted anti-corruption action
plans. We were particularly pleased to learn that the
Cabinet has approved a budget line in the State budget
for the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission. That is a hopeful sign for the future work
of the Commission, which we hope will continue to
make the protection of human rights a central issue in
the future development of Afghanistan. In addition, we
welcome positive measures taken in the area of access
to justice with the opening of Ministry of Justice legal
aid offices in several provinces. This represents an
encouraging concrete step that should give the Afghan
people more confidence in their country's justice
system.

With regard to aid coherence, Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes UNAMA's efforts to support
the coordination of development activities at the sub-
national level. We share the Secretary-General's
opinion that aligning provincial development councils
and donors with Government-led processes is essential
to future development.

Regarding humanitarian assistance,
reconstruction and development, we strongly support
refugee return and welcome the return of more than
112,000 Afghan refugees in 2010, nearly double the
number of returns in 2009. This would not have been
possible without the valuable assistance of the United
Nations and its agencies. We commend the work of all

the parties concerned in creating the conditions
necessary for the returns, including improved security
in some parts of Afghanistan, the provision of
employment opportunities and the Afghan
Government's land allocation schemes. We reiterate
our call on all actors to continue their valuable work to
create the conditions necessary for economically
sustainable returns.

We are encouraged by the development of
regional cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, and in that context we welcome the role
played by Turkey in facilitating and advancing regional
engagement in Afghanistan. We hope that the
recommendations on priority investment issued by the
most recent Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, held in Istanbul, will
encourage further regional economic cooperation and
produce concrete results on the ground.

We also welcome the progress made in the area of
mine clearance, which will help the country on its path
to economic development, especially in rural
communities. The concrete benefits of these actions
include improved security for the Afghan people, as
well as the opening of land for the new railway system.

Bosnia and Herzegovina notes with concern that
the human rights situation in Afghanistan has
deteriorated significantly compared with previous
years. We remain particularly alarmed about civilians
who continue to suffer from deadly attacks across the
country. They remain the most vulnerable targets, and
we call on all relevant parties to redouble their efforts
in the area of the protection of civilians. We must
engage all our resources to protect this innocent
population.

Regarding the mission support and operational
issues of UNAMA, we welcome the signing on
28 November of an agreement between the United
Nations and Kuwait establishing a UNAMA support
office in Kuwait in order to help maintain its vital
technical and administrative functions in a secure
environment.

In conclusion, our thanks go to the staff of
UNAMA and to all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan for their dedicated work to improve the
everyday life of the Afghan people.

