Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to join previous
speakers in commending and thanking Mr. Karim
Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), for the comprehensive
and enlightening report (see S/2019/407) submitted
pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). We also welcome
the appointment of Ms. Al-Khafaji.

The delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
highlights the importance of resolution 2379 (2017) in
terms ofjudicial accountability for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is essential that those
responsible for the atrocity and mass crimes committed
by Da'esh during the period between June 2014 and
December 2017, in which it occupied, controlled and

operated with impunity in large areas of Iraq, committing
all kinds of crimes involving serious Violations of
international human rights law, international criminal
law and international humanitarian law, all of which
constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, be held accountable.

The shocking and horrifying discovery of more
than 200 mass graves containing the remains of
thousands of men, women and children deserves no
less. We therefore welcome the establishment of the
Investigative Team and its efforts to implement the
original strategies for the complete fulfilment of its
mandate as well as the strategies that continue to be
implemented, specifically the field visits to the major
crime scenes in Iraq and the ongoing contact with the
national authorities, groups of survivors and civilian
and religious leaders in the country.

With regard to the gathering and analysis of
evidence, we also welcome the standard operating
procedures for the collection, handling, preservation
and storage of evidence and information management
tools, such as chain of custody forms, which are being
tested to ensure their probative value before a broad
range of national courts. It is important that the victims
feel that justice is being rendered so as to prevent a
sense of impunity.

We note the important contribution made by
Member States of expert personnel. In that regard, we
thank the Governments of Germany, Saudi Arabia,
Sweden and Turkey because we believe that a much
more effective team is thereby being formed with the
required number of staff.

Furthermore, we commend the Iraqi authorities as
well as the United Nations for continuing to enhance
their operational cooperation with the Investigative
Team. We hope that the activities of the Investigative
Team are conducted in an impartial and transparent
manner in full compliance with international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, our delegation wishes Mr. Khan and
his entire team much courage, success and determination
in the challenging and complex task entrusted to them
by the United Nations. At the same time, we assure him
of the support of the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea in his duties.

