Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): My delegation is
grateful for this opportunity to take the floor in this
important debate and to add a few remarks to the
statement made by Portugal, the current European
Union President, regarding the Netherlands'
commitment to peace, security and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.

The excellent and comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/555) demonstrates the
complexity of the problems that Afghanistan and the
international community are facing. Thanks to the
continuing support of the international community, the
Government of Afghanistan is increasing its capacity
and its effectiveness. Millions of refugees have
returned; millions of children, including girls, now go
to school; and the majority of Afghans have access to
basic health services. Although many challenges
remain, there is no reason for an attitude of doom and
gloom.

The Council rightly underscores the synergy in
objectives between the United Nations and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). ISAF
has settled in all over the country and has shown that it
can deliver basic security within the Afghan
development zones. That is also what the Netherlands,
with 1,800 troops, and Australia have shown in
Uruzgan. In the troubled southern provinces, the
Taliban is under pressure, although the threat of
asymmetrical attacks has not subsided.

The ISAF mission is a state-of-the-art
stabilization mission, one in which human security and
the creation of an environment conducive to better
Government and socio-economic development are
central points. We are gaining valuable experience in
Afghanistan that can be put to use in other fragile or
failed States. ISAF is an Assistance Force, providing
security and stability so that the legitimate Afghan
Government, in cooperation with international
organizations and other civilian development actors,
can succeed.

ISAF is no reconstruction entity. The Netherlands
would like to see more complementarity among the
United Nations, NATO and the European Union (EU).
We are very pleased that the EU has started a police
mission in Afghanistan. We will continue to encourage
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to open offices, as a matter of priority, in all
southern provinces. In our view, the United Nations as
a whole needs a much stronger engagement in the
civilian area.

All of us are in Afghanistan because we have a
clear-cut security interest in being there and because of
our responsibility to the Afghan people. But those are
not the only reasons. Afghanistan is one of the poorest
nations on Earth. By investing in development in
Afghanistan, the international community is working
towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals in one of the most difficult
environments possible.

The security situation and the lack of capacity on
the part of both the Government and non-governmental
organizations are hampering development plans and
programmes. Capacity-building needs our immediate
attention. Capacity can be built only by working
through Afghan national programmes. We ask the
national Government to actively promote the rollout of
national programmes in the provinces, even difficult
ones such as Uruzgan.

The urgent challenge right now is to bring better
governance to the people of Afghanistan, including in
the more far-flung provinces. Today, we should, as a
matter of priority, focus our efforts on the growing
discontent among the Afghan population. People are
growing impatient; they want central and provincial
government to offer the basic services that they have
been promised since 2002.

I should now like to say a word on counter-
narcotics efforts. This is an area where many of the
problems that plague Afghanistan - a lack of effective
governance, corruption, the influence of power brokers
and the insurgents - come together. There are no easy
solutions. We need patience and a long-term
commitment to poverty reduction - more specifically,
rural development. Only an integrated approach can
help us.

The Afghan counter-narcotics strategy has all the
necessary elements; we need to insist on its correct
implementation. Our experience in Uruzgan has taught us
that, although eradication is an integral part of the
strategy, eradication should not be carried out in isolation
but should be preceded by the provision of viable
alternatives. And even though eradication can be an
option, spraying is not, in our view: we believe that it is
too indiscriminate and that it carries too many health
risks.

Finally, I should like to say a word about staying
power. The Netherlands strongly believes that the
international community must commit to Afghanistan
for the long haul. We maintained a military presence in
Bosnia for 15 years. International solidarity, our own
national security and a moral obligation to the Afghan
people warrant a continued multilateral presence in
Afghanistan. The debate in the Netherlands on
prolonging our stay in Uruzgan is, however, not yet
finalized. In that context, the Netherlands calls upon
United Nations Member States to contribute personnel,
equipment and other resources to ISAF, particularly for
deployment in the troubled southern provinces.

