Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing and express
its appreciation to the various United Nations agencies
for their work over the years in the humanitarian field.

The Security Council has been seized with the
question of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
for nearly a decade and has adopted many resolutions
and presidential statements on that topic. However,
because of the changing character of conflicts and the
interlinkage among various complex factors, many
civilians the world over still suffer from the harm and
damage inflicted upon them by armed conflicts. The
recent resurgence of conflict between Israel and a
Palestinian armed faction has caused numerous deaths
and injuries among innocent civilians and given rise to
a severe humanitarian crisis, which has become a
matter of serious concern for the international
community. The grim reality tells us that the
international community has a long way to go towards
fulfilling its duty to protect civilians.

In order to improve the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, I wish to emphasize the following three
points.

First, the Security Council should fulfil its
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. As the core of the world's
collective security system, the Security Council should
take prompt action within its spheres of competence to
reduce and address the root causes of conflicts and
mitigate the harm brought by armed conflicts to
civilians. As a result of the joint efforts of the Arab
countries and other countries concerned, the Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009) 13 days after the
outbreak of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, calling for a
ceasefire between the two parties. We urge the parties
concerned to implement the ceasefire immediately, as
requested by the resolution, so as to avoid more
civilian casualties and ease the humanitarian crisis.

Secondly, the Security Council must not view the
protection of civilians in isolation; instead, it should
look at the context of a particular conflict in terms of
the peace process and the political situation, taking an
integrated approach. We have seen in recent years that
deteriorating security situations in places such as the
Middle East and Afghanistan have made victims of
countless civilians in armed conflicts, whereas positive
progress in peace processes in countries like Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire have brought hope for a better future
to local civilian populations. This shows once again
that the Security Council should focus more on how to
deal with and address conflicts. In this connection, we
are not in favour of establishing a Security Council
working group on the question of civilians.

Lastly, the role of Governments in the protection
of civilians should be respected and supported.
Governments bear the primary responsibility for
protecting their civilians. While the international
community and external forces can provide
constructive support, they must follow the provisions
of the Charter, fully respecting the wishes and
refraining from undermining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned, and
even more so from forceful intervention.

The efforts of the Security Council alone are far
from adequate to address the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We expect the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council to play bigger roles,
and encourage international institutions, such as the
United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank, and regional organizations, such as the
African Union, to do their part to help the countries
concerned with their economic development,
settlement of conflicts and civilian protection. We also
welcome a positive role for non-governmental
organizations in this respect.

China is willing to work together with other
members of the international community to make
pragmatic and effective efforts to achieve more
constructive results in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

