Mr. Colak (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation): It
is an honour for me to address the Council today, on
behalf of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to take part in the discussions
relating to the report of the High Representative of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is a particular pleasure to inform the
Council - which has held a number of meetings
dedicated to peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - that I have come here today to express
our firm commitment to invest additional efforts in
fulfilment of Bosnia and Herzegovina's remaining
obligations, which will open the way for us to start
negotiations on a stabilization and association
agreement (SAA) with the European Union (EU).

Thus, peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have made possible a clear vision of what
the future will mean for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
will mean Bosnia and Herzegovina as a member of the
EU; that is the common position of all political parties
in the country.

The reporting period was marked by the shift
from the country's so-called Dayton era to the so-
called Brussels era. We have improved the legal
framework; to date, 38 new laws have entered into
force. We are now in the final phase of complying with
the recommendations of the feasibility study. We
expect that the EU will recognize the significant
progress on our part and give us the green light for the
opening of SAA negotiations in May this year.

It is a fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
achieved significant progress in complying with the 16
recommendations within a very short period of time,
but it is also a fact that we will continue to make the
process more dynamic, in order to be far along in the
SAA process in time for the tenth anniversary of
Dayton.

I would like to point out a few areas where we
have, indeed, made huge progress: reforming the
financial, customs and tax systems, the defence and
security structures, the rule of law and border control.
We have established a national crime prevention
commission, and we have significantly reduced the
number of illegal entries into the country.

The plan for restructuring the country's police
forces has been completed under the remarkable
guidance of Mr. Wilfred Martens. We are now making
very serious efforts to ensure that a political consensus
can be reached by all the stakeholders in the country in
this regard. We understand that this is one of the most
important conditions set out in the feasibility study,
and we will do our best to fulfil it. That would not only
be in the best interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
it would also serve to benefit Europe as a whole.

Finally, fulfilling our obligations arising from
annex 7 of the Dayton Agreement is an ongoing
process. Obviously, we still have a lot to do, but I
assure the Council that the process of the return of
refugees and displaced persons, as well as the issue of
property claims, has advanced a great deal recently.
The satisfaction of the international community in this
area is a reflection of that.

The issue of the return of refugees and displaced
persons is now being resolved through direct
negotiations with neighbouring countries; that also
provides new impetus for the final resolution of the
problem. However, I would like to inform the Council
that today, 10 years after we signed the Peace
Agreement, the process of returns has still not been
completed. The return of property has been
successfully completed throughout most of the country,
with certain exceptions. Of 2.2 million refugees and
displaced persons, approximately 1 million have
returned to their pre-war homes, and a further 250,000
wish to do so.

We are especially concerned about the cases of
people who have moved out of their homes over the
past five years. Approximately 10,000 Croats have left
Banja Luka municipality alone since 1999. There are
also some areas in which the scale of returns has been
reduced to the very minimum. Sustainable return,
therefore, must imply that people have full access to all
of their rights. Bosnia and Herzegovina must ensure
respect for the EU Copenhagen criteria, the rule of law
and human rights for all.

This year will mark the tenth anniversary of
Dayton. All of us present here have our reasons to
consider Dayton a success. However, our jobs are not
done yet. As part of the process of integration and
embracing EU standards, we want to build a State in
which all citizens can have trust. To that end, it is
necessary to reform not only the military and police,
but also the judiciary. The most important pillar of
every democracy is an independent judiciary.

The High Representative could tell the Council
that 877 judges and prosecutors have been appointed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. But there are cases in the
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in which, when it
comes to bringing charges, final decisions - including
the verdict - are made by international personnel.
That is the result of the fact that judicial councils
consist of two international judges and one local judge.
The European Convention on Human Rights has been
incorporated into the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and therefore enjoys supremacy over any
local laws or regulations. In some instances, however,
international judges have not adhered to it. Examples
relate to length of detention, the changing of charges
during detention, incomplete and constantly changing
lists of evidence, public statements by prosecutors and
public availability of indictments before delivery. All
such practices are contrary to our usual practice and to
the European Convention on Human Rights. We
believe that the European Convention must be
implemented, as we are to become a member of the
EU. Building trust in the judiciary is yet another step
towards the rule of law and reconciliation in, and the
stabilization of, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the global level, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
become a partner of the international community by
participating in international efforts in United N ations-
led peacekeeping missions throughout the world. We
stand ready to invest further efforts; in this context, I
am referring above all to our obligations towards the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).

The judicial structures in the country are ready to
take on the processing of war crimes now that we have
established war crimes chambers in the State Court and

the State Prosecutor's Office. We have also set up an
inter-agency working group that is in charge of
cooperation with the ICT Y; that is a huge step forward.
Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions are now taking
over responsibility for coordination and control of all
the agencies in charge of arresting war criminals still at
large.

As to the issue of decertified police officers, the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers has turned to the
Venice Commission of the Council of Europe for
assistance and guidance, and we hope that, working
together with the Venice Commission and the Security
Council, we will find a suitable solution for this
problem.

We expect that with the signing of the
stabilization and association agreement a new era will
come about in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, we
wish to underline our readiness to take on full
responsibility for all the ongoing processes. Our goal is
to see a Bosnia that will not require the Bonn powers
of the High Representative.

Although the final decision on extending or
modifying the current mandate of the Office of the
High Representative is up to the Security Council, I
wish to emphasize the willingness of the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to take up full responsibility
for the further development of our country. We wish to
be a partner of the international community in joint
efforts leading to full membership in both European
and NATO structures.

