Mr. Duval (Canada): Canada welcomes the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
members of the Panel were set an extraordinarily
difficult task, and through Ms. Ba-N'Daw we thank
them for their work.

For almost three years, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has been torn apart by a conflict regional
in scope and devastating in toll. As in Angola and
Sierra Leone, where the illicit exploitation of diamonds
and other resources has helped fuel conflict, we have
had reports of systematic looting of the natural
resources, fuelling continued violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the report
before us makes clear, economic interests have been at
the very heart of this conflict.

The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
constitutes a disturbing example of a new sort of
conflict, one in which war itself has become profitable,
where economic interests compete with political
objectives and where the aim of some belligerents is
not to prevail, but to sustain the conflict and those
conditions that allow criminality to flourish.
Advancing peace and human security in such a context
is a daunting task.

(spoke in French)

The report of the Panel of Experts contains
disturbing allegations that the Council must consider
carefully. Where the allegations are borne out, the
Council must act. In the first instance, the Council
should work with the relevant Member States to ensure
that action is taken to stop the looting of resources. If
those Member States refuse to cooperate, the Council
must consider more robust action.

As several speakers have emphasized, it is not a
matter of punishment or blame, but rather of ensuring
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and the
decisions taken by the Council. Any individuals,
Governments and armed groups that have illegally
exploited the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, through their activities,
have contributed to the perpetuation of the war there,
merit our condemnation. The exploitation of resources,
and the fuelling of war, must end without delay.
Progress in this regard will be critical to reducing the
flow of arms circulating in the region, which is itself a
key prerequisite for the achievement of peace.

The illegal exploitation of resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo contributes directly
to the suffering of the civilian populations. The
International Rescue Committee estimates that up to 3
million people have died as a result of the war, directly
or indirectly. Three out of four children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are dying before the
age of two. Those who do not die run the risk of being
recruited by armed groups fighting for control over
regions rich in resources. In some instances, these
groups are engaging in deliberate campaigns of terror
among civilian populations and committing violations
of human rights and humanitarian law with impunity.
Populations, forced to flee from violence and to leave
their land and homes, are deprived of their means of
subsistence, further exacerbating this humanitarian
crisis. More than 2 million people are internally
displaced, and hundreds of thousands are refugees.

Humanitarian access must be provided to help all
these people. All parties to the conflict must respect
their obligations, including the need to ensure the
safety and freedom of movement of humanitarian
personnel. Canada is deeply saddened by last week's
tragic murder of six Red Cross workers, and our
condolences go to the families of the victims. These
events remind us of the often difficult and dangerous
environments in which humanitarian workers are
operating, often finding themselves in peril while
trying to provide protection and assistance to those
most in need.

The Lusaka signatories, many of which are at this
table, must, without delay, bring this conflict to an end.
The implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions
constitutes the only viable solution to the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The inter-
Congolese dialogue is also crucial to peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
must be held as soon as possible. We are encouraged by
the latest achievements of the facilitator, whose Office
Canada broadly supports. We welcome the cooperation
now extended to the facilitator by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Government of Canada remains fully
committed to the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which, we hope, will bring a
just and lasting peace to the region.

Full consideration must be given to the report of
the Panel of Experts, and the Panel's mandate must be
extended so that it can complete their work. A full
understanding of the causes of this conflict must be
achieved if the international community is to assist the
parties in establishing effective political solutions and
in choking off economic incentives for the continuation
of the war.

