Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the briefing made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore', and value her efforts and those of her team.

My delegation associates itself with the statement to
be made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

We believe that, given the crucial moment in Haiti,
the international community should continue to play a
crucial supporting role that facilitates dialogue among
all Haitians. Since 2006, elections in Haiti have been
held pursuant to an electoral cycle that has allowed for
a renewal of democratic institutions. We therefore urge
all Haitian political sectors to seek an understanding
that will enable the institutions to continue to operate
without interruption, which would sow uncertainty and
undo all the efforts of recent years.

For Chile, security, stability and development are
interrelated principles and, based on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/617), the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in that regard has been fundamental. The process of
consolidating and withdrawing the Mission should
therefore be gradual and adjusted at all times to the
changing Haitian reality with a concrete timetable.
Any downsizing should be done without undermining
the achievements made in security and be in keeping
with the electoral agenda, given its potential effects on
stability. Chile is therefore convinced that the drawdown
process and all reductions should begin gradually after
the presidential elections, and certainly not before the
inauguration of the new authorities.

The global financing needs of peacekeeping
operations are growing and face a dearth of resources.
However, budgetary considerations and external factors
should not affect the decisions that the Council takes
with regard to the Mission.

The Mission represents an enormous Latin
American effort. That commitment was reflected
recently in a letter sent to the Secretary-General and
signed by 11 Latin American countries, including Chile.
The letter reflects a common vision of the evolution of
the only peacekeeping mission in the Americas.

In the 10 years since MINUSTAH began working
in Haiti, the progress that has been made in stabilizing
the country is obvious, but its efforts to consolidate
the rule of law must continue. Making a success of the
2012-2016 strategic development plan for the Haitian
National Police is an urgent and high-priority task
for MINUSTAH, and a strategic one, in that it has a
measurable objective with quantitative and qualitative
indicators that can help Haiti become self-sustaining
in the area of public security throughout the country.
In order to achieve that, it is crucial to increase police
capacity as well as to reach numerical targets.

We commend the progress that Haiti has made in the
areas of security, economic growth, development, post-
earthquake reconstruction and institution-building, but
we know that there is still work to be done in improving

socioeconomic development and the people's well-being
as well as security. One such challenge is the cholera
epidemic, and we note that the emergency measures
undertaken by the Government, with the international
community's support, have enabled it to reduce the
number of new infections by more than 75 per cent this
year. We note the role that the United Nations Senior
Coordinator for the Cholera Response in Haiti plays in
this and urge the international community to strengthen
its collaboration in the efforts against cholera.

We believe that the role of the Mission in general,
and of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in particular, should not be restricted to a
mandate for security. It should also support dialogue
between the various political stakeholders aimed at
achieving consensus beyond party differences so as
to enable them to make decisions that strengthen the
country's democratic institutions, political stability and
socioeconomic development for all Haitians without
exception, in the framework of a society that is fully
democratic, united and with a deep respect for human
rights. But MINUSTAH's role should also be limited,
since Haitian society itselfis responsible for solving its
own problems in sovereign independence.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that 10 years
ago, when, as it is today, Chile was a non-permanent
member of the Council, we supported and participated
in the deployment of the multinational interim force sent
to help deal with the plight threatening Haitian society.
Latin America and the Caribbean's commitment to
and solidarity with the people and authorities of Haiti
continue to this day and will undoubtedly continue to
do so in future.

We measure the success ofa peacekeeping mission
when its contribution to solving the problems for which it
was created makes its continued existence unnecessary.
That is what we hope for with MINUSTAH.

