Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns itself
with the statements made by the representatives of
Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and of Singapore, on behalf of Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.

I begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and your country, China, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank you for convening this important debate, which,
most importantly, looking at the many countries taking
the floor, everyone finds timely.

I have unshakeable belief in the virtue of
multilateralism in finding solutions to the challenges
facing humankind and in promoting sustainable peace
and development. At the heart of the multilateral system
is the United Nations - the largest congregation of
nation States. It embodies the international community
and exemplifies our collective determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The
United Nations provides a rules-based platform for
dialogue and cooperation, bringing together nations,
large and small, on the basis of sovereign equality.

It saddens me to say that multilateralism is now
under unprecedented strain. The United Nations
is increasingly challenged to respond to ever more
complex global challenges 4 from conflicts in remote
parts of the world to climate change, from terrorism to
extreme poverty and from weapons of mass destruction
to pandemics.

I should mention the lack of progress in resolving
the question of Palestine, which is one of the longest-
standing issues on the United Nations agenda. A
performance deficit breeds a trust deficit, and signs
of a trust deficit towards the United Nations are
becoming more prevalent than ever, as seen in the
growing recourse to unilateralism and isolationism,
countries withdrawing from internationally agreed
commitments, trade differences leading to disputes
that affect the global economic stability, and the use of
coercive measures to achieve national policy objectives.
Indeed, some of the world's largest problems today
are precisely the result of those kinds of irresponsible
actions. Against that backdrop, I would like to make the
following points.

First, we all must renew our commitment to
multilateralism. No nation, no matter how powerful,
can effectively address the global challenges on its
own. The United Nations was established to harness
our collective efforts, knowing that we would fail if
we acted separately. That was true in 1945, and it also
remains true now. The world must not be seen as a zero-
sum game. Kofi Annan once said:

"Peace, security and freedom are not finite
commodities which one State can acquire at
another's expense [T]he more peace, security and
freedom any one State has, the more its neighbours
are likely to have." (A/57/PV2, p. I)

I should make a reference to United Nations
peacekeeping, underlined by the Secretary-General
as a concrete example of multilateralism at work. As a
core business of the Security Council, United Nations
peacekeeping was designed to enable us to contribute
to peace and security, sharing the responsibility under
the United Nations flag. However, the survival of
multilateralism ultimately depends on the capacity of
the United Nations to adapt to new challenges and to
the quality of its response.

My second point is that we must enhance
our support for United Nations reform. Stronger
multilateralism requires a stronger United Nations. The
reform of the United Nations is critical to ensuring that
the Organization remains relevant and fit for purpose
and that it has an impact on the ground. All those words
and jargon must be translated into concrete actions. We
are now in the implementation phase of wide-ranging
reforms initiated by the Secretary-General. It is also
our job to ensure that the process remains inclusive and
transparent. The goal of the reform is clear: the United
Nations must be better positioned to help countries
to sustain peace and development. Only then can we
restore the faith of global community in the United
Nations.

Much needs to be done to communicate the
achievements and positive work being done by this
Organization. We must perhaps increasingly harness
the power of social media and engage with the wider
United Nations stakeholders, bringing their views
into our deliberations here, and vice versa. Many have
said that we must invest in defending multilateralism.
We must also be sure that our investment in the past
is not for nothing. A simple test of our desire for
multilateralism is to renew our commitment to past
agreements, such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement, as well as to
adopting future agreements, such as the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration. That is a simple
test for us all.

In conclusion, in his opening statement at the
recent 2018 annual meeting of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, held in Bali from
8 to 14 October, referring to the multilateral system,
which is under attack, the President of my country,
Mr. Joko Widodo, used the metaphor that the world is
like the Game of Thrones television serial, where the
evil winter is coming. I would like to add that if winter
really comes, we all will be left in the freezing cold.
No one country will survive if we choose unilateralism
over multilateralism. We would be frozen in our tracks.

