Mr. Henze (Germany): Let me begin my remarks by
stating the obvious: we fully associate ourselves with the
statement made by Italy on behalf of the European Union.

 

When my delegation took the initiative on the draft
resolution now before the Council, we did so for a number
of reasons.

Since its first days, we have consistently supported the
United Nations peace-keeping mission in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. We were and we are
convinced that its presence there is a most valuable
contribution to peace and stability in the region and in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia itself, a country
under the prudent leadership of President Gligorov, with
which we have very solid and friendly relations.

We also believe that the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), along with its
predecessor mission, is one of the success stories of the
United Nations. So when we began to put together the first
elements for a new draft resolution on UNPREDEP, it was
our wish to contribute, as a member of the Security
Council, to the continuation of this peace-keeping operation,
which is not big in size and costs, but big in terms of
usefulness, success and achievement.

Today the Council will decide on the question of a
further extension of the mandate of UNPREDEP. Let me
sum up our own view with the following brief remarks.

First, we have been told by the Government of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia that it believes it
to be in the best interest of the Macedonian people for the
presence of UNPREDEP to be continued without substantial
changes, and this information has been confirmed today by
the representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. In addition, also all the troop-contributing
countries - and we pay tribute to them and the members
of the Force - have made it known that it is their
considered common view that the mandate of UNPREDEP
should be reaffirmed for another regular extension of six
months. We believe that the considered common opinion of
the host country and of the troop-contributing countries is
in itself a very important element because, obviously, it is
in their own interest to continuously assess the security
situation in the area in the most careful manner.

Secondly, in his report of 23 May 1996, the Secretary-
General has laid out with remarkable care and clarity the
arguments both for and against a possible extension of
UNPREDEP'S current composition and mandate. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his thorough report.
Especially because of the balance of its approach and the
comprehensiveness of its careful analysis, the report of the
Secretary-General, in our view, makes a compelling case.
Without going again into all the arguments, let me simply
state that we find that the Secretary-General eventually
comes to the convincing conclusion that the mandate of
UNPREDEP in its present configuration should be
extended for a further period of six months, to
30 November 1996. We fully support this analysis and
this recommendation.

It has been argued that the situation of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has improved to such
an extent that a drastic down-sizing of UNPREDEP, or at
least a much shorter mandate, should be decided upon.
Yes, the situation of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia has improved. We note, for example, the
Agreement of 8 April with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the improved relations with our European
Union partner, Greece.

But with regard to the overall situation in the former
Yugoslavia, we believe it would be unwise to be too
confident too soon, that reliable, lasting stability has
already been established in the area. This is, in our view,
the strongest reason to continue UNPREDEP for at least
another six months.

But are we opposed in principle to changing the
configuration of UNPREDEP or reducing its size? Of
course not. The draft resolution before us explicitly points
to the possibility of changing the composition of
UNPREDEP at a later stage in the light of further
changes for the better in and around the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, as indicated by the Secretary-
General.

And I should even like to go one step further.
Yesterday, in the informal consultations of the Security
Council, our President, the Permanent Representative of
China, wisely reminded us of an important principle. With
your permission, Mr. President, I should like to quote
what you said:

"Every peace-keeping operation should have not
only a beginning but also an end."

We fully subscribe to this principle. Germany will be
among the first to welcome a situation in which peace
and stability have been secured in the region in such a
manner that the UNPREDEP can be sent home with its
mission fully accomplished.

But, unfortunately, we have not yet reached this
point. With UNPREDEP, peace and security in the area

 

still have to be secured, have to be won firmly. The success
of UNPREDEP in the struggle for lasting peace and
security is, to our knowledge, disputed by nobody.
Therefore, in concluding, let me again mention an old rule
that is valid not only in sports: "Never change a winning
team".

In the interest of the Macedonian people and the
region as a whole, we wish UNPREDEP and its personnel
luck and success in the performance of their mandate. It is
in this spirit that we will vote for the draft resolution.

