The International Criminal Court (ICC) is a crucial pillar of a strong rules- based international order. We fully support the Court, its impartial work and the values enshrined in the Rome Statute. In 2011, the Council referred the situation in Libya to the ICC so as to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. Nine years later, the security and human rights situation in Libya remains extremely worrisome. We commend the Prosecutor for her unwavering commitment to justice for the victims of atrocities in Libya. We must not let impunity reign. Accountability is also essential for achieving a lasting, peaceful solution to the crisis in Libya. We could not agree more with Ms. Bensouda's conclusion in her nineteenth report that: "Tijt is regrettable that the arrest warrants issued by the Court have still not been executed. The resulting impunity is an affront to the victims and their loved ones, as it undermines any hope of achieving a lasting peaceful solution to the crisis in Libya, of which justice is an essential element." We therefore encourage the prosecutor and the ICC to continue the investigations with regard to Libya and urge Member States to execute the arrest warrants. Full cooperation and assistance from Member States remains essential for the Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate and for the Court to play the role assigned to it by the international community to end impunity for the most serious crimes. It is the Council's responsibility to ensure that its referrals are followed up and implemented. In that context, it is encouraging to hear from the Prosecutor that her Office is working on applications for new arrest warrants. We welcome Libya's commitment to justice and call for it to further strengthen its cooperation with the Court. The competent authorities are unable to prosecute the most serious crimes under international law, so until they are, the ICC must step in to ensure accountability. As the fighting in Libya continues, the human cost continues to rise. The report by the Office of the Prosecutor reminds us of some of the numbers the fighting entails. Reports indicate that, since the offensive started in April 2019, more than 350 civilians have been killed, more than 300 have been injured and 140,000 have been displaced. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) reports that there were 57 attacks on health-care facilities in 2019, causing the death of 13 health-care workers. Attacks on civilians constitute a breach of international humanitarian law. Accountability for crimes under the Rome Statute and full respect for international law are prerequisites for sustainable peace in Libya. It is the duty of the international community to ensure that there will be consequences for the perpetrators. The absence of accountability encourages the repetition of crimes. We are also highly concerned about the systematic use of sexual violence, including against refugees and migrants in Libya, as reported by the Prosecutor. Let me therefore again recall the sanctions listing criteria introduced by the Security Council for sexual- and gender-based violence, which clearly recognize the devastating effects of such heinous crimes on peace and reconciliation in Libya. We note that the armed forces associated with General Haftar are responsible for the vast majority of attacks on civilians - more than 80 per cent, according to a recent UNSMIL report. We also recall from earlier briefings by UNSMIL that the vast majority of attacks on health-care facilities can be traced back to the Libyan National Army (LNA). The LNA's continued blatant disregard for civilian lives calls for a response from the ICC, and we also commend the ICC's work in that regard. Before concluding, let me state that full, continued and steadfast support for the ICC and the efforts of the Prosecutor in establishing accountability so as to enforce the urgently needed respect for the rule of law remains absolutely essential. We call on the members of the Security Council, and indeed on all United Nations Member States, to support the Court and its efforts to end impunity and ensure accountability. Let me also again call on those States that have not yet joined the Rome Statute to consider doing so.
