Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Lithuania strongly
condemns the clear violation by the Russian Federation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The military actions we are witnessing on Crimean soil
defy the fundamental principles of international law,
the Helsinki Final Act, the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994, the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation and
Partnership between Russia and Ukraine of 1997, and
the legal framework regulating the presence of the
Russian Black Sea fleet in Crimea. This blatant breach
of the Charter of the United Nations has no place in the
twenty-first century, and for too many in our part of the
world evokes the memories of the darkest pages of the
twentieth century. It is a threat to international peace,
security and stability, and must be qualified clearly as
such.

Such violations of international law must also
entail international responsibility. Nothing - none
of the events - in Ukraine merits a military invasion
such as we are witnessing from the Russian side.
The will of the Ukrainian people to pursue a path of
democratic transformations and rebuild the rule of
law in their country must be respected. We call on
the Russian Federation to withdraw its forces back to
their permanent bases and to refrain from any further
intervention or interference in Ukraine. osc

Let me stress that the international community
has a wide array of instruments that can and must be
used to resolve existing differences and de-escalate the
situation through political dialogue and consultations,
especially as all of the major regional and international
organizations - the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
Council of Europe and others - are offering their
mediation and good offices to this effect. The presence
of Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and OSCE
representatives on the ground testify clearly to that.

We welcome the proposal of the OSCE to send a
monitoring mission to Crimea and other regions of
Ukraine. We urge the Russian Federation to respond
positively.

In the light of the international efforts, Russia
cannot continue forging ahead with military invasion,
especially as Ukraine has repeatedly offered
consultations with Russian counterparts. Consultation
mechanisms are also foreseen in the Budapest
Memorandum and must be used to de-escalate the
situation. All of these avenues should be utilized with
a sense of great urgency, including through bilateral
contacts, to move away from the brink of war.

We stress once against the inadmissibility of the
threat or use of force in international relations. We
call on the international community to stand united in
support of Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. Efforts to destabilize the situation,
as well as to stoke radical action and separatism
in Crimea and elsewhere in Ukraine, are highly
dangerous. We commend the restraint shown by the
new Government of Ukraine and its determination not
to give in to provocation.

We support the efforts of the Secretary-General
to defuse the crisis and welcome the proposals, as I
said before, to send monitoring missions. We would
welcome any other bodies and missions that may help
to ease the situation. We urge the Russian Federation
to respond to these efforts and to seize the opportunity
before it is too late.

