Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I naturally align myself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank Ambassadors Kim, Quinlan
and Loulichki for their briefings. We note in particular
that in the joint briefing, the opportunities for synergies
between the Committees was highlighted.

With respect to the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), we
highlight once again the extent to which the threat from
Al-Qaida, in various forms and degrees, continues to
affect every Member State. The most visible and the
most worrying manifestation are spreading to cover
entire regions. TheAl-Qaida Sanctions Committee
plays an indispensable role in addressing that threat.
Its decisions, which must be implemented by all, are
an essential tool. If this system is to continue to be
effective, several elements are, in our view, crucial.

First, the list of persons and entities subject to
sanctions should follow the evolution of the threat, and
the adoption of resolution 2089 (2012) in December
2012, by extending the criteria for listing, has
contributed to that. The regular updating of the list is
essential. To that end, we encourage all Member States
to continue to submit to the Committee requests for
inclusions on the list, so that the list can best reflect
the state of the threat. It is indeed in that spirit that
the Security Council has called for the adoption of
sanctions against groups linked to Al-Qaida operating
in Mali, including the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
Western Africa and Ansar Dine. In that regard, I would
like to commend the initiative taken by the Australian
presidency to organize thematic meetings on those
groups.

If the list is to be credible, the mechanism and
procedures for delisting must respect the fundamental
freedoms of people on the list. By creating and then
strengthening the mandate of the Ombudsperson, recent
resolutions have allowed for progress to be made towards
that goal by improving safeguards. The adoption of
resolution 2089 (2013) has strengthened the institution
of the Ombudsperson by making it sustainable and by
improving support and increasing the transparency of
its procedures. The work of Ms. Prost remains essential
for us.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), France attaches particular
importance to its work in promoting the exchange
of experiences. The presentation made yesterday by
Saudi Arabia from the Prince Mohammed Bin Nayef
Centre for Counselling and Care is an example of that.
We also welcome the initiative taken by the Moroccan
Chair to organize special meetings on specific themes.
Capacity-building in the fight against terrorism in the
Sahel States and the prevention of terrorism through
new technologies are excellent topics that will give
added value to our work.

I further wish to acknowledge the work done
by Mike Smith and the entire Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in helping the Committee to
revise the procedures by which States report on their
implementation of the resolutions to the Committee. I
note in particular the meeting on 2 May that introduced
new evaluation documents, which was an excellent
initiative. The large number of participants are a
testament to the relevance of that tool.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), like others I underscore the
fact that the possibility that radiological, biological,
chemical or nuclear weapons could fall into the hands
of non-State actors or terrorists is a real danger that
concerns us all. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key
role in the prevention of those risks. In that regard, we
welcome the progress achieved in the implementation
of the resolution since its adoption in 2004.

Today, a large majority of States have taken
steps to implement the provisions of that resolution.
Universality seems achievable. We commend the
efforts of the South Korean chairmanship to bring us
as close as possible to universality on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution
in 2014. Now fully staffed, the Group ofExperts will be
all the more able to assist the Committee in its outreach
work. Country visits allow for privileged dialogue on
the implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). In that connection, we welcome the recent trip
of Ambassador Kim Sook and that of several experts to
Trinidad and Tobago.

The Committee plays a key role in assisting the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution. In
that regard, we note the request of the Central American
Integration System, and we hope that it will be dealt
with and responded to as soon as possible.

Certainly, much remains to be done. We must
continue to strengthen cooperation of the 1540
Committee with other international actors, particularly
in the area of assistance. One of the areas of dialogue
that we believe should be strengthened and continued
is that with the Group of Eight Global Partnership on
that topic.

