Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali, to today's
meeting, and congratulates him on his assumption ofhis
new role. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his briefing.

China appreciates and supports the people of Mali
and express its support to them in their determined
efforts to actively advance their peace process and
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. Since the signing of the Peace Agreement,
the Government of Mali, signatory armed groups and
the relevant parties have made tremendous efforts to
implement it, which has produced ongoing progress.
China welcomes those developments.

Last October, a Security Council mission visited
Mali and held fruitful talks with the relevant parties.
At the same time, the current security situation in
Mali continues to worsen. Terrorist activity in Mali
and neighbouring areas is rampant, thereby seriously
affecting the peace process. The international
community should strengthen its efforts to support
Mali's peace and reconciliation process and help the
country achieve security, stability and economic and
social development.

First, the international community should support
the Malian parties to implement the Peace Agreement.
China hopes that all parties to the Agreement will
continue to demonstrate political will, fully implement
the Agreement's provisions and jointly commit
themselves to national development and reconstruction.
The interim administration in northern Mali should
provide basic services as soon as possible so that people
in the region can lead better lives and enjoy a peace
dividend. That will help to win the hearts of the people
for the peace process. The international community
should continue to help Mali to enhance its capacity
for self-development and governance, on the basis
of respecting Mali's independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

Secondly, the international community should
help the Government of Mali to enhance its capacity
in the areas of security and counter-terrorism efforts.
It should also provide assistance to the Government, at
its request, in order to enable it to respond to security
challenges throughout its territory and gradually
assume its responsibility for national security.

With regard to the rampant terrorist activity,
measures must be taken to adopt integrated steps to
respond through regional cooperation. China welcomes
the efforts of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and other regional mechanisms and supports
the establishment of a Joint Force to independently
deal with regional security challenges. China urges the
international community to respect the leading role of
Africa in dealing with its own problems. China actively
supports countries of the region in their effort to
respond to the cross-border threats posed by terrorism
and organized crime.

Thirdly, the international community should
support the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
China thanks MINUSMA and Special Representative
Annadif for their tireless efforts to help to advance
peace and reconciliation in Mali. China hopes that
MINUSMA will continue to coordinate and cooperate
with the Government of Mali, respect Mali's suggestions
and help the country strengthen its security capacity
and assist with disarmament and reintegration efforts.
MINUSMA is deployed in a complex and dangerous
environment. Its peacekeepers are being attacked
regularly, which is a severe safety and security issue.

There has recently been some improvement with
regard to MINUSMA's equipment, but resources and
capacity are still lagging. We hope that MINUSMA
will continue to strengthen safety and security for its
personnel and enhance communication with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and other parties
providing assistance in order to ensure that MINUSMA
has the necessary equipment and resources to
implement its mandate and defend itself. China thanks
the Secretariat for its timely briefings on MINUSMA
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We hope that it
will continue to advance relevant work in that regard.

China firmly supports Mali in its efforts towards
peace and development. China is an important
TCC in MINUSMA, with nearly 400 peacekeepers
deployed. We would like to work with the international
community to continue to support Mali's peace and
reconciliation process and to make our contribution to
Mali's achievement of peace, stability and development.

