The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.

I would first like to thank Jeffrey Feltman, the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Jiirgen Stock, the Secretary General of INTERPOL,
for their very helpful and forward-looking briefings on
how the United Nations system can best operationalize
the Council's sanctions decisions.

Today more than ever, sanctions are at the
very heart of the collective security framework of
the Charter of the United Nations. They are the
instrument the Council relies on increasingly to
maintain and restore international peace and security.
As Mr. Feltman said this morning, we now have the
highest number of sanctions in the history of the United
Nations, and, as several speakers have said today, they
are an exceptionally adaptable instrument, bolstering
States recovering from conflict, protecting vulnerable
populations from the predations of armed groups and
terrorists, preventing a State's natural resources being
abused for the benefit of insurgents and criminal
networks and blocking the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

The reason the Council relies so much on sanctions
is that they are recognized by all Council members as
the only effective tool, short of more interventionist
measures, for maintaining and restoring international
peace and security. In turn, the general United Nations
membership is increasingly recognizing the preventive
and protective character of sanctions. It is therefore in
the interests of the Council and all Member States to
ensure that the measures the Council decides on are
implemented effectively.

As others have pointed out, Australia, together with
Finland, Germany, Greece and Sweden, has sponsored
the high-level review of United Nations sanctions
conducted over the past six months. Our contribution
to the review has been to lead consultations on how the
United Nations system itself comes together, internally
and with Member States, to give effect to the Council's
sanctions regimes. We have consulted primarily with
Member States to which sanctions currently apply, as
well as with their immediate neighbours and States that
regularly have dealings with the sanctions system. Those
States are the key beneficiaries of an effective sanctions
regime, in terms of delivering peace and security, but
they are also pivotal in making the sanctions effective
in the first place. It remains Australia's intention to
shortly put to the Council a draft resolution that draws
on the experience of those Member States and other
stakeholders to formulate a blueprint for improving
the implementation of Council sanctions that would
allow cross-cutting discussions of sanctions issues and
would facilitate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States.

Under-Secretary-General Feltman's briefing
demonstrated how the Council and the Secretariat are
already moving in the direction sought by Member
States during the consultations over the past six
months, towards a simpler and more consultative,
transparent and coherent sanctions system. Briefings
of the Council are increasingly public, Committees are
more actively engaging with key stakeholder States,
and the Secretariat has made implementation simpler
by standardizing sanctions lists.

As described by Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
the new Interagency Working Group on Sanctions
within the Secretariat, which was created to coordinate
and provide United Nations inputs into the high-
level review from the 20 United Nations entities that
contribute to sanctions implementation, is itself a
highly productive legacy of the review. It has the
potential to further improve the effectiveness of the
Council's sanctions measures, but clearly there is scope
to do more.

We see value in building the Secretariat's capacity
to further support the Council and Member States.
There is untapped potential in the Secretariat to
identify best practices, mobilize expertise within the
United Nations system relevant to effective sanctions
implementation, and support efforts by the Council and
the sanctions committees to provide practical guidance
on sanctions implementation issues and capacity-
building and technical assistance for Member States.
As Under-Secretary-General Feltman noted today, "we
need an effective United Nations system delivering as

a,

one .

More broadly, we see value in the Secretary-
General's reports to the Council on specific situations
discussing in more detail the coordination between
sanctions and other United Nations conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
We would also welcome periodic reports from the
Secretary-General on Council practice and Member
State challenges related to sanctions generally, including
recommendations for better support to Member States
in their implementation of sanctions measures.

To use the expression of the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, Ambassador Gasana, from
this morning, expert groups assisting the sanctions
committees are our eyes and cars on the ground. They
have proven to be an indispensable asset for improving
the effectiveness of sanctions. While it is essential
that those groups receive the necessary support and
cooperation across the United Nations system and
from all Member States, the way in which the expert
groups engage with the key Member States for a
particular sanctions regime is particularly crucial. A
more interactive relationship between Member States
and expert groups, between Member States and
Committees and, as both our colleagues from France
and the Republic of Korea have reminded us, with the
private sector as well, would build trust and confidence
and break down barriers to cooperation.

Looking beyond the United Nations itself,
INTERPOL Secretary General Stock's briefing
highlighted how international and regional organizations
and intergovernmental bodies can provide both Member
States and the Council with better tools to implement
Security Council sanctions measures. The Council's
relationship with INTERPOL is long-standing. Its
relationship with the United Nations dates from 1949
and continues to evolve. It provides a model for how
the systems and networks of relevant international
organizations can enhance the effectiveness of the
Council's sanctions measures, while at the same time
building key capabilities in stakeholder Member States.
The Council needs more such partners.

In conclusion, ultimately the key to the effectiveness
of the United Nations sanctions system remains how it
engages with Member States. It is Member States that
are obligated to implement our decisions in respect of
sanctions. Australia will work over the next few days to
reach a Council consensus on our draft resolution to put
in place these and other measures. We firmly believe
that our draft resolution would improve Member States'
access to information and assistance on sanctions
implementation, as well as enhance the transparency
and responsiveness of the United Nations sanctions
system generally, and the relationship between Member
States and the sanctions committees and expert groups
in particular. That would benefit us all.

We encourage the Chairs of sanctions committees
to continue to engage Member States and other
stakeholders as partners in the implementation of
sanctions. And we encourage Member States to
demand greater transparency from and interaction with
the United Nations sanctions system, if it is ever not
forthcoming. Under the collective security framework
of the Charter, sanctions are a shared responsibility
between the Council and Member States, and the more
we engage with each other, the stronger that framework
will be.

Finally, as Chair of three of the Council's
sanctions committees, let me endorse the practical
recommendations of Ambassador Gasana on better
ways to ensure professional continuity in the task
of presiding over Sanctions Committees as the new
Committee Chairs are identified and transition to their
new roles.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I thank my colleagues for their participation this
morning. I also thank our briefers, Jeffrey Feltman and
Jiirgen Stock. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
