Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I, like previous
speakers, would like to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
meeting and for giving me the opportunity to speak on
this issue of great importance to my country. I would
also like to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for his
briefing at this meeting, as well as each and every one
of the members for their constructive and helpful
comments.

The conflict that has plagued my country for the
past 10 years has been the preoccupation of four
consecutive Governments, which have devoted much
time and energy and many resources to it. The peace
process has, of course, been given the highest priority
and attention by all previous Governments -
especially the most recent - as well as by the current
Government under the leadership of the Prime
Minister, The Right Honourable Sir Michael Somare.

It also gives me great pleasure to inform the
Council that positive progress has been made on the
three principal fronts: peace and reconciliation; arms
disposal; and constitutional reforms - this last issue
being an unprecedented achievement, as there was no
provision or precedent appropriate to Bougainville's
post-conflict situation within the constitutional
framework of Papua New Guinea.

The Council is well aware that under the previous
Government, the former Minister for Bougainville
Affairs, Sir Moi Avei, introduced the proposed
constitutional amendments and the Organic Law in
Parliament in January and March 2002. On that
occasion, the National Parliament of Papua New
Guinea voted overwhelmingly in support of the
proposed constitutional amendments to add part XIV to
the national Constitution and to bring into effect the
new Organic Law on Peace-Building in
Bougainville - Autonomous Bougainville
Government and Bougainville Referendum. No votes
were cast against the amendments, which showed the
very high priority and utmost seriousness given to the
issue by the Government and the people of Papua New
Guinea.

The votes required two-thirds absolute majority
of the 109 members of the national Parliament. The
recorded votes were 84 and 86, respectively, with no
dissenting vote.

All parties to the Bougainville Peace Agreement
as well as regional and international friends and
agencies, including the United Nations observer
mission in Bougainville, headed by Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, are working earnestly, with unity of purpose,
to consolidate and build peace on the ground. I wish to
express our gratitude to Ambassador Noel Sinclair for
the wonderful job that he has done in helping Papua
New Guinea in this process.

I wish also to place on record our gratitude for
the regional initiative from our close friends and
neighbours, especially the Governments of Australia,
New Zealand, Fiji, Vanuatu, Solomon Islands and
Tonga, in the early stages, for their continued support
and involvement in the regional Peace Monitoring
Group on the island of Bougainville.

My Government also recognizes the involvement
of many other Governments and international
organizations and agencies that have come forward in
the provision of assistance in respect to peace-building,
reconciliation and restoration, and other sectoral
development assistance to Bougainville. These include
the Governments of Japan and of the United Kingdom;
the European Union; the United Nations Development
Programme; the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); and non-
governmental organizations such as churches, the Red
Cross and Medecins Sans Frontieres.

Here in New York, the efforts of many, including
those of the members of the Security Council, the
Pacific Islands Forum missions and others, in close
cooperation with the Secretary-General and the United
Nations observer mission in Bougainville, are
providing the necessary catalytic role in managing the
dialogue process between all affected parties.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
all States Members of the United Nations, especially
those immediate past and present members of the
Security Council, for continuing to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB), so that it can support arms collection and
disposal.

I need not repeat the excellent exposition given
here by Sir Kieran Prendergast when he presented the
Secretary-General's report. Suffice it to say that my
Government confirms that the first and second stages
of the arms collection are progressing well and nearing
completion. Stage III of the arms-disposal process
remains to be accomplished. We all agree that this
aspect is a very important part of the peace process.

I wish also to express my Government's sincere
gratitude for the Council's continued support of our
request for the mandate of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville to be extended. We are
appearing today once again to request the same for
another, and final, 12 months.

The proposed timetable set out in the August
2002 aide- memoire still stands, but, as can be noted by
the Council, it has slowed somewhat due to many
factors, including those mentioned this morning by Sir
Kieran. But we believe that there are definite
milestones outlined in that aide-memoire,
supplemented by the aide-memoire that has been
circulated this morning, to ensure a proper exit by the
parties. Therefore, the Government of Papua New
Guinea is confident and optimistic that the issue will be
resolved by the time requested, or, hopefully earlier.

This was also aptly reaffirmed by the Prime
Minister, Sir Michael Somare, during his meeting with
the Secretary- General, Mr. Kofi Annan, in New York
on 18 October 2002.

In conclusion, we believe that this peace mission
can be a success if we all work together.

