Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The resolution just adopted unanimously by the
Security Council pursues an essential objective - to
promote the political situation that the Council has
endorsed and has always supported: implementation by
all the Ivorian parties of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and compliance with all the commitments
made at Accra in July.

The Security Council has never ceased to
reiterate that there is no military solution to the crisis
in Cote d'Ivoire. There is only a political solution: the
one set out at Linas-Marcoussis and specified at Accra.
For months now, we have noted and deplored the
impasse in the situation owing to the refusal by all the
Ivorian parties to honour their own commitments. The
basic legal text defined at Linas-Marcoussis has not
been adopted; the conditions for eligibility for the
presidency of the Republic have not been revised; the
disarmament process has not been undertaken. Those
impasses are unacceptable.

I must recall that the Council, when it visited
Abidjan in June, recalled solemnly and with great
firmness the statements made in April and May
(S/PRST/2004/4l2 and S/PRST/2004/4l7). We should
act today, when Cote d'Ivoire is experiencing the
situation that know well, by adopting an immediate
arms embargo and by deciding on a mechanism for
individual sanctions if the commitments made by the
parties have not been honoured by 15 December.

By adopting this resolution, the Council is
demonstrating today that it intends to support the
initiatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and of the African Union by
putting all the weight of the international community
behind the African initiatives.

Re-launching this national reconciliation process
is everyone's objective. In Cote d'Ivoire, France is
committed to helping all Ivorians. We are convinced
that the country must move forward towards the
elections in October 2005. That presupposes that all the
conditions set at Linas-Marcoussis will be met. We are
all working to that end.

