Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate
on the implementation of the measures set out in the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507 on
the working methods of the Security Council. My
delegation recognizes the efforts made by Japan as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions to
continue to improve the transparency and efficiency of
the Council's work and its interaction with the wider
United Nations membership.

We feel that the Security Council's reflections on
its working methods are part of a more wide-ranging
exercise of interest to United Nations Members
regarding comprehensive reform of the Council. As an
urgent matter, such reform must be adapted to the new
global balances and challenges. As an elected member
of the Security Council, Mexico shares these
objectives. Our actions in the Security Council have
been and will continue to be guided by the principles
of transparency, democratization and accountability.

Today's debate is particularly important in
pursuing the discussion that began in 2006 with the
adoption of presidential note S/2006/507, which has
led to significant improvements in the Council's
working methods. Nonetheless, although much remains
to be done, it is essential that the Informal Working
Group on Documentation continue to discuss and
analyse in-depth the implementation of the
recommendations in document S/2006/507, and define
the updating necessary to continuing to improve the
Council's working methods. Mexico hopes that this
will lead to the adoption in the coming months of a
comprehensive presidential note. To achieve that goal
and to continue to strengthen the Council's
transparency, the participation of all States Members of
the Organization in this discussion is necessary.

Since the adoption of presidential note
S/2006/507, the Council has held a greater number of
open meetings and open debates, not only on matters
relating to the Council's agenda, but also on cross-
cutting themes that impact on peacekeeping and
international security. Similarly, since 2008 it has
improved the content of its annual report to the General
Assembly in response to a long-standing demand by
the membership. There is also greater interaction
between police- and troop-contributing countries and
the Council.

Despite these improvements, not all of the
recommendations in document S/2006/507 have been
implemented and new concerns have arisen that must
be taken into account by the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

On transparency, my delegation considers it
necessary to continue to increase the number of open
meetings of the Council and to ensure that informal
consultations are convened only when strictly
necessary, thus promoting greater interaction among
Council members. It is important to question the
relevance of holding informal consultations to hear
statements and briefings that could be given in open
meetings, although they provide additional information
for the Council's internal work. It is also necessary to
continue to enhance the internal transparency of the
Council. At present, most decisions are taken by
consensus, which ensures greater political impact for
Security Council decisions. Such unity will be
preserved only if we maintain internal transparency.

Regarding effectiveness, the Council must
continue to explore and, if possible, codify the various
meeting formats that allow it to address all threats to
international peace and security and to interact with all
States and actors involved in a conflict, including civil
society. Recent informal interactive dialogues on Chad
and Sri Lanka, as well as the increased number of Arria
Formula meetings, are successful demonstrations of the
Council's new flexibility in executing its
responsibilities.

On the issue of inclusiveness, the practice
whereby new Presidents of the Security Council submit
the monthly agenda to Member States and the media
must be perpetuated. However, this practice should be
expanded and systematized in order to strengthen the
consistency of discussions with the Organization's
wider membership. An additional resource that has
proved useful in that area is the regular informational
briefings of Security Council members by the
respective regional groups. As an elected member of
the Security Council, my delegation has participated
actively in these informational meetings with the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.

I conclude by referring to a matter of great
importance. As stated in Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council acts on behalf of
Member States in maintaining international peace and
security. To protect this essential principle, the Security
Council must continue to fine-tune its working
methods in order to ensure that its decisions are
effectively implemented by all Member States, as
provided by Article 25 of the Charter, and ultimately to
enhance its credibility.

