Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Because
this is one of the few occasions on which the subject
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) has been addressed in
an open meeting of the Security Council, Uruguay,
as a non-permanent member elected by the General
Assembly to the Security Council and a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
feelsduty-bound to relay to the other Member States
much of what has been already expressed and presented
in the various consultations ofthe Security Council and
on which resolution 2285 (2016) is based.

Let us be very clear. Uruguay is in favour of
maintaining the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, on the condition that it
is able to fulfil each and every one of the components of
the mandate set out by the Security Council. Uruguay
has a long history of participating in peacekeeping
operations under United Nations auspices. Currently, we
have 1,500 troops deployed, mostly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Haiti. Troop-contributing
countries come to an agreement with the United Nations
on a set of documents that serve as mutual guarantees
with regard to the mandates of missions, standards and
discipline, which are applicable at all times. Those
documents are commonly known by their English
names: status-of-forces agreement, status-of-mission
agreement and rules of engagement, and so on.

The mandates provided by the Security Council
and the entire set of documents that I have mentioned
constitute the contract that binds troop-contributing
countries with the United Nations. Furthermore, they
are the guarantees that protect the personnel whom
a country voluntarily contributes to a peacekeeping
operation. Accordingly, it is obvious that that set of
commitments can be modified only by whomever has
the international legitimacy to do so. In this case, that
is the Security Council.

The Security Council today adopted resolution
2285 (2016) on the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara. The text was presented
to the members of the Security Council in an initial
version on Wednesday afternoon - Ambassador Rafael
Dario Ramirez Carrefio of Venezuela pointed out that it
was at 3.30 p.m. - and the draft of the resolution that
we adopted today was presented at 6.45 p.m. yesterday.
The resolution was drafted in consultations with a very
small and self-convened group called the Group of
Friends on Western Sahara. Although we feel that we
are friends of the Western Sahara, apparently we are
not qualified to be members of that select group.

Owing to the content and structure of the resolution,

the text is almost identical to the resolutions adopted
by the Council in previous years. In other words, it is
business as usual. My delegation believes, however,
that we are very far from business as usual, because on
16 March, the Permanent Mission of Morocco conveyed
to the Executive Office of the Secretary-General a list
of 84 members of the international civilian component
of the MINURSO and the African Union who had
to leave Morocco within three days' time. It was a
document - an objective fact - and we have all read
it. That sovereign yet unilateral decision taken by
Morocco immediately altered and radically changed
the conditions of the operationality of the Mission
provided for by the Security Council, which today
barely manages to maintain its self-sufficiency - far
from complying with the mandate with which it was
entrusted.

We all know that the sovereign decisions adopted
by Morocco indicate that their authorities felt deeply
offended by the statements made by the Secretary-
General during his visit to the region in early March.
For my delegation, the question of offenses must be
resolved directly between the person who was offended
and the offender. Each party will decide on the actions
that they wish to take with regard to one another, but
between themselves, without affecting a third party.

My delegation deems that the sovereign measures
adopted by Morocco have no connection to the person
whom that country considers to be the offender - the
Secretary-General - but are rather aimed at the entire
Organization that he represents. The expulsion of the
international civilian component of MINURSO from
Western Sahara has nothing to do with any offence that
the Secretary-General could have committed. It has
everything to do with the mandate that the Security
Council established in a timely manner and with the
functionality of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara.

That is why we were very surprised, in reading
the text of the resolution, not to find a single reference
to the fact that a decision has disrupted the operation
of an important peacekeeping mission. I should like
to read out the twenty-third preambular paragraph of
resolution 2285 (2016), which consists of the following
curious statement:

"Regretting that MINURSO's ability to fully
carry out its mandate has been affected as the
majority of its civilian component, including
political personnel, cannot perform their duties
within MINURSO's area of operations."

The Security Council does not explain in any way
how the inability of the Mission to carry out its tasks
might have arisen. We have no indication as to whether
a lack of means or equipment or some impediment
on the part of the personnel are responsible, or if a
serious misfortune - a dengue or chikungunya virus
infection - arose to prevent that from happening.

Following the text, we see that in operative
paragraph 1, despite the fact that the Council admits that
MINURSO is prevented from carrying out its tasks, it
has decided to extend it until 30 April 2017. Paragraph
2 emphasizes the urgent need for MINURSO to return
to full functionality. In regard to a Mission that cannot
comply with its tasks for unknown reasons and whose
mandate has been extended, the Council points to the
urgent need for it to return to full functionality. Frankly,
we have no idea what the phrase "full functionality"
means. It is clear that it is a comparative term and that
"full" will depend on the parametre that it is measured
against. For example, if tomorrow we compare the
functionality of MINURSO to how MINURSO is
functioning today, clearly MINURSO will have
reached full functionality. Perhaps the provision was
intended to imply that "full functionality" was the
state of operation enjoyed by the Mission on 15 March,
before the adoption of the sovereign measure taken
by Morocco, but for one reason or another that is not
specified in that sentence.

Finally, I would like to refer paragraph 3, which

"Requests the Secretary-General to brief the
Council within 90 days on whether MINURSO
has returned to full functionality and expresses
its intention, if MINURSO has not achieved full
functionality, to consider how best to facilitate the
achievement of this goal".

I would like to point out several issues in that regard.

First, the Council provides no guideline on what
to do or how to ensure that MINURSO recovers full
functionality, nor does it point who is responsible for
leading the process of the return to a normal situation.
I admit there is some logic to the Security Council's
inability to explain why functionality was lost or what
it means by "return to full functionality", and that it is
therefore unable to define how and who has to do it.

Secondly, the timeline for a return to full
functionality - three months - is too long. We all
remember Murphy's Law. Murphy has a special chapter
on "committology" that is guided by the principle that
every committee tends to use to the maximum the
period entrusted to it to carry out its task. Murphy was
an optimist. In that regard, there is also a certain logic
to this three-month period. The Council does not know
why, how or who has to carry out this task, so it is best
to provide for as long a deadline as possible.

Thirdly, it is not very common, but the Council
itself is expressing serious doubts as to whether the
Mission can return to full functionality within three
months. Ifthat were not the case, the Council would not
need to reaffirm its intention to consider how best to
facilitate achievement of that goal.

With respect to the phrase "expresses its intention",
allow me to make a frank comment. We are all familiar
with the variety of tones used in diplomacy to refer
to the degrees of commitment that we are willing to
make. We have all on different occasions used different
expressions - I will say them in English since that
is the language in which we usually draft - such as
"shall", "will", "would", "should", "may", "might",
"ought to" and so on, to express our intentions. The
phrase that represents one of the most tenuous types
of commitment on the spectrum is the term "best
endeavours". Thus, if it is decided after three months
that we have not returned to full functionality, the most
that the Council is committed to is "to consider how
best to facilitate achievement of this goal". I have to
ask - would any of us sign a contract to sell our house
to a buyer who expresses the intention of paying us but
does not even set a price?

After so much discussion, it would have been far
simpler to include a provision stipulating something
along the line of "urges the Government of Morocco
to facilitate forthwith the full recomposition of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in the
Western Sahara", such that it could fully carry out the
mandate established by the Security Council. As some
of my colleagues have already pointed out, we were
unable to rupture the iron-clad content of the text that
is presented here.

I reiterate that Uruguay is in favour of maintaining
a United Nations Mission for the Referendum in the
Western Sahara which that is able to comply with every
element of its mandate, as defined by the Security
Council. Our delegation believes that resolution 2285
(2016) does not endow the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in the Western Sahara with the tools or
guarantees necessary to comply with its mandate. That
is why my Government felt obligated to vote against
the resolution.

In conclusion, Uruguay endorses and supports
the actions of the entire Secretariat, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Western
Sahara, and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara. We unreservedly support the
work undertaken by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Moreover, as a troop-contributing country in many
missions, we pay tribute to all MINURSO personnel,
who face ongoing and ever-greater difficulties.

