Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on the
assumption by your friendly country, the Federal
Republic of Germany, of the presidency of the Security
Council this month.

I thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of France, for his responsible and
successful leadership of the Council last month.

I also thank the Security Council for speedily
convening this meeting at the request of the Group of
Arab States, to which my country has the honour to
belong, to discuss the grave deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

The extrajudicial murder by Israel two days ago
of the Palestinian freedom fighter Abdel Aziz
Al-Rantisi, killed with several companions in the Gaza
Strip when his car was targeted by an airborne missile,
was yet another in a series of assassinations by the
Israeli occupation authorities of the leaders of the
Palestinian people, who have been demanding
independence and freedom from occupation. Those
assassinations, in addition to other Israeli practices -
including the collective punishment of civilians, the
demolition of homes, the shelling of heavily populated
areas, detention and extradition, to name but a few -
are war crimes ordered by the leaders of the
Government of Israel in order to perpetuate their power
and allow them to subjugate the entire Palestinian
people.

This long and eloquent list of crimes represents
terrorism - State terrorism perpetrated by the Israeli
military machine. The resistance of the Palestinian
people to such terror is normal, legitimate and the right
of a nation that has long been enslaved and whose
territories have long been occupied. The consideration
by certain Israeli leaders of the ongoing pursuit of that
criminal policy requires the Security Council to
shoulder its cultural and ethical responsibilities. This is
a serious step, since the Council is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
thereby with the task of ending occupation, colonialism
and settler colonialism, protecting the welfare of
peoples under occupation and enforcing respect for
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War.

As it kills Palestinians, Israel is creating
conditions for a unilateral withdrawal from Gaza and
demanding guarantees and even a reward for its
withdrawal. Israel is simply pursuing yet another series
of violations of international law and the resolutions of
the Security Council. In that regard, its withdrawal
from Gaza would be a pretext for killing more
Palestinians there, besieging them, depriving them of
their sovereignty over their waters and airspace, and
stripping them of their natural right to friendly
relations with neighbouring countries. Israel's so-called
abandonment of its occupation of Gaza would thus give
it a pretext to demolish Gaza homes, with their
residents inside, to assassinate its people, to kill their
leaders one after the other, and to obstruct any attempt
at negotiation or to establish an autonomous leadership,
authority or a Palestinian State there. What is strange is
that some would accept such tricks by Israel, while
they are entrusted with peace in the Middle East. It is
normal that people who resist occupation would now
do so more enthusiastically. The Israeli Government
has simply asked for the impossible - withdrawal
from Gaza - a situation that would literally kill the
road map endorsed by the Security Council. Such
actions would also hold hostage the work of the
Quartet, if, indeed, it did not paralyse such work, and
kill other peace efforts, probably preventing a return to
the negotiating table.

The fact is that the Israeli Government is simply
taking further steps towards trying to absolve itself of
its responsibilities before the international community,
in spite of its rejection of United Nations resolutions
relevant to the occupied Palestinian territories and its
ignoring of the Arab peace initiative. All this
demonstrates that the Israeli Government has been
mainly a Government of occupation and expansion at
the expense of the Palestinian people.

The price for the so-called Israeli withdrawal
from Gaza would simply mean preserving its right to
interfere in Gaza at will and to usurp the rights of the
Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland,
including the Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. Such
policies are also part of an attempt to legitimize the
establishment of settlements, to completely usurp the
city of Jerusalem. Such policies are also seen as an
attempt to make the international community accept the
establishment of the separation wall in the Palestinian
territories, to accept the annexation of part of those
territories and to accept Israel's failure to enter into
negotiations for a final status.

The peoples and countries of the world are
looking to the Security Council to see whether the
Council will adopt the necessary measures to curb the
acts of the State of Israel and whether the international
community will protect itself from the reckless acts of
criminals.

