Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on conflict
prevention, and for providing us with the opportunity
to present our views on this important issue. This
meeting is a further testimony to the importance which
the Security Council attaches to conflict prevention in
the maintenance of world peace and security.

Considering the cost of armed conflict in terms of
human suffering and material destruction, not to
mention of post-conflict national rehabilitation and
reconstruction, the importance of resolving a dispute
before it escalates into a conflict is all too obvious.

The Government of Japan believes that the
international community should address situations of
potential conflict by taking a comprehensive approach
that combines political, economic, social and
humanitarian measures, taking into account the specific
requirements of the situation. We consider it
particularly important to try to eliminate the root
causes of conflict through measures to alleviate
poverty, while utilizing an early-warning system in
order to detect possible conflicts.

In the context of conflict prevention, I would also
like to emphasize the importance of post-conflict
peace-building efforts aimed at preventing the
recurrence of conflicts, for it has been shown that
conflicts recur in approximately 60 per cent of cases.
To provide assistance for disarmament, demobilization
and the reintegration of former soldiers, in addition to
the deployment of peacekeeping personnel, is vitally
important at the post-conflict stage.

The meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Group of
Eight, which Japan chaired on 12 and 13 July,
emphasized the importance of nourishing a culture of
prevention. As described in the Miyazaki initiatives for
conflict prevention, which was adopted at that meeting,
the Group of Eight Foreign Ministers focused on a
range of issues, including the question of small arms
and light weapons, the relationship between conflict
and development, the need to restrict the illicit trade in
diamonds, the protection of children in armed conflict
and the role of civilian police in conflict prevention. I
note that many of these points are underlined in the
presidential statement which will be issued today.

The Security Council, which has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, could play a more positive role in
conflict prevention, particularly in detecting potential
conflict situations. So could the Secretary-General,
particularly in bringing potentially violent situations to
the attention of the Security Council and, thereby, to
that of the international community. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's report in preparation
for the Millennium Assembly (A/54/2000) in which he
advocates a more active United Nations role in this
regard. In a similar vein, we look forward to receiving
the report of an expert panel established by the
Secretary-General to review peace operations.

Needless to say, various other actors, including
the conflicting parties themselves and interested States,
governmental and non-governmental organizations,
other regional organizations and frameworks for
dialogue such as the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), have
an essential part to play in the prevention of conflicts.
Encouraging these actors to coordinate their efforts is
also an increasingly important task before the Security
Council.

For its part, the Government of Japan has been
taking a number of initiatives with a View to fostering
the culture of prevention. For example, Japan has
hosted a series of international conferences on such
subjects as the role of non-governmental organizations
in conflict prevention and the implications of conflict
prevention for African development.

Japan has also contributed to date $1.2 million to
the OAU Peace Fund at the United Nations, with the
aim of helping to develop a regional mechanism for
conflict prevention. Of that amount, approximately
$200,000 is earmarked to support OAU efforts to
develop an early warning system in Africa.

Japan has also been active in tackling the issue of
small arms and light weapons and has sponsored a
General Assembly resolution on the subject in past
years. Japan's contributions to the United Nations trust
fund for the purposes of preventing the illegal transfer
of weapons and reducing the number of small arms in
post-conflict zones amount to $2 million. And, in an
effort to contribute to the success of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All its Aspects to be held in 2001,
Japan recently organized a preparatory workshop in
Tokyo, in which representatives from countries
throughout Asia and other regions participated.

Conflict prevention is a very important but
difficult task. We, therefore, as the Member States of
the United Nations, have to work together, keeping in
mind the responsibility of the United Nations and
particularly of the Security Council for preserving
world peace.

I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that Japan
will spare no effort in the endeavour to tackle this
difficult challenge of conflict prevention.

