The President: I shall now make some remarks in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the
three Force Commanders for their very informative
briefings this morning. We see this as one of the most
important sessions the Security Council has, since it
is critical that we hear directly from the field before
establishing and renewing mandates for peacekeeping
forces around the world. I might also add that with the
use of video technology, one of the advantages we see
in having video-teleconferencing (VTC) with Special
Representatives, as we do occasionally, is that they
sometimes enable the Force Commanders to be present
and sitting alongside them and can thus actually give
the Security Council direct advice. I hope that will
become normal practice when we have our briefings
and consultations via VTC.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Lieutenant General Gaye and thank him for his sterling
leadership of the Office of Military Affairs and for his
sage advice to the Security Council over the past three
years. We wish him well in his new position in the field.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to those engaged in what my Pakistani colleague rightly
called the noble cause of peacekeeping, and to recall
and acknowledge their many sacrifices in making our
world a safer place.

Turning to the briefings, I do have some questions
for the three Force Commanders. General Dos Santos
Cruz made a compelling case for the use of advanced
military technology in United Nations peacekeeping,
including unmanned aerial systems (UAS). I know a lot
of people were asking about the General's experience
with it; my understanding is that the system is not yet
deployed, so it is obviously too early to respond as to
how effective it is, but I would like him to say something
about the preparations the Mission is making for the
arrival and deployment of the UAS, so that the system
can be used to best effect when it is eventually deployed
in a few months' time.

I was also struck by the General's reference
to innovative disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and reconciliation-and-reintegration
efforts such as using loudspeakers attached to
helicopters. I understand that that has been used to
some effect in the fight against the Lord's Resistance
Army in the Central African Republic, and wondered
if that was a technique - not high-tech, by any means,
in fact rather old-tech, but nonetheless one that can
be quite effective in getting the messages out from
the United Nations peacekeeping missions - that the
General thinks might have a role to play.

I would like to thank Major General Ngondi very
much for his briefing, the focus of which was the
in-mission assessment of pre-deployment training, but
I wonder whether he thinks that it would be useful to
have a validation of that training before the deployment
and after the training, as it were. Obviously, as we say in
English, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, but it
would nonetheless be useful ifthere was some validation
of the preparatory training before peacekeepers were
actually put into the field.

Major General Iqbal Asi talked a good deal about
inter-mission cooperation being a crisis and contingency
tool, but I wonder whether in fact it could be used more
widely than that. Clearly there has been quite a lot of
support consolidation around Entebbe and Brindisi,
and so forth, in support of peacekeeping missions. But
I wonder, given that most missions already have joint
operations centres and joint mission analysis centres,
whether these can be used on a more regular basis to
share information, particularly in adjacent missions,
rather than waiting for the crises to hit.

In that respect, I would ask Mr. Ladsous if, with
respect to some of the constraints that General Iqbal
Asi referred to, in terms of inter-mission cooperation,
which we understand, as well as the legal and political
aspects, consultations, host Government consent and so
on, there is more than the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations can do to address some of those constraints.

Finally, I would pose a question to all four briefers,
building on the question of the UASes and recognizing
that they have not yet been deployed in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given that we have
the two Force Commanders in another theatre where
there is a lot of enthusiasm by the host Governments,
in Liberia and in Cote d'Ivoire, for the use of UASes
in that theatre, in theory, at least, do they see some
advantages in the deployment of UASes in that West
African theatre or, more generally, in peacekeeping
areas where the mission or the mandate is very broad,
the territory very widespread and resources, obviously,
constrained?

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous to decide ifhe wishes
to respond to any of the questions raised. I hope that he
will. He may wish to pass on to the Force Commanders
any questions that are more appropriate for them.
