Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Allow me to join
others in thanking the High Representative for his
work and dedication throughout his time in office, and
especially through what has been a difficult few
months in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have been
extremely grateful for his efforts to maintain
momentum on key reforms. We note and appreciate his
recommendation that the Office of the High
Representative and its attendant Bonn powers should
be extended. We welcome the fact of the appointment
of his successor, Mr. Lajcak, and we pledge to work
with him closely, as we have done with the High
Representative and his predecessors. And may I take
this opportunity to ask the High Representative to pass
on our thanks to his team, who have worked very hard
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to bring the country into
the European Union (EU).

Many speakers have mentioned the leading role
of the European Union in Bosnia, and we are very
grateful for that acknowledgement and support. I
would like to align the United Kingdom with the
statement that will be made later by the representative
of Germany on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union.

I think what we have heard around the table today
shows strong disappointment at the lack of progress on
the reforms in Bosnia, particularly those required for
EU integration, and a certain amount - if I can put it
like this - of incomprehension that a country that has
had so much attention from the international
community cannot do better itself, owing to the
pernicious actions of some of its leaders, at actually
putting into place the reforms that are needed for EU
integration to proceed. This is almost worse than
disappointing as regards some of those leaders; it is
negligence. And it is our view that Bosnia is poorly
served by some of its leaders at present. There is
tremendous goodwill for the country, as today's debate
has shown. Some leaders - not all leaders, but some
leaders - on all sides in all ethnic groups seem bent
on squandering it. In contrast, we welcome very much
the multi-ethnic emphasis, the ownership and the EU
emphasis that we heard from Mr. Spirie today in his
role as Chair of the Council of Ministers.

I would like to say briefly a word about Kosovo
here, if I may. I think we share the High
Representative's assessment of what the Kosovo issue
is and how it is relevant to the debate in Bosnia at the
moment. In other words, it is being used by a few of
those nationalistic leaders for their own particular
ends. There is no directly relevant link between
Kosovo and the situation in Bosnia. We look to all
leaders in Bosnia to make clear that that is not going to
be their focus, and that they are going to turn their
attention to building a stable multi-ethnic society in
Bosnia that works for all its citizens.

I would like to say a brief word about the issue of
decertified police and to thank those colleagues, and
the High Representative, who were good enough to pay
tribute to the role of the United Kingdom. We now look
to the Bosnian authorities to ensure that the approach
that the President of the Security Council laid down in
his letter on 30 April is implemented. That includes
annulling the decision to launch a domestic review
process of International Police Task Force decisions.

I would like also to turn to constitutional reform.
I think we strongly endorse what the High
Representative said about not changing the territorial
order of Bosnia that is laid down in the Dayton General
Framework Agreement for Peace. Unilateral changes to
the constitution contravene Dayton and risk instability
in Bosnia and elsewhere. We would much rather that
those leaders who favour constitutional reform work
closely with the High Representative to bring about a
consensus within Bosnia as to what sort of
constitutional reform is needed and to secure the buy-
in of all the relevant groups that are represented in its
institutions and throughout the country.

Constitutional reform will be necessary - I do
not think we can duck that - for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to implement the reforms required for
European Union and NATO integration. But it has to

be on the basis of consensus and it has to be done in a
way that is not unilateral and that proceeds in step with
the Dayton Peace Agreement. We hope a new process
will get under way soon; it has now been over a year
since there was any meaningful discussion on
constitutional reform. And I would like to say that if
some of Bosnia's leaders put as much effort into
constitutional reform and building a consensus as they
do into their rhetoric about undermining Dayton, then
Bosnia would have made progress a long time ago.

I think it is impossible to talk about Bosnia
without talking about Srebrenica. I do not think that
anybody can remain unmoved by the fate of the over
7,000 Muslim men and boys who were massacred, as
several people have said, in the worst atrocity in
Europe since the Second World War. That happened 12
years ago. I also think that it is impossible not to feel
some shame at the international community's failure to
prevent this massacre. I commend to colleagues a
report written by the United Nations on Srebrenica.

But I would also like to emphasize that all of that
is no an excuse for using Srebrenica as an issue for
political ends. Bosnia's leaders should not exploit the
recent International Court of Justice (ICJ) verdict to
stir up Srebrenica as a means of undermining Dayton.

And Serbia and Republika Srpska leaders should
not use that, in turn, as an excuse for ignoring what it
is the ICJ said. It found, among other things, that
genocide did take place at Srebrenica, and it called for
cooperation in transferring those responsible to The
Hague. Serbian and Republika Srpska leaders must
recognize the implications, and also the gravity, of that
ICJ verdict. It is frankly appalling that Serbia is not
cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and transferring
Karadic and Mladic, responsible for Srebrenica. The
lack of their transfer is bound to impede the progress of
the integration of the whole region into Europe and it
follows that calls for special administrative status for
Srebrenica are not helpful to managing the situation at
present.
I would like to conclude by drawing attention to
the fact that there are three words we hardly ever hear
in connection with Bosnia at present. They are
reconciliation, truth and justice. These things are
needed every bit as much today as they were in 1995
when the Dayton Agreement was signed.

