Mr. Haekkerup: It is a true privilege once again
to have the opportunity to inform and update the
Council on the state of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Since we
covered a broad agenda in our last meeting, I will
today focus on the Kosovo-wide elections and the
establishment of self-government. I also look forward
to answering any questions that members of the
Council would like to put, and to hearing their
comments.

These are dynamic and challenging times for
UNMIK. We are on the threshold of fulfilling the core
objective of resolution l244 (1999) - the
establishment of substantial autonomy and functioning
self-government in Kosovo.

Three days ago, on 2 October, the election
campaign was officially initiated. Expectations among
ordinary people and political contestants are equally
high. Kosovo is about to embark on a journey towards
sustainable democracy, multi-ethnic dialogue and
gradual normalization.

UNMIK is making every effort to secure broad
participation in the election. It is in the interest of all
communities to have a recognized and legitimate voice
in the future of Kosovo. Inter-ethnic violence and high
criminality, mutual prejudice and intolerance are daily
reminders of a post-conflict reality. The hope and
potential manifested by the 17 November elections
have to be nourished and cultivated by responsible
leaders.

Initial preparations for the 2001 Kosovo
Assembly election have been made. UNMIK has
finished a successful inter-pillar civil registration and
voter service period. A voters' list is now being
produced as well as a ballot, including political entities
representing all of Kosovo's communities. The Council
of Europe Election Observation Mission (CEEOM),
responsible for the international monitoring of the
electoral process, reports that

"overall, the registration process has been
conducted in a manner which is in accordance
with international standards".

The great disappointment of the 2000 municipal
elections was the decision of the Kosovo Serb
community and large segments of the Kosovo Turk,
Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian
communities not to participate. UNMIK is pleased to
report that all of Kosovo's communities are now in a
position to participate in the 2001 Assembly election.

UNMIK has provided secure and convenient
registration facilities for all potential voters living in
Kosovo and elsewhere in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Potential voters living in other countries
were able to register by mail. Because early
registration turnout was disappointing, especially in
Kosovo Serb communities within Kosovo, UNMIK
increased the intensity of its coordinated public
information and outreach campaigns, and enlisted the
help of Kosovo Serb and Belgrade leaders. The
decision of Bishop Artemije and other local leaders to
register and the unambiguous statements of support
from Serbian Orthodox Patriarch Pavle and from
President Kostunica of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia led to significant increases in registration
among Kosovo Serbs.

In order to accommodate the increased demand,
the voter service period was extended by two weeks,
until 22 September. Every community was offered
another secure opportunity to register within that two-
week extension. Although civil registration offices will
continue to operate, the voters" list has now been
closed.

With data processing still under way, it appears
that more than 1.2 million persons will be eligible to
vote, both inside and outside of Kosovo. Although
UNMIK does not collect data on the ethnicity of
registrants, we estimate that 83 per cent of eligible
voters are Kosovo Albanian, 12 to 13 per cent are
Kosovo Serb - that is, approximately 155,000
persons- and the remainder are primarily Kosovo
Bosniac and Gorani, Kosovo Turk and Kosovo Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian. Based upon the best available
demographic data, those figures indicate that Kosovo's
communities have participated in large numbers.

The Central Election Commission has certified 26
political entities to stand in the election. One represents
the Kosovo Turk community, two represent the Kosovo
Bosniac and Gorani communities, three represent the
Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities, and
one represents the Kosovo Serb community.

After much internal negotiation, a Kosovo Serb
citizens' initiative, Coalition Return, reportedly backed
by 21 political parties and non-governmental
organizations, was certified on 24 September. This
presents a genuine and critical opportunity for the
Kosovo Serb electorate to participate in the shaping of
the future in Kosovo.

The political entities have complied with the
requirement that one third of the first two thirds of the
candidates on the candidates list must be women.
Because the list is closed, meaning that the voter
selects a political entity but not an individual
candidate, this should result in women accounting for
more than 20 per cent of the Assembly.

In response to widespread international concern
over radical political movements and individuals, and
in accordance with the commitment made to the
Council in my last presentation, I have instructed the
Central Election Commission not to allow any
individual appearing on the United States so-called
black list to stand as a candidate.

UNMIK and the voters and political leaders of
Kosovo are now turning our attention to the 45-day
campaign period, which started on 3 October and
which will end 24 hours before election day. The civil
registration and voter service exercise was notable for
its order and lack of violence. A Political Violence
Task Force has been established for quick and efficient
response. Security operations for electoral activities are
coordinated through joint election operations centres at
the headquarters and regional levels.

Public information and outreach will continue to
ensure that eligible voters know where, when and how
to vote. These efforts will be targeted particularly at
smaller communities, women and disabled voters. In an
effort to avoid the long queues and confusion of the
2000 election day, UNMIK has improved procedures,
with a focus on order and voter convenience. Election
day will be under lOO-per-cent international
supervision, requiring States members of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to provide 1,800 international polling station
supervisors and the Council of Europe election
observation mission to engage another 200
international observers on election day. In addition,
more than 6,000 voters are expected to be certified as
domestic observers, including representatives from the
well-regarded Federal Republic of Yugoslavia non-
governmental observer organization, the Centre for
Free Elections and Democracy (CESID).

Neither the successful registration nor the
certification of the Kosovo Serb citizens' initiative,
Coalition Return, implies a commitment on the part of
the Kosovo Serb community to participate on election
day. Kosovo Serb leaders and Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/Serbian officials have not yet come out in
favour of participation. UNMIK will ensure that any
Kosovo Serb who wishes to participate has a safe and
convenient opportunity to do so, and we will
relentlessly continue public information and outreach
programmes.

UNMIK is on the verge of moving into a
determining phase of interim administration in Kosovo.
Following the elections in November, the role of
UNMIK in the transferred areas will evolve from that
of direct administrative responsibility to one of
oversight of self-government. As part of that process,
UNMIK will transfer many of its interim
administrative responsibilities to the provisional
institutions of self-government. We will, however,
continue to closely monitor and support the provisional
institutions in their work in order to ensure compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999), and with the
Constitutional Framework and other relevant UNMIK
regulations. It should be emphasized that during all
stages of transition UNMIK's overarching mandate
remains the same, as does the ultimate authority of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The transition itself should be smooth and
orderly, with minimal disruption to the provision of an
interim administration and services in Kosovo. Much
of the groundwork for the transition has already been
laid, and the rest should be in place by 17 November.
Following the signing of the Constitutional
Framework, the first step in preparing for the transfer
of responsibilities was the elaboration of an UNMIK
regulation to set out the 10 ministries which will
compose the executive branch of the provisional self-
government. One of the ministers will come from the
Kosovo Serb community and one from another non-
Albanian community. Promulgated on 17 September,
the Executive Branch regulation defines the powers
and responsibilities of the ministers, as well as those of
the senior civil servants of the provisional institutions
of self-government.
The next step was to lay the groundwork for the
transfer of responsibility to the ministries themselves.
To that end, the departments of the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure were merged into transitional
administrative departments. The composition of those
departments reflects the distribution of responsibilities
found in the Executive Branch regulation. From
3 October until the certification of the general
elections, UNMIK will continue to consolidate the
transitional administrative departments while
simultaneously preparing for their separation into
provisional self-government ministries and reserved
UNMIK structures. Also on 3 October, the function of
"Co-heads" ceased to exist. All Kosovo Co-heads have
been given leave with pay until 17 November 2001.

As part of the transition, the two institutions that
have ensured the participation of Kosovo
representatives in the decision-making process at the
highest level will cease. The Kosovo Transitional
Council concluded its activities on 2 October. The
Interim Administrative Council will continue operating
until the date of transfer of powers to the provisional
institutions. There are a number of regulations that
require the attention of this body prior to the transfer of
powers.

After the certification of elections, the Assembly
will hold its inaugural session. Preparations are
ongoing to ensure that the Assembly is supported by
professional and efficient services and that minority
representatives can fully exercise in that institution the
rights granted to them in the Constitutional
Framework.

At the top of the Assembly's agenda will be the
election of the presidency of the Assembly and the
President of Kosovo. When the President of Kosovo
has nominated a candidate for Prime Minister, he or
she will have an opportunity to present a proposed list
of Ministers to the Assembly for ratification. Once
ratified, the Ministers will take up their posts at the
head of the Ministries of the provisional self-
government of Kosovo.

A key factor in this process will be the extent of
Kosovo Serb participation in the elections and its
implications for the composition of the Assembly.

Functional responsibility for the administration of
Kosovo will be cleanly divided between UNMIK and
the provisional institutions of self-government.
Resolution 1244 (1999) sets out the Mission's mandate,
and its post-election areas of immediate responsibility
are clearly delineated in terms of functions in chapter 8
of the Constitutional Framework. Functions transferred
to the provisional self-government are provided in the
Constitutional Framework, and for the Executive
Branch in the Framework Regulation, as elaborated.

Once the transfer has taken place, the structures
of UNMIK and the provisional institutions of self-
government will be separate and distinct entities. The
future Assembly, though, will be able to pass
legislation only within the areas of responsibility
transferred.

The Executive Branch will consist of the Office
of the Prime Minister and the Ministries of Finance and
Economy; Trade and Industry; Education, Science and
Technology; Culture, Youth and Sports; Health,
Environment and Spatial Planning; Labour and Social
Welfare; Transport and Communications; Public
Services; and Agriculture, Forestry and Rural
Development. The internal organization of the
Ministries will follow a standard guideline, which has
been adapted according to the individual characteristics
of each Ministry's areas of responsibility.

The Ministers will be political appointees who
have been selected by the Prime Minister and
confirmed by the Assembly. The Ministers will be
responsible for setting policy and political direction for
the Ministries. However, they will not exercise direct
administrative control over the Ministries.

In addition to support staff, the Ministers will be
assisted by up to five political appointees. One or more
of those political appointees will serve as a Vice-
Minister, to whom the Minister can delegate authority
in the latter's absence.

The structure of UNMIK itself will remain
essentially the same. The Pillar system will continue to
exist, as will the current distribution of general areas of
responsibility across Pillars.

Although most structures associated with the
Joint Interim Administrative Structure will be absorbed
into these Ministries, some will remain under the
immediate control of UNMIK, as foreseen in the
Constitutional Framework. In areas such as law
enforcement, the judiciary and emergency
preparedness, the bulk of existing responsibilities will
continue to fall under my immediate authority.

Not coincidentally, these are the core areas in
which policy is likely to have the most direct impact on
the lives of minority communities. By retaining
immediate authority in these areas, UNMIK will be in
the best possible position to protect the rights and
interests of these communities.

International staff members will be placed in the
reserved and transferred structures. In the former, they
will implement reserved functions, in line with
resolution 1244 (1999) and chapter 8 of the
Constitutional Framework.

In addition, a number of international staff
members will be seconded to the provisional
institutions of self-government, mostly to the
Ministries. A primary task of these internationals will
be to oversee and monitor compliance with resolution
1244 (1999), the Constitutional Framework and key
UNMIK regulations. To this end, a senior international
officer will sit next to the Minister, where he or she
will oversee and monitor as well as advise the Minister
in his work.

Other international staff members will sit in
actual line management positions inside the Ministry,
where they will implement certain transferred functions
for a limited time under the authority of the local
Minister. Those international staff members will
gradually exchange their functional responsibilities for
a purely advisory and oversight role as additional
qualified Kosovo civil servants are identified and
recruited.

In the Assembly, international staff will provide
technical and administrative assistance through the
Assembly secretariat. This will include legal counsel to
the political groups and to the presidency of the
Assembly to ensure that all of the acts of the Assembly
are in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework.

A group of senior international advisers will
assist the President of Kosovo, in particular in his or
her external relations role. I will establish the
necessary mechanisms for permanent consultation and
support of my Office to the President.

In this context, it is important to emphasize that
UNMIK will take on a number of new tasks and
responsibilities, which will increase the workload of
the existing international structures. All our resources
will be utilized to the full extent, and UNMIK cannot
afford to lose either staff or technical support during
the transition period.

Kosovo civil servants will work throughout the
institutions of self-government. In the Ministries, most
Kosovo civil servants will report to, and come under
the direct supervision of, the Permanent Secretaries.
The Permanent Secretary will be the most senior civil
servant in the Ministry and would be primarily
responsible for administration - financial and human
resources - as well as policy coordination and
development. The composition of the Kosovo civil
service has to include all the communities, as reflected
in the composition of the Assembly.

Kosovo civil servants will also work within the
reserved structures, where they will report to the
relevant Pillar head, instead of to a local Minister.

Although there will be a clear functional and
organizational separation between UNMIK and the
provisional institutions of self-government, procedures
will be in place to ensure that the Assembly and the
Government fully respect Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government. The issue of an eventual
declaration of independence would hence be obsolete,
since this is by no means within the authority of the
self-government. On the contrary, I expect a joint spirit
of close cooperation to emerge from the shared need to
achieve a common goal. Senior officials from the
provisional institutions of self-government and
UNMIK will be called upon to work together on a wide
variety of issues, from policy formulation to
programme implementation, to ensure an overall unity
and coherence in the administration of Kosovo.

In addition to the institutional dialogue between
UNMIK and the provisional institutions of self-
government, I will consult with all the political forces
represented in the Assembly on matters relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (2001) and to the
development of self-government in Kosovo.

With the creation of the provisional self-
government, a major step forward in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(2001) will have be taken. But it is not a goal in itself.
It is part of a process. It is an essential means to create
a safe and secure environment for all of Kosovo's
communities. Only by taking the political process
forward and making the politicians work together can
we overcome the hatred and distrust created by the
atrocities of the past, and only in that way can we
facilitate a final political settlement in future.

Those who do not support participation or put up
unrealistic conditions for participation will harm that
process.

The present concerns of all communities are
recognized by UNMIK. However, there is no
contradiction between remaining critical to aspects of
the current, difficult situation and participation in the
election. The answer lies not in further alienation and
boycott. Responsible leaders who truly pursue the
interests of their community must be encouraged by the
international community to act accordingly.

