Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to express our appreciation for
the valuable briefing by Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
and to welcome him today on his first briefing to the
Council. We fully support his efforts to stabilize the
situation in the Great Lakes region. We also support
his tireless efforts to build capacities and enhance
development in the region.

We have been following with interest the activities
of the Special Envoy and his Office and we welcome
the steps they have taken to engage the countries
of the region in efforts leading to the creation of an
environment of cooperation, which will contribute
to the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.

We also welcome the coordination and cooperation
among all the United Nations offices and missions
in the region. Cooperation among them and with
regional organizations like the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is
essential to achieving stability of the region which is
our common goal.

On the political situation, there are many positive
indicators that we must shed light on and build upon
during the upcoming period. We welcome the political
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the recent formation of a new Government
and President Tshisekedi's engagement with many of
leaders of the region. That could undoubtedly help
build trust among countries of the region and create
an environment conducive to regional cooperation,
especially since many challenges in the region are
mutual and interrelated.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region is the best way to address those challenges.
We welcome the progress achieved thus far, and in
particular the outcome of the Luanda meeting, at which
certain countries of the region agreed to settle regional
disputes through existing regional mechanisms.

There is no doubt that achieving development
in the region will contribute to stability and conflict
prevention. We note that all leaders of the region talked
about this issue when they addressed the international
community during the general debate last week. We
look forward to the outcome of the conference on trade
and investment in the Great Lakes region that is set to
take place next year. We welcome the support provided
by the Office of the Special Envoy to the Conference
and urge all countries of the region to participate
constructively in it and in all regional activities aimed
at bolstering the region's economy.

On the security situation, we are concerned about
continued insecurity in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as it has serious repercussions on the
stability and security of the entire region. We welcome
the commitment of the Congolese President to take
serious and effective steps in that regard, and we stress
the importance of regional cooperation to the success
of any stabilization plan in the region.

In that connection, we recall the recommendations
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, calling on the
countries of the region to redouble their efforts to
address the situation in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We welcome the conference organized
by the Special Envoy and the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework on exchanging
information among security services. This is a positive
step that enhances cooperation and trust among the
countries there.

We also call on all countries of the region to ensure
the success of the tenth summit of the regional oversight
mechanism, to take place in Kinshasa. We note that
agreeing on strategies to counter violence is essential

to achieving the stability of the region.

We are indeed concerned about the fact that
some armed groups in the Central African Republic
are not abiding by the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation, and we stress the importance of
upholding the Agreement in the coming period, given
its importance to stabilizing the security situation.
With regard to Burundi, the stable security situation
is a positive indicator, and we hope it remains stable
beyond the elections to be held in 2020.

In conclusion, the humanitarian situation in the
Great Lakes region is dire. The large numbers of
refugees and displaced persons, along with the spread of
disease, are increasing the burdens on the countries of
the region and the responsibilities they bear. Intensified
regional and international efforts are needed to address
those challenges. We commend the preventive measures
that various countries in the region have taken to stop
the spread of the Ebola virus on their territories and
also look forward to seeing them the steps necessary
to ensure the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees to their homes.

