Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Climate change is a major long-standing challenge
confronting the world today. The international
community is fully aware that climate change will
affect national economic and social development and
that it poses a threat to the sustainable development of
human society. The importance of finding solutions to
climate change is obvious to all. China is therefore
ready and willing to discuss with other countries how
to strengthen international cooperation and jointly
respond to climate change.

Climate change may have certain security
implications, but generally speaking it is in essence an
issue of sustainable development. The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change has laid
down the framework and the basic principles for the
international community's response to climate change.
The Kyoto Protocol has set quantifiable albeit limited
targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in
developed countries. The Conference of the Parties to
the Framework Convention, the United Nations
Commission on Sustainable Development, the United
Nations Environment Programme and other forums are
involved in discussions and actions related to this
theme. To tackle climate change effectively, it is
necessary to follow the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities set forth in the
Framework Convention, respect existing institutional
arrangements, strengthen cooperation and encourage
concrete action.
Climate change solutions require concerted
efforts by the international community. Discussing
climate change in the Security Council will not help
countries in their efforts towards mitigation. Nor will it
help developing countries affected by climate change
to respond to it more effectively. Discussions on
climate change should be conducted within a
framework accessible to all parties. The developing
countries believe that the Security Council lacks
expertise in handling climate change and is not the
right place to take decisions with extensive
participation leading to widely acceptable proposals.
Such reasonable concerns should be fully understood
and respected. In our view, the discussions at this
meeting should be regarded as an exception giving rise
to neither outcome documents nor follow-up actions.

The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to climate change. As a developing country,
China formulated its national sustainable development
strategy as early as 15 years ago and is now
formulating a national strategy to respond to climate
change. China will vigorously implement its
sustainable development strategy, and will make its due
contribution to addressing climate change, in the form
of actual deeds. We support full, pragmatic discussions
on related issues within the context of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We are also in favour of international cooperation to
promote clean development. At the end of this month,
discussions on climate change will be held at the
fifteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development. We look forward to working with other
countries towards climate change solutions.

