Ms. Bandu Bahati (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Netherlands for inviting
me to this very important meeting on the political
and humanitarian situation of women and girls in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, because the voice
of rural women is not often listened to.

I am a rural woman and the coordinator of the local
women's non-governmental organization, Encadrement
des Femmes Indigenes et des Menages Vulnerables
(EFIM), based in Goma, North Kivu province, in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today I
speak as a rural woman, a peasant woman, a grass-
roots woman, a displaced woman, a woman affected by
conflict and especially armed conflict.

My organization EFIM. engages in the promotion
of peace, gender equality and development; in the
prevention of armed and community conflicts; and in
the protection of women and girl Victims of Violence.
Our vision is to strengthen community mechanisms that
protect children and women and promote human rights,
focusing on peaceful coexistence among communities,
the promotion of peace and the sustainable development
of my province. This morning, there are three issues I
would like to raise with the Council: the security and
humanitarian situation of women; the deterioration of
the socioeconomic situation of women and girls; and
the political participation of women.

First, the security and humanitarian situation of
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
increasingly deteriorating. It is tragic, catastrophic and
chaotic. The majority of those affected - especially
those living in rural areas where we work - are
traumatized and live without hope for the future. The
situation has been growing worse every year for more
than two decades.

There are myriad kinds of violations among the
salient problems negatively affecting and weakening
populations, and which are particularly experienced
by women and girls in Democratic Republic of the
Congo, especially in the east. These include massacres,
bloodshed, murders and killings, temporary and
permanent displacement, rape and sexual exploitation,
kidnapping for ransom, human trafficking, houses
burned to the ground, activism, the proliferation
of local and foreign armed groups, the looting of
natural resources, in particular from the mining and
agricultural sectors from which they could benefit,
restrictions to rural activities, insufficient incentives
to facilitate the participation and schooling of women
and girls, the possession of illicit weapons by several
people and humanitarian disaster. Such violations have
lead to increased poverty, unemployment, chronic
vulnerability, rural exodus, psychological trauma,
weapons proliferation, and so on. It is a time bomb that
will result in the extermination of women and girls
and of the entire population if no effective grassroots
measures are taken to prevent, protect and support
women and girls.

By way of example, last month, 54-year-old
Ms. Maombi, displaced and very vulnerable, with
nine children in her charge, was assaulted and shot by
armed men when she went to her field to reap crops.
Her daughter, who was under 18, was with her. She was
abducted, raped and returned a few days later. Another
woman, Dorothee, who witnessed the attack, stated:

"I was in my field. Attackers came and looted
goods, burned houses and killed women and men in
my presence. They kidnapped four children - two
boys and two girls. I am now taking care of a baby
left behind".

It should be noted that international aid workers in our
areas of intervention are also the victims of attack.

Secondly, the deterioration of the socioeconomic
situation of women and girls is also one of the major
consequences of the humanitarian crisis that stems
from myriad chronic insecurity-related tensions. I am
referring here to North Kivu, but I should point out that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as a whole, is
affected and almost engulfed by the scourge. With less
than a dollar a day, it is almost impossible to live in
other areas. It is an intolerable situation for women and
girls. What is worse is that they spend entire days with
nothing to eat. Such extreme poverty deprives them,
men and boys, of prospects and opportunities, which
leads some young people to join armed groups and
perpetrate other abuses. I know a widow who, before
the war, would sell her goods in several markets. She
was well-off , but due to the insecurity, she was robbed
and became very poor and vulnerable. She can no
longer feed her children or take care of her family. That
is just one example among many.

Finally, the level of women's political participation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains low
for several reasons. First, the new electoral law is not
conductive to the participation of women and girls.
Secondly, few political parties are created by women.
Thirdly, very few women are appointed to leadership
positions in decision-making entities and women's
organizations, in particular at the local level. With
regard to North Kivu, there are no women in leadership
positions in any of the six territories and three cities.
Despite all current and past efforts, women's voices
are silenced. That, in a few words, describes the ordeal
women and girls face in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Notwithstanding the issues listed above, I assure
the Council that we have brave, intelligent, capable and
competent women. They simply require the Council's
support and assistance in order to show what they can
do and produce. That is why we ask the international
community to support those women, as well as
young girls and boys without jobs, doomed to a life
of unemployment.

In conclusion, on behalf of my organization,
Encadrement des Femmes Indigenes et des Menages
Vulnerables, and of the women of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we recommend that the Security
Council, the United Nations and its Member States
quickly assess security, protection, socioeconomic and
political strategies that would help the women, girls
and entire population of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; efficiently redefine indicators that can lead to
positive change; act promptly and positively to combat
impunity; launch an investigation to punish those guilty
of the revolting acts being perpetrated throughout my
country; protect women so that they can live and work in
a safe environment and provide support and assistance
to women and women's organizations at the grassroots
level that would yield good results that improve their
humanitarian, sociopolitical and economic situation.

I thank the Council once again for the honour to
speak as a rural woman who endures the ordeals I have
described. The women of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo want to be taken into consideration,
protected, brought to safety and supported. They want
to live with dignity and in decent conditions, with the
hope of a better tomorrow. They expect the Council to
respond quickly to their cries for help.

