Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is gravely concerned
at the sudden escalation in the Gaza Strip. We believe
that it is necessary to bring an immediate end to
Israel's wide-scale use of force against the Gaza Strip,
which has already led to great losses and suffering
among the Palestinian civilian population. Clearly, the
current conditions in Gaza make it virtually impossible
to avoid such casualties.

At the same time, we again urge Hamas to
immediately end the firing of rockets into the territory
of Israel.

On 28 December, the members of the Security
Council clearly stated that they favoured an immediate
end to all military action in Gaza. Unfortunately, the
parties have yet to heed their call. We insist that they
must do so without further delay. We are certain that
the key task today is to put an end to armed
confrontation and to restore calm on both sides. That is
an essential condition for saving lives and ensuring the
safety and security of Palestinians and Israelis alike
and for preventing a humanitarian catastrophe and
destabilization throughout the Middle East, which
would hold unpredictable consequences for
international security.

It is time to put an end at long last to the Israeli
blockade of Gaza. Scattered ad hoc measures will not
bring that about. All parties must fully comply with
international humanitarian law. As a matter of urgency,
humanitarian corridors must be opened and allowed to
operate safely to enable unimpeded passage out of
Gaza by civilians, as well as by foreigners, including
Russian citizens. This would also help in the
immediate evacuation of the sick and wounded from
the Gaza Strip.

The Israeli and Palestinian parties must
immediately resume full and unconditional
implementation of their obligations under the Road
Map for a Middle East peace settlement, including
putting an end to settlement activity and effectively
fighting terrorism. Here, it is key to resume efforts
towards a just and comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian problem, to ensure adequate security for
Israel and, in the broader sense, to bring about a
comprehensive and lasting peace between the Israelis
and Arabs.

There is an ever more urgent need for inter-
Palestinian reconciliation, based on the well-known
principles laid down by the Quartet of key international
mediators. That was the thrust of resolution 1850
(2008), recently adopted by the Security Council. We
hope that, guided by that important decision of the
principal organ bearing responsibility for international
peace and security, the parties will demonstrate
political will and a sense of responsibility for the future
of the region and that they will put an immediate end to
violence and genuinely move forward towards an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement, with a coordinating role
played by the Quartet.

Russia will continue actively to encourage the
attainment of that objective. There is no alternative for
the sake of peace in the Middle East.

We shall study the draft resolution submitted to
the Security Council by the delegation of Libya.

