Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on an important subject.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the various briefers for their statements earlier today.

I also welcome and support the adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014).

Today I would like to touch on four issues. The
first is that of child soldiers; the second is on persistent
perpetrators. For the third, I would like to discuss
peacekeepers' responsibility to protect children. The
last is that of military use of and attacks on schools.

First, I would like to address the issue of child
soldiers and welcome the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign launched yesterday. I commend the initiative
taken by Special Representative Zerrougui and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, in starting
this campaign. We support it and will join in its efforts
to eliminate the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflict by 2016. Looking
back, we can see that the issue of child soldiers is
exactly what made the Security Council put the subject
of children and armed conflict on its agenda. Child
soldiers are deprived of their right to education. Their
reintegration into society is difficult. That is a heavy
loss for society as a whole.

Japan has provided support for reintegrating child
soldiers into society in Africa, the Middle East and
Asia, through both bilateral assistance and international
organizations. That support represents an application
of the concept of human security, which Japan has been
promoting, by protecting and empowering the children
who are most vulnerable in armed conflicts. We have
expended approximately $75 million over the past five
years on the reintegration of child soldiers into society.
That includes a financial contribution to Sri Lanka for
the purpose of supporting job training for former child
soldiers through the United Nations Human Security
Fund. We are planning to make further financial
contributions relating to the issue of child soldiers in
such countries as the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Mauritania
and South Sudan.

Secondly, when addressing the agenda of children
and armed conflict, the international community
must pay attention to persistent perpetrators of grave
violations against children. In the last five reports of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
more than 30 parties to conflicts were listed. Of those,
11 have been on the list for more than a decade. The
Security Council should respond more firmly to such
persistent perpetrators, with measures that include
considering the possibility of an assets freeze. In
that context, Japan welcomes the fact that parties to
conflicts in Sri Lanka and Nepal have been delisted
from the Secretary-General's reports. They were
delisted because they achieved considerable progress in
implementing the action plan that had been agreed on
between them and the United Nations. It is important
to study those cases to understand why the delistings
were possible, because we believe those lessons could
be applicable to similar situations in other countries.

Thirdly, one of the main objectives of United
Nations peacekeeping operations is to protect children
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Yet we hear
cases where peacekeepers have been criticized for
becoming violators of the rights of children. Is that not
a disgrace to the reputation of the United Nations?

I would like to emphasize that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be a model in protecting
children. We, as troop-contributing countries to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, should recognize our
responsibility to train our personnel at home so that
they will not abuse children in the course of their duties
but will protect them.

Finally, the children and armed conflict agenda is
not only about child soldiers. There is also a growing
recognition of the military use of and attacks against
schools.

Japan pays great attention to the formulation of
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict. The work of the Global Coalition to Protect
Education from Attack is bearing fruit. Japan, for its
part, is willing to participate in the future process of
the Lucens Guidelines.

Children are sometimes exploited, intimidated,
threatened and even killed all over the world. There
are a number of measures to prevent those tragic
cases, including providing assistance to countries in
conflict and developing rules and standards to address
new challenges. We are determined to contribute to
protecting the rights of children by using those concrete
actions.

