Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): It is my honour to
present the Secretary-General's report on the activities
of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) from 1 January to 30 June.

Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council in December 2010 (see S/PV.6455), the
situation in West Africa has seen some positive
developments. The post-electoral crisis in C6te
d'Ivoire, which was so drawn out and consumed a
great deal of energy, was finally ended by the
international community's support and cooperation
between the United Nations, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union.

Following the welcome outcome of the Guinean
crisis, constitutional order was restored in Niger
following the organization of presidential elections that
were deemed to be credible and transparent. The
successful transition in Niger is clearly to the credit of
the country's political class, leaders and civil society.
In this respect, I wish to commend the former head of
the transition, Mr. Salou Djibo, who kept his word and
2
acted with the necessary resolve to see the transition
through.

The support and resolute accompaniment of the
international community to these countries emerging
from crisis must be pursued in order to consolidate the
significant progress that has been made. The invitation
extended to those three countries to the Group of Eight
summit in Deauville in May and the political and
financial decisions taken at that time sent a strong
message of support.

With respect to Niger, I am pleased to note the
resumption of its democratic experience, which was
unfortunately interrupted during the crisis, and the
resources that have been made available to it will allow
it in time to become a symbol of political and
economic success so long as it continues to enjoy
regional and international support in meeting the
human security challenges ahead. In this regard, I echo
the appeal launched by President Mahamadou Issoufou
to the United Nations and all Niger's partners for
assistance in ending the chronic food insecurity from
which that country has suffered too long. I encourage
Member States and the United Nations system to
respond favourably to President Issoufou's request for
the organization of a high-level conference on food and
nutritional security that he hopes to hold in Niger by
November.

The positive developments in the subregion over
the past six months were also confirmed by the fact
that a number of countries have been able to organize
credible elections and overcome the threats of electoral
crises that would have had destabilizing consequences.
Benin was therefore able to muster the necessary
resolve to overcome profound political divisions over
the electoral process that endanger national stability
and cohesion. Moreover, Nigeria held general elections
that represented a significant step forward for
democracy. That success, which was lauded by the
Secretary-General during his recent visit to Nigeria,
will make it possible for that country to continue to
play its most welcome role as a leader in peacebuilding
and security within West Africa and beyond. In all of
those cases, I am happy to say that the partnership that
has developed among the United Nations, ECOWAS
and the African Union was crucial for the success of
the electoral processes.

While there is much to celebrate in those
important steps forward, stability in West Africa is
11-40577
nevertheless fragile and many challenges remain, as
well as threats to peace, security and development in
the region. Instability associated with elections
continues to be a significant challenge, especially when
we consider the number of elections to be held in West
Africa in the next few years. In Guinea, several
initiatives are under way to meet the population's
needs and to lay the groundwork for economic
recovery. However, additional efforts will be needed to
diffuse tension and promote the widest possible
consensus with regard to preparations for the
legislative elections that are to be held before the end
of 2011.

As for the elections planned between now and
2013 in West Africa, drawing lessons from the
elections that have just taken place, with the aim of
preventing political tensions tied to elections, last May
UNOWA organized in Praia a high-level regional
conference on elections and stability. The goal of the
conference, which was organized with the whole host
of United Nations partners, including ECOWAS, was
to encourage momentum to catalyze efforts at all levels
to create the conditions necessary for peaceful
elections in the subregion. Our hope is that the
Declaration on Elections and Stability in West Africa,
adopted at the conference, will contribute to generating
that momentum.

Efforts to consolidate the recent progress in West
Africa should not overshadow defence and security
issues that too often have played a negative role,
contrary to efforts aimed at promoting democratic
governance. UNOWA will continue to work very
closely with ECOWAS in the area of security sector
reform in order to develop a regional strategy and
implement the reforms already undertaken in Guinea
and in any other country of the subregion where such
an undertaking would be useful.

In addition, I cannot fail to mention the positive
role played by women in the prevention of conflict and
the resolution of crises in West Africa. It is often
through women's sacrifice and suffering that
opportunities for crisis resolution emerge, as we saw in
the sad events in Conakry on 28 September. In that
spirit, UNOWA will continue to promote initiatives to
help women in the subregion, in keeping with the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The range of actions undertaken to promote
security and stability in the subregion will only
11-40577

produce results if the scourges of drug trafficking and
organized crime, which further weaken already fragile
State institutions in West Africa, are not diligently and
forcefully fought. As the Council is aware, in 2008
ECOWAS put in place a regional action plan to combat
illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse
in West Africa. It is important to further mobilize
political leaders and civil society in order to help the
countries of the subregion to deal with this threat to
peace and stability, above and beyond the obvious
public health consequences if the growing trend in
drug use continues.

It is with that goal in mind that UNOWA,
working with ECOWAS, will continue to mobilize the
various stakeholders, particularly within the framework
of the West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI), whose
political committee held its first meeting on 20 June in
Dakar. UNOWA, through its presidency of the
committee, will work to promote WACI as the
spearhead for the implementation of the ECOWAS
action plan.

I would like to address the impact of the Libya
crisis on West Africa. Although their magnitude is not
yet fully known, concerns have already been expressed
that the humanitarian and security consequences of this
crisis could worsen the chronic instability in the
subregion, particularly in the countries of the Sahel.
Officials from the subregion, particularly the President
of Niger, whom I recently met with in Niamey, have
voiced serious concerns about the genuine and
potential implications that the crisis could have for the
Sahel. Beyond the social and economic impact on the
subregion of the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, the countries
of the Sahel, especially Mali and Niger, must cope with
the return of thousands of migrants from Libya. Most
of those migrants sought refuge in areas of those
countries that were already affected by
underdevelopment and the insecurity resulting from the
activities of terrorist groups and traffickers operating
there.

Furthermore, a significant increase in arms and
explosives in circulation in Niger, Mali and the Sahel
Strip in general has been noted by the countries
affected, which have expressed serious concern about
those arms and explosives falling into the hands of
terrorists operating in the region. If we are not careful,
the increase in the number of weapons in circulation in
the subregion could spark a new wave of instability
within the countries of the Sahel. In that context, we
3
welcome the re-launching of regional cooperation
among the countries of the Sahel to address common
threats to security, particularly from terrorism.

Worsening living conditions and the high rate of
youth unemployment, exacerbated by tensions related
to electoral competition for power, pose additional
risks to stability. Those conditions create a breeding
ground for recurring disputes and tensions affecting the
countries of the subregion, especially in an
environment in which the legitimate aspirations of the
people for progress and change are being frustrated.

That phenomenon is made worse by the impact of
events seen in certain North African countries. No
country of the subregion is immune from such turmoil,
as we saw recently in Burkina Faso, a country that has
had a long period of stability, and Senegal, a country
with a long-standing democratic tradition. These latest
developments confirm, if confirmation were needed,
that there is a need to comprehensively address the
issues of development, governance and security in the
countries of the subregion. Despite their commendable
efforts to promote development and stability, they
continue to be vulnerable and fragile. They therefore
deserve the determined and steadfast support of the
international community.

In conclusion, let me express my gratitude to the
Security Council for the interest it continues to show in
the situation in the subregion and for the support it
provides to the United Nations Office for West Africa.

