Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2012/818) details key events and activities in Kosovo
during the period 16 July to 15 October 2012. While the
period in question was mainly calm, very significant
developments have taken place since the end of the
reporting cycle, and it is on them that I shall focus
today.

On 21 August, the last time the Security Council
met to discuss Kosovo (S/PV.6822), I spoke of the
urgent need for a renewed political process, not only to
safeguard the substantial international investments in
Kosovo, but also to encourage the parties to move more
swiftly in order to resolve issues hampering progress
on both sides. The fact that Belgrade and Pristina
were represented at the leadership level in that session
already signaled the potential for elevated engagement.

Subsequently, as new sessions of the dialogue
mediated by the European Union (EU) got under way
soon after the end of the reporting period, a far more
fundamental milestone was reached on 19 October. That
day, thanks in great measure to the personal leadership
of EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, a new
and more fundamental phase of the dialogue process
was initiated in Brussels. Prime Ministers Dacie and
Thaci assumed direct leadership within this process,
and met for the first time as leaders of their respective
delegations.

This fast meeting was swiftly followed by a second
meeting on 7 November. During their second meeting,
the two leaders demonstrated their seriousness, and
were able to agree on concrete steps to move forward
in the dialogue in a more profound and far-reaching
manner. At the end of October, High Representative
Ashton and United States Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton paid joint visits to Pristina and Belgrade,
crucially demonstrating firm commitment and support
to the dialogue process at a high level.

I am personally gratified by these developments,
and wish to congratulate both sides - in particular
these two leaders - on demonstrating the political will
and courage to embark on the difficult yet indispensable
process of working together to recast relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. In so doing, they each showed
that they are looking to the future rather than to the
past.

Given the complexity of the issues that have
continued to inhibit progress on both sides, it would
be unreasonable to expect solutions to emerge easily
or quickly. Nonetheless, this initiative to tackle the
issues more forthrightly in a higher-level dialogue is a
development which I hope all members of this Council
will not simply commend, but also provide concrete
support to. The international community should be
well prepared to provide appropriate resources and
political backing to encourage and endorse sustainable
agreements achieved through a genuine dialogue
between the two parties.

As with any process striving to overcome the
legacies of past conflict, leaders on each side will
inevitably be confronted with obstacles on many fronts.
Each side must be able and empowered to overcome
challenges and resistance, including from those among
their respective constituencies who, for one or another
reason, do not see political progress serving their own
interests. Some may seek to influence the situation on
the ground outside the context of peaceful negotiation.
Others may seek to undermine the political position of
those negotiating.

Indeed, in the few weeks since these higher-level
talks were launched, we have witnessed instances of
increased tension in sensitive areas on the ground in
Kosovo. Also, injust the past week and the past two days,
public reactions to decisions of courts involving high-
profile war crimes defendants have shown the fragility
and reactiveness of public sentiments on matters of
reconciliation and justice. In order not to allow such
developments to generate yet further obstacles, a united
approach among the international presences engaged
on the ground also remains essential.

I am pleased to be able to report in this respect that
today there is great unity of purpose and commitment
among the mandated international presences on the
ground. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is fulfilling its mandate
as part ofa genuine team that encompasses the Kosovo
Force, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the European Union
Special Representative for Kosovo, who is leading the
important political engagements within Kosovo. Most
recently, close coordination of efforts on the ground
has already helped to inhibit recent flare-ups from
acquiring less manageable proportions.

Many issues are yet to be addressed through
dialogue, and both sides face daunting challenges
outside of the process, including difficult economic
circumstances, challenges to the further development
of rule of law institutions, and complicated internal
political environments. The situation in the north
of Kosovo remains fragile. The mission continues to
put priority on working with our partners to maintain
stability, and to try to slowly increase confidence among
populations living north and south of the Ibar River. It
is vital that all who are able to influence the atmosphere
continue to work together towards these ends and to
promote an atmosphere conducive to progress during
the political dialogue.

During the reporting period, I once again appealed
to Kosovo Serbs in the north and to the Pristina
leaders to encourage them to open further lines of
communication. In talks with leaders in Belgrade and
Pristina, I also stressed the importance of providing
these communities with full information in order to
reassure them that their legitimate interests were taken
fully into account during the efforts to achieve political
progress.

As detailed in the report, during the recent period
EULEX continued to implement the reconfiguration of
its structure, and provided new targeted expertise to
the police and judicial institutions in Kosovo. A recent
report of the European Court of Auditors, alongside
recent reports of the Kosovo Ombudsperson and the
OSCE, provided a sobering reminder of the current
essential challenges in this area. UNMIK has continued
to monitor the situation affecting minority communities
in Kosovo and, wherever possible, is providing good
offices for the resolution of disputes and reduction of
tensions on the ground.

I continue to be concerned about recurring incidents
of vandalism, theft and occasional violence against
minority returnee communities and their property. At
the same time, I am heartened by the renewed efforts of
the Kosovo police and other public institutions to engage
the communities affected and to tackle these problems.
Increased participation in municipal community safety
councils and local public safety committees during
the reporting period was an encouraging sign of these
efforts.

Among the many issues that continue to demand
sustained and coordinated effort on the ground, it
is worth mentioning in particular that, during this
period, the Mission dedicated facilitation efforts to
progress on the issue of missing persons. UNMIK
and the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
facilitated a joint visit to Cyprus by representatives of
the Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serbian families of
missing persons and further pressed all parties, local
and international, to step up their work to help promote
earlier resolution of this issue.

Albeit in its early phase, the elevation to a higher
political level of the EU-mediated dialogue marks a
new and vital step in the political process. Each side
should be commended for assuming the leadership and
political risks entailed in taking it. They should be able
to depend upon political support, including from the
members of the Council, to underpin the process and
the agreements that may be reached during its future
course.

I would like to sincerely thank the members of the
Security Council for their continued support of the
work of UNMIK, and for their continued commitment
to and interest in promoting peace and security in
Kosovo. I ask for the Council's active support for
the new phase of EU-mediated dialogue. I also ask
for its active encouragement to both Belgrade and
Pristina to fully seize the opportunity that has now
been presented, including through taking additional
confidence-building measures within their own remits.
Doing so holds promise for real hope, not only to begin
to overcome long-standing problems but also to achieve
fundamental progress towards meeting the aspirations
of the people for a more secure and more prosperous
future.

