Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): Like others, I would like
to thank Mr. Le Roy for today's briefing on the
situation in Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan and to
welcome the presence of Mr. Margelov, Special
Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation on the Sudan.
Once again, we find ourselves faced with a
dichotomy when addressing the situation in Darfur.
While we would like to welcome direct talks between
the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM) - and, to some extent,
between the Sudan and Chad - we are also faced with
obstacles along that path, as well as with continued,
albeit reduced, violence. That is certainly not
commensurate with the goals that the sides are trying
to achieve in the negotiations.

Croatia welcomes the stated commitment to the
peace process on the part of both the Government of
the Sudan and JEM, as expressed by both parties. It
includes a reaffirmation of the Agreement of Goodwill
and Confidence-Building for the Settlement of the
Problem in Darfur, signed in Doha in February this
year, as well as the exchange of lists of respective
detainees and a willingness to work on the release of
prisoners. Against that backdrop, however, we are
concerned at the preconditions that each side has set
before discussing a framework agreement, with JEM
demanding a release of prisoners and the Government
insisting on a cessation of hostilities. That has led to an
impasse and to a suspension of the talks in Doha.

We are also concerned at the application of
numerous death sentences by the Government of the
Sudan and the effect that that is having on direct talks
with JEM. Both JEM. and the Sudanese Government
need to understand that military action works only to
prolong this protracted conflict and to put civilians at
risk. We therefore wholeheartedly support the work
being done by Joint Chief Mediator Bassole, including
by encouraging the rebels to come to Doha with a
united position. We also support the visit to Darfur by
the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, led by
former South African President Mbeki, and look
forward to its releasing its findings and making
recommendations in the near future.

Croatia concurs with the Secretary-General's
assessment and concerns regarding the deterioration in
Chad-Sudan relations, especially in light of the
continuing support that the sides are providing each
other's armed opposition forces. We call upon them to
refrain from such acts or acts that may lead to the
escalation of tensions and exacerbate the already tense
situation on their mutual border. We are particularly
concerned about the cross-border incursions from
Chadian territory into western Darfur. As the
Secretary-General has stated, both sides need to
exercise maximum restraint and return to the
framework of their mutual agreements, including, but
not limited to, the Doha Agreement of 3 May this year
and the Dakar Agreement of 13 March last year. In that
regard, we would like to express our appreciation to
the Governments of Qatar and Libya for their
mediation efforts.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation concurs with the Secretary-General's
assessment that, although there has been an
improvement in the level of cooperation among the
Government of the Sudan, the United Nations and the
remaining community of non-governmental
organizations, serious gaps remain. The consequences
of the 4 March expulsions have put a large number of
innocent, exhausted civilians at great risk, and we note
that the number of humanitarian workers has been
reduced by almost 5,000, affecting some 1.1 million
beneficiaries of food, water and sanitation aid and
1.5 million who receive health services support. We
also note that the rainy season is coming soon and that
the World Health Organization has warned of an
increased risk of water-borne diseases.

Croatia is concerned by the observation made in
the Secretary-General's report that the mission still
faces considerable challenges to its freedom of
movement and therefore to its ability to implement its
mandate. We are also very concerned at the
bureaucratic impediments put in place by the
Government of the Sudan to obstruct the movement of
contingent-owned equipment, including the Nigerian
armed personnel carriers and Rwandan vehicles still
awaiting customs clearance. We call on the
Government of the Sudan to work diligently with
UNAMID to address and resolve those issues. The
Tripartite Mechanism now in place is a step in the right
direction towards identifying and resolving such issues.

Considering the overall precarious situation in
UNAMID's area of responsibility, including the
continued armed clashes between the Government and
rebel movements, stagnation in the implementation of
recent initiatives, the build-up of forces and the
possibility of further clashes along the Sudan-Chad
border, we reiterate our appeal to the Council to place
greater emphasis on the regional dimension of
UNAMID's work and to enable that mission, other
missions in the region and United Nations presences on
the ground to cooperate more closely with one another,
thereby making them more efficient in fulfilling their
respective and often overlapping mandates.

Finally, my delegation would also like to thank
the United Kingdom delegation for preparing and
distributing the first version of the Security Council
draft resolution on UNAMID's extension. We stand
ready to work with other Council members on
completing this task.

