Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the participation
of the Ministers present at today's meeting. We
listened carefully to the briefing by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and we appreciate her valuable
information regarding the recent developments in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

We took note of the two letters addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States (OAS)
and the Charge d'affaires of the United States delegation
regarding the decisions taken by the OAS on the current
crisis in Venezuela.

We have committed ourselves to fully implementing
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations in
order to maintain international peace and security. We
must therefore work together to address the challenges
and crises facing our world today. Chapter VI, Article
34, of the Charter states:

"The Security Council may investigate any
dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in
order to determine whether the continuance of
the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security."

That is why the Security Council has a fundamental
role to play in implementing preventive diplomacy in
order to prevent conflicts and address crises at an early
stage, should there be any early signs of a situation
leading to a threat to international peace and security.
That would be in accordance with the mandate given
to the Council based on Chapter VI, Article 34, of
the Charter.

Since joining the Council, the State of Kuwait
has sought to implement all our priorities based on
the fundamental principles of international law while
promoting the role of preventive diplomacy and
stepping up our efforts to prevent conflicts and settle
them peacefully. We strongly believe that preventive
diplomacy is one of the main pillars at our disposal
when dealing with unrest and crises at an early stage in
order to avoid significant economic and political losses,
as well as losses of human life and property.

It is with concern in mind that we are following
the recent developments in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and regret recent reports regarding many
casualties among civilians during demonstrations in
Venezuelan cities. The State of Kuwait stresses the
need to respect the freedom of expression and peaceful
demonstration as guaranteed by international law,
including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, which was adopted by the General
Assembly in 1966. Inter alia, the Covenant guarantees
the rights to the freedom of expression and the freedom
of peaceful assembly according to national laws.

The current political crisis in Venezuela requires
all the relevant stakeholders to prioritize national
interests over personal or partisan ones. They must
commit to an inclusive political dialogue to resolve
the current crisis. We call on all the relevant parties to
exercise self-restraint, reduce tensions, reject violence
and make every effort to prevent any further human
losses. In that context, we support the statement issued
by the Secretary-General on 24 January.

We belong to a region where over the past two years
certain countries, such as Syria and Libya, have seen
demonstrations and protests that started peacefully but,
unfortunately, became violent, leading to grave losses
in human lives and the destruction of infrastructure.
Some of them have even led to the tragedies that we
are witnessing today, including the suffering from their
repercussions, which affect the security and stability
of the region and the world. We must therefore step up
our efforts to prevent such events from reoccurring,
whether in our region or in any other part of the world.

Before concluding I would like to stress the
importance of the Security Council addressing
such situations by utilizing the well-established and
recognized principles of relations among nations,
which are built on those of the Charter of the United
Nations that call on nations to respect the sovereignty of
States, not interfere in their internal affairs and respect
the competencies of various United Nations organs
mandated by the Charter. Those are the principles
that govern relations among nations, and they should
be the principles on which we rely when addressing
such situations.

We hope that Venezuela will be able to peacefully
overcome this crisis, while ensuring security, stability
and prosperity for its people.

