Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for sharing their experiences with
us today. I also express my heartfelt appreciation to all
peacekeepers for their contribution in the face of severe
challenges on the ground.

We welcome today's discussion as part of the
Council's broader focus throughout the year on
making peacekeeping operations as effective as
possible through better mandates, capabilities and
force generation. Resolution 2382 (2017), which we
adopted today, also follows the important work of 2014
on the rule of law, good governance and oversight of
security institutions through resolution 2151 (2014),
on security sector reform, and resolution 2185 (2014),
on policing. We have had a series of discussions on
peacekeeping in the Chamber this year. We have had
good discussions, and Japan believes that it is time to
move from proposals to action. Today's resolution will
provide important guidance on the way ahead. All of
the missions represented today offer important lessons
and insights.

I would first like to highlight Haiti, since
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) successfully completed its operations
last month. The support of MINUSTAH to the Haitian
National Police provided a successful example of
the role of policing based on national ownership.
MINUSTAH adapted to changing circumstances on
the ground through community violence-reduction
initiatives, while supporting police capacity-building,
improved criminal justice procedures, joint patrols
and the development of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.
The transition to MINUJUSTH also serves as a model
for how United Nations peacekeeping missions should
adapt as a country's needs change as part of an eventual
exit strategy.

The briefing provided by Mr. Yacouba reminds us
that the role of police in MINUSMA is vital. Due to the
growing security threat in Mali, we tend to focus on the
Malian defence and security forces, but security and
justice cannot be delivered by them alone. The primary
objective of the mandate of MINUSMA is to support
the Government's efforts for the gradual restoration
and extension of State authority, including the Malian
police. Japan has been providing capacity-building
assistance to the Malian police, in cooperation with the
United Nations police.

Regarding UNAMID, we look forward to the
ongoing efforts of the Mission's police to strengthen
local police to undertake protection of civilians
tasks, as well as for the safe and voluntary return of
internally displaced persons as the Mission's drawdown
progresses. We hope that in so doing, UNAMID will
continue to set new standards for dealing with gender-
related issues.

During its Council presidency in December, Japan
hopes to round out this year's discussions by holding
a meeting on effective and efficient training and
capacity-building based on the report of the Secretary-
General mandated by resolution 2378 (2017). The year
2018, in turn, will be the year to translate our various
discussions and resolutions into concrete results in the
field - a goal shared with the Secretary-General's
reforms. Interaction with the wider United Nations
membership will be key to our success. Japan looks
forward to actively supporting those efforts.

