Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me congratulate you on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October 2003, and for the outstanding manner in which
you have been able to conduct the business of this
Council. I also thank you for convening this timely
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

John Maynard Keynes said, "In the long run we
are all dead." A whole generation has passed while we
try to resolve the Middle East problem, and it is our
passion for the short-term solution that has kept the
region at the boiling point and prevented a
comprehensive solution to the problem for a whole
generation. It is about time that the international
community took a bolder step.

Nepal has always spoken very clearly about the
Middle East. Israel has the right to live in security,
within secure borders, and to protect its people and its
property. Palestinians have the right to a viable State -
secure, peaceful and within the 1967 borders.

We have consistently denounced the excessive
use of force by Israel against innocent Palestinian
civilians and attacks by Palestinians against innocent
Israeli civilians. After more than a half-century of
conflict and bloodshed, everyone should understand
that there can be no solution to the Middle East
problem through violence. Only constructive dialogue
and flexibility from both sides will lead to a
comprehensive and durable peace in that troubled
region. Reflexive violence and counter-violence will
only worsen the situation, as we have witnessed.

Indeed, suicide bombings drive the Israelis into
despair. By the same token, the building of Jewish
settlements and the presence of Israeli security forces
in Palestinian territories, as well as the excessive use of
force against innocent Palestinians, drives them into
despair as well.

The security wall Israel has been building has
further fueled the flames. Nepal would have no
difficulty had Israel erected the security wall on its
own territory, but building a wall within the Palestinian
territory is absolutely unacceptable.

Nepal is opposed to Israel's attack on Syria for
three reasons: first, it is illegal to attack another
country without explicit provocation; secondly, it sets a
very wrong precedent; thirdly, it can give a sense of
impunity to larger or more powerful States that might
wish to attack their smaller or weaker neighbours
without justifiable reason.

Nepal urges both sides to stop trading charges and
to sit down at the negotiating table and find a
comprehensive settlement to this long-festering
problem.

The international community might have limited
options to bring peace and normalcy to the Middle
East, but it certainly has not run out of options. The
Quartet, with the help of the wider world community,
could find a way to implement the road map.

Nepal shares the Secretary-General's View that
bold steps, in keeping with the road map, are now
necessary to salvage the peace, as small steps have not
worked.

Some ideas might not be relevant at a certain
time, but could be at another. The world community
should not allow the unconscionable bloodshed in the
Middle East to go on. At some point, it needs to take
steps to protect the people and property of the two
sides to the conflict.

Maybe it is time to consider disengaging the two
conflicting parties by deploying international forces
along the 1967 borders to keep the peace while the two
parties negotiate a final settlement.

I urge the Security Council to do everything in its
power to stop the bloodshed and help the region to
achieve a comprehensive peace. The people of the
Middle East deserve it, and the international
community has the obligation to help ensure that it
happens.

