Mr. Mahmoud: I thank you, Sir, for inviting
me to address the Security Council on such an
important subject.

The purpose of my briefing is twofold. First, it is to
present to the Council the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations' (HIPPO) view of the conceptual
and attitudinal shifts that need to be internalized by
peace operations if they are to unleash their potential
to contribute to sustaining peace. Secondly, it is to
share with the Security Council some of the practical
implications of those shifts, in terms of the design,
implementation and review of peacekeeping operations.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) devotes some 10
pages to the issue of sustaining peace. Its main thrust
is to unpack the spirit and the letter of its title, which
calls for "uniting our strengths for peace: politics,
partnership and people". HIPPO views sustaining
peace as the ultimate objective of United Nations post-
conflict engagement, in which inclusive politics and the
people in that inclusive plurality, including women and
youth, play a central role.

What are the shifts advocated by HIPPO for the
purpose of sustaining peace? Let me just mention three
of them. The first is to acknowledge that countries
emerging from conflict are not blank pages and their
people are not projects. Internal actors at all levels of
society are the main agents of peace. That means that
our efforts to help sustain peace should be motivated by
humility to learn from what still works well in countries
emerging from conflict and to respect that every
society, however broken it may appear, has capacities
and assets, not just needs and vulnerabilities. Such
an approach goes against the grain of the practices of
some outside interveners who believe that countries in
conflict lack the competency and resources to address
their own predicament.

That myopia leads me to the second shift
advocated by HIPPO, namely, the need to challenge
the assumptions and values that underpin some of the
supply-driven templates and technical approaches and
solutions that are regular staples in the mandates of a
number of peacekeeping operations. Strengthening
central State institutions, for example, is believed to
create the conditions for peace. However, that approach
ignores the fact that State institutions, as they are
being strengthened, tend to be in the thrall of domestic
ruling elites who are concerned more about power
than governance and susceptible "to corruption by
powerful groups".

The third shift advocated by HIPPO is
politics - legitimate politics, I hasten to add. Lasting
peace is neither achieved nor sustained through military
and technical engagements, but through political
solutions. Peace processes do not end with a ceasefire or
a peace agreement, which simply mean that belligerents
have decided, sometimes through coercive diplomacy,
to move from violence to politics, a transition usually
fraught with uncertainties and reversals. HIPPO
contends that politics is the best force multiplier where
missions are deployed in hostile environments.

Therefore, what are the practical implications of
those three shifts? Let me mention two.

First, there is a need to rethink the way that we
analyse peace and conflict when planning and reviewing
peace operations. Such analysis should not only assess
the factors that drive and sustain violence and instability,
it should also map what is still working and not just
what needs to be fixed. Such mapping would include
surveys of the resilient capacities that host societies
and ordinary people are using to peacefully manage
conflict and subsist in the direst of circumstances. It
would also assess other determinants of peace, such as
the commitments of domestic, bilateral and regional
stakeholders to the cause of peace, accompanied by an
inventory of their respective interests and comparative
advantages. Given that the drivers of instability tend
to be transnational in origin and effect, the analysis
should assess those drivers from a regional perspective.
And because women and youth experience conflict
differently, specific measures should be taken to ensure
their unique perspectives are taken into account at
every step of that analytical exercise. Let me hasten to
add that several peacekeeping missions are undertaking
aspects of that type of analysis, including through
surveys. But I suspect that sustaining peace is not the
overarching organizing framework for collecting and
processing information.

The second practical implication of the shifts is the
development of a strategic compact for sustaining peace.
That could be initiated in response to a specific and firm
request from the Security Council. The compact would
articulate a shared, context-sensitive understanding of
what sustaining peace means in accordance with the
spirit and the letter of resolution 2282 (2016). It would
outline, on the basis of the analysis Ijust discussed, the
primary responsibilities of the host country and other
national stakeholders, as well as the supportive role
of the United Nations system on the ground under the
leadership of an empowered Resident Coordinator. The
compact would also include time-bound performance
benchmarks to ensure mutual accountability and
facilitate reporting. It would be a strategic framework
that would ensure inclusive national ownership and the
primacy of legitimate politics. In addition, it would
enable the mission to execute its mandate from a long-
term, sustaining-peace perspective, whether the task
is the extension of State authority or the protection
of civilians.

The compact would also respond to the call by the
Secretary-General and others to build synergies among
the three foundational pillars of the United Nations and
to put "we the peoples" at the centre of United Nations
engagement. The pillars, including the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, would flow through
the compact in an integrated manner. It would also
provide a natural home for people-centred approaches,
particularly if the compact is vetted through a standing
civil society consultative body.

I recognize that this is a tall order, and attempts
have been made, particularly in peacekeeping missions
serving in challenging political contexts where host
Governments are unable or unwilling to cooperate. But

without a shift in mindset and an up-front investment
in strategic analysis and an inclusive compact-building
process for the sake ofpeace, the United Nations, in my
view, will continue to deploy peacekeepers into hostile
environments with little or no peace to keep, where
at times the line between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement becomes blurred and where the primary
focus during review periods is largely on meeting the
pressing operational and logistical requirements for
overstretched missions.
In conclusion, the next time peacekeeping
operations come up for review, particularly those with
"stabilization" as their middle name, I humbly suggest
that the Council consider the following four questions.

First, does the mission have dedicated capacity at
the highest level to generate and cultivate legitimate
political solutions?

Secondly, does the mission have the necessary
knowledge, skills and attitudes to regularly conduct
strategic, integrated and participatory analyses to
identify how it can contribute to sustaining peace?

Thirdly, does the mission have a binding, strategic
compact and an exit strategy that, in addition to its
intrinsic mandated objectives, are explicitly designed to
contribute to the overarching goal of sustaining peace?

Fourthly, and lastly, does it have mission-wide
consultative mechanisms that put people at the centre
and to ensure inclusive national ownership and effective
trust-building?

The answers to those questions and the debates
they may generate might offer the Council, with the
advisory support of the Peacebuilding Commission, an
opportunity to include in mission mandates provisions
that can enhance their potential to contribute to
sustaining peace, guided by the spirit and the letter
of HIPPO recommendations and the sustaining
peace resolutions.

