Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by warmly congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your leadership of the Council this
month, all the more so as you come from a neighbourly
and brotherly African country that has contributed so
greatly to promoting peace and stability throughout our
African continent. It is my great pleasure to commend
your role as President of the Council and the role you
have played in ensuring the success of the Council's
stock-taking visit to the Sudan. That visit enabled the
Council to observe the situation on the ground. I would
also like to congratulate you for having organized these
important discussions on peace and security in Africa
in the area of support for the peacekeeping operations
of the African Union (AU).

The founding fathers of the United Nations
wanted to guarantee, through Chapter VIII of the
Charter, that there were legally binding texts regarding
the support to be provided by the United Nations to
peacekeeping operations carried out by regional and
subregional organizations. They were fully aware of
the fact that global peace is an integral and indivisible
whole and that genuine partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations on
issues of the maintenance of international peace and
security was inevitable.

The recommendations of the African Union-
United Nations panel established under Security
Council resolution 1809 (2008) were aimed at
acquiring the means of financial sustainability for AU
peacekeeping operations as authorized by the United
Nations. The first part of the report (S/2008/813)
focused on the ways to strengthen the strategic
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union in order to revitalize channels for joint
action between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council in a way that fully
utilized the potential capacity for partnership and direct
coordination in the field of decision-making and the
sharing of responsibility, according to the mandates of
the two organizations.

I welcome here the mutual visits organized thus
far and the joint advisory meetings between the two
bodies from 2007 to today. However, we all yearn for
greater and closer coordination, especially with regard
to United Nations support for the African Union
10-year capacity-building programme and the
promotion and enhancement of peacekeeping, as
provided for by the joint communique publicized by
the two Councils following their joint advisory meeting
held on 4 July 2010 in New York.

All of us are aware of the need to step up the
number of regular briefings by the leaders of the
African Union to the Security Council in which they
spell out their position regarding progress made in
areas of cooperation between the two organizations. In
the past, these briefings have stressed the need for
cooperation between the two organizations, especially
with regard to the situations in Burundi, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia, Madagascar and my country, the
Sudan.

We agree with the recent report of the Secretary-
General with respect to the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, which is a
two-tiered process. The first tier is the implementation
of the 10-year capacity-building programme and
support for the mechanisms of the African peace and
security architecture. The second consists of joint
efforts by the two organizations through regional
mechanisms and the relevant United Nations agencies
and institutions in the areas of peacebuilding.

Conflict prevention should also be a priority. I
would refer to the concept note on optimizing the use
of preventive diplomacy tools (S/2010/371, annex)
used by the Security Council to guide its debate of 16
July (see S/PV.6360). The presidential statement
adopted on that occasion (S/PRST/2010/14) stressed
the enhancement of capacity-building for regional and
subregional organizations and national Governments in
the areas of preventive diplomacy and peace through
mediation, including, more broadly, developing
regional working methods in the area of conflict
resolution.

With regard to peacekeeping, and specifically the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), cooperation between the United
Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission has been a
success, given the transformation of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan into UNAMID in December 2007.
The goal was to create a model for implementation
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Chair of the African Union
at the time clearly asserted that this was to be an
African-owned mission, made up solely of Africans.
The United Nations was to provide the necessary
technical, financial and logistical assistance, including
technical advice, in all areas. That experience
illustrates the importance of regional capacity-building
in peacekeeping, including efforts aimed at
strengthening AMISOM. and activating its role.

We believe, however, that the AMISOM
experience attests to the importance of predictable and
sustainable financing for AU peacekeeping operations
mandated by and in coordination with the United
Nations. Such operations face many challenges,
including the main challenge of being financially
dependent on the contributions of international donors
and partners, including the African Union. We are well
aware that the AU's inability to count on sustainable
and predictable sources of financing makes its plans
and strategies for peacekeeping operations arbitrary,
fluctuating and unstable. The position of donors at the
moment when peace agreements are signed sometimes
change when it comes to providing assistance in the
post-peacekeeping phase.

I could list several examples in that regard, but
will limit myself to reminding the Council of the very
generous contributions and pledges made by donors at
Oslo in 2005 in order to implement the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in the Sudan. However, such
contributions were not forthcoming once both parties
to the Agreement entered the implementation phase.

In conclusion, I would like to say that forging a
comprehensive strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union requires
practical guidelines and measures on the part of the
competent legal bodies of the United Nations,
especially with respect to financing and its sources.
That is all the more true now that the African Union
has assumed many responsibilities in the
implementation of promising regional initiatives that
have contributed to the settlement of conflicts
throughout Africa.

I would also like to stress the importance ofjoint
meetings between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. We should establish
a broader mechanism to deal with the preparatory work
for those meetings, without in any way impinging upon
the mandate of the Security Council's Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

It is for those reasons that I welcome the African
Union's contributions to and initiatives on the
continent, including in my own country, the Sudan.

