Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): The representative of the
presidency of the European Union has just expressed our

 

common vision of the Liberian peace process and our
support for the draft resolution before the Security Council.
Portugal notes with deep satisfaction the recent progress
made towards the consolidation of peace and national
reconciliation in Liberia. We particulary welcome the
significant progress in the political and military situation, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General dated 19
March 1997.

We hope that the present extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
and the Mission's new and important role in the electoral
process will constitute positive contributions towards the
holding of free and fair elections in that country.

My delegation strongly believes that the maintenance
and strengthening of UNOMIL's presence are essential to
this phase of the peace process, as underlined in the report
of the Secretary-General. In this context, enhanced
cooperation between UNOMIL and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) will be an essential element in the
success of the peace process.

Let me also welcome the agreement between the
Council of State and the Economic Community of West
African States on a basic framework for the holding of
elections in Liberia. We call on both the Liberian Council
of State and ECOWAS member States to work jointly, with
renewed energy, towards the full implementation of that
agreement.

The peace process is now entering a new and crucial
phase. Timely conclusion of this phase is essential both to
the credibility of the peace process and to the viability of
the coming elections. We support the efforts of ECOWAS,
and we very much hope that all the parties will abide by
the timetable established in the Abuja Agreement. I also
underline the importance we attach to the establishment of
electoral law and regulations by the end of this March, to
the registration of voters in April and to the election
campaign in May.

Like other delegations, we very much favour the
strengthening of ECOMOG, and we also would like to pay
tribute to the very important role of ECOMOG'S Force
Commander in the area of the demobilization of the ex-
combatants of all Liberian factions.

Organizing elections is not an easy task, especially in
countries which have experienced civil war. Several
requirements must be met in order to organize free, fair and
internationally verifiable elections in Liberia. I would just
like to mention several items deserving of careful
consideration at this essential stage of the preparations:
the urgent installation of the independent Electoral
Commission and the reconstituted Supreme Court; the
registration of voters; and the return of refugees - and
I would like to stress that this is indispensable for the
credibility of the entire electoral process. The possibility
of non-participation by almost 30 per cent of the Liberian
population in the elections should be a matter of great
concern for the international community.

As we have stated on other occasions, we strongly
believe that the primary responsibility for peace and
national reconciliation in Liberia rests with all Liberian
parties. We urge all Liberians to cooperate fully with the
peace process, in order to consolidate national
reconciliation and to move the disarmament process
forward. We also urge all Liberian leaders to create
conditions of security for everybody. Their commitment
to respect human rights in the country and their
facilitation of humanitarian activities are of particular
importance.

The United Nations and regional organizations must
continue to play an important role in Liberia. However,
the role of those organizations cannot be confined to the
strict implementation of the military and political aspects
of the peace agreement. They should help and promote all
efforts to alleviate the present difficulties that the Liberian
people are facing.

In conclusion, I would like to echo the appeal to the
international community to support actively not only the
economic and social reconstruction of Liberia but also
Liberian institutions directly involved in the preservation
of law and order.

The draft resolution before us is a step in the right
direction.

