Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and J allow for their reports and, even more,
for their dedication to global justice.

The recent debate over the Security Council's
referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court shows that the struggle to hold
accountable those responsible for mass atrocities is not

behind us. The four briefers have shown outstanding
leadership in their efforts to end impunity and advance
accountability. People everywhere are in their debt.

The United States has strongly supported the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) since their inception.
The two courts have tried more than 200 defendants
accused of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including top political and military leaders.
It has been a complex and unprecedented undertaking,
yet the Tribunals have demonstrated a commitment
to fairness, impartiality and independence. Today we
see, as demonstrated by the events in Syria, South
Sudan, the Central African Republic and elsewhere,
that mass atrocities still pose a challenge to the global
community. We also see that the record provided by the
ICTY and ICTR provides a warning to leaders that the
choices they make and the orders they give can have
serious personal consequences.

With the work of the Tribunals now nearing
completion, the United States commends the efforts
of the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals to
transfer the remaining functions to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. At the
same time, we understand the need for flexibility and
recognize that the exact closure dates will depend on
the completion of ongoing and soon-to-begin trials and
appeals.

Turning to the ICTY, we note with satisfaction that
the Tribunal continues to focus on the completion of
all trials and appeals, having rendered four appellate
judgements between November 2013 and May 2014.
We are pleased that the trial of Ratko Mladie is moving
forward as forecast and that a judgement in the case
of Radovan Karadzie is expected next year. Those
two men are accused of being the architects of the
Srebrenica genocide, the worst crime committed on
European soil since the Second World War. Completing
their trials will help to close the book on one ofthe most
painful chapters in the history ofthe former Yugoslavia.
We urge all Governments in the region to continue to
work towards reconciliation, to avoid statements that
inflame tensions and to continue to bring war criminals
to justice in local courts.

Regarding the ICTR, we are pleased that the
Tribunal has wrapped up its workload of trials and
continues to complete appeals. The Mechanism in
Arusha opened in 2012 and has smoothly taken over
most prosecutorial and judicial responsibilities.

The United States remains concerned, however,
that nine ICTR fugitives remain at large. Those
alleged mass murderers must be brought to trial, and
the United States urges all Member States, especially
those in the region, to cooperate with the Tribunal in
the apprehension of those nine men. The United States
continues to offer monetary rewards for information
leading to their arrest, whether those individuals are
prosecuted in the Mechanism or in Rwandan courts.
We are working very closely with the ICTR tracking
team, the Rwandan Government and INTERPOL to
form an international task force later this year with
a view to increasing collaboration in the search for
those fugitives. We also call on regional Governments
to work with the Tribunal on the relocation of several
persons who have been acquitted by the ICTR or have
served their sentences, but whose return to Rwanda is
problematic.

We see the historic contributions that the two
Tribunals have made to international criminal justice.
They have brought to justice some of the most Vicious
criminals in the history of humankind. They have also
assembled an historical record that will be publicly
accessible and that will protect the truth from those who
might in the future attempt to deny or distort it. They
demonstrate that the world does not forget. Political and
military leaders perpetrating atrocities today should
ponder that lesson carefully.

