Mr. Jensen (Denmark): The main discussions
in New York about Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist organizations have
served to remind us once again that the threat from
terrorism and Violent extremism is accurate and real.
Violent extremism and terrorism are not only a threat
to innocent civilians of the countries of the Middle
East and North Africa, they are a global challenge.
To counter the terrorist threat effectively, we must be
guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. Peace and respect for human rights
go hand in hand. The international rule of law is not
about selectively invoking tranquility as a shield for
oppressive regimes while at the same time ignoring the
legitimate rights of States in other regions of the world.

A functioning global order requires us to protect the
innocent victims of terrorism where States fail to do so.
It requires a comprehensive effort that involves military,
economic and political being deployed strategically and
through the broadest possible coalition. It was therefore
good to hear this morning the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Lavrov, say that Russia would
participate in the fight against ISIL - and we can see
now that they have always been militarily active. But
it was also troubling to hear that it was difficult to see
who Russia has been militarily active against. Rumours
say that it was not ISIL that was hit by the military
aggression from Russia this morning.

What we also need to do is to focus on how we
can prevent persons from turning to terrorism in the
first place. Countering extremism by investing in
prevention measures, education and jobs for youths is
key, as is paying attention to the need to extend citizen
participation and democracy to all. Our own experience
has shown us that we must focus on applying an early
preventive effort while at the same time being capable
of managing more eminent threats.

In Georgia and Tunisia, we are launching new
initiatives with the Governments to counter radicalism.
Those include a focus on youths, dialogue and
preventive measures. To reduce the appeal of ISIL to
potential foreign fighters, we are supporting initiatives
to investigate and document war crimes and human
rights abuses in Iraq and Syria committed by ISIL and
other extremists.

Violent extremism impacts the security of us
all - in Copenhagen, Baghdad, Paris and New York.
But it also hinders development and economic growth
globally. It is therefore important for us that the global
framework for countering this threat be firmly anchored
at the United Nations and that all Member States
and others in the United Nations family are actively
engaged in the efforts to build resilience and to counter
violent extremism wherever we meet it. A successful
approach to counter-terrorism must therefore revolve
around partnerships.

