Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference): At the outset, I would like to extend to you,
Sir, my warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are confident that your rich experience and known

 

professional and academic skills will serve you well in the
successful discharge of the complex task currently facing
the Security Council.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Botswana,
Ambassador Legwaila, for his able performance in steering
the work of the Council during the month of March.

On behalf of the General Secretariat of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), I am
privileged, once again, to address the Security Council on
an issue of critical importance to our two Organizations.
Let me say that on this issue the United Nations and the
OIC have a commonality of views, and both have
cooperated readily in seeking ways to reduce tensions and,
as far as humanly possible, bring peace and stability to the
Afghan people and to the region.

Since the liberation of Afghanistan and following the
collapse of the Najibullah regime in April 1992, a peaceful
transfer of power to the Afghan Mujahideen constituted a
principal objective of all OIC action on the Afghan
question. It was in this spirit that the agreements signed by
the leaders of the Afghan Mujahideen on 24 April 1992, on
the formation of their new administration, and the
installation, four days later, of an interim government in
Afghanistan, were welcomed by the OIC with great hopes
and expectations. Regrettably, these expectations proved to
be short- lived, as fighting erupted among different
Mujahideen groups in and around Kabul, bringing with it
immense loss of human life and treacherous conditions for
the surviving population. Among other measures, the
launching of an ambitious OIC programme of
reconstruction assistance that was being developed in
mutual cooperation between the OIC and the Islamic
Development Bank for the newly resurrected State of
Afghanistan, was seriously hampered by these events.

In the period that followed, all of us in the OIC
observed with distress a rapid deterioration in the Afghan
situation. Our Organization seized every opportunity to play
a constructive role in the matter. My Secretary General, Dr.
Hamid Algabid himself, appealed to the parties concerned
to cease hostilities and seek a peaceful solution through
dialogue. In a statement on 25 January 1993 he welcomed
the initiative of His Majesty King Fahd Bin Abdul Aziz of
Saudi Arabia for the restoration of peace in Afghanistan,
urging the Mujahideen leaders to respond positively to that
initiative. The Secretary General's Special Representative
for Afghanistan, Ambassador Bakr, Visited the region and
extended the OIC's full diplomatic and political support to
the Saudi initiative. This initiative was reinforced by that
of the then Prime Minister of another member State of
my Organization, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
resulting in a fruitful meeting of all Afghan Mujahideen
leaders in Islamabad on 7 March 1993. The Afghan Peace
Accord, concluded that day, was ratified on
12 March 1993 at Makkah Al Mukarramah, in the
presence of King Fahd and the Prime Minster of Pakistan.
My Secretary General was there, too, in support of that
initiative.

Under article 10 of the Afghan Peace Accord, the
OIC was given the responsibility, together with the
representatives of the Afghan parties, to monitor the
cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities in Afghanistan.
This was consistent with the mandate given by the Sixth
Islamic Summit, which called for an active role for the
OIC in the solution of the Afghanistan problem. My
Organization welcomed this call and serious consultations
were undertaken at the highest levels to define its
monitoring role and to detail the modalities for making it
operational. Plans were also being considered by the
Islamic Development Bank for dispatching teams of
experts to Afghanistan to evaluate the country's
reconstruction and development needs.

The Twenty-first Islamic Conference of Foreign
Minsters, held in Karachi, Pakistan, in April 1993 had,
among other things, appealed to member States and the
international community in general to provide generous
humanitarian and financial assistance to Afghanistan and
to the Afghan refugees awaiting repatriation from
Pakistan and Iran. All subsequent Islamic Conferences of
Foreign Ministers and the Seventh Islamic Summit have
consistently upheld this principled position.

These and other earlier supportive moves, however,
were stopped in their tracks as fresh intra-factional
fighting broke out in Afghanistan in May 1993. Since
then the hostilities have never completely ceased; rather,
they have frequently gained in intensity, thus causing
much human suffering, including loss of lives, and
hampering measures that would have fostered stability
and paved the way to the social and economic
development of the country. Throughout this period, the
OIC has continued in its efforts to counsel the exercise of
restraint and to advocate discussions and dialogues among
all warring factions so that peace may be attained and
maintained on mutually agreeable terms.

I have to emphasize here that these initiatives have
been and are being undertaken not in isolation, but in

 

harmony with the United Nations peace-making efforts in
Afghanistan. Constant contacts between the two
Organizations at the appropriate levels, including the levels
of the respective executive heads, are being maintained, and
the OIC's complementary role vis-a-vis that of the United
Nations in seeking a peaceful solution of the Afghan
problem is being pursued. My Secretary General has
continued his own travels to Afghanistan and other affected
areas, engaging in dialogues with the leaders concerned.
These have been followed by the visits of his Special
Representative to the area, in which the Afghan leaders
have indicated their interest in seeing the implementation of
the Afghan Peace Accord once favourable conditions are
attained.

To facilitate this task, the OIC, in cooperation with
and with the most appreciated support of the Government
of Pakistan and in full agreement with all Afghan parties,
established a permanent representation for Afghanistan in
Islamabad.

The Secretary General of the OIC, on the basis of the
consultations of his Special Representative with the relevant
Afghan parties and the follow-up reports from the OIC
Permanent Representative for Afghanistan, has proposed
that once a durable cease-fire has been established the OIC
could examine the possibility of convening a gathering of
all parties concerned at a suitable place, preferably J eddah,
and at an appropriate time, initiate an inter-Afghan process
for resolving their problems and for defining the direction
of efforts to establish durable peace in Afghanistan.
Simultaneously, the OIC would do its best to ensure that
emergency relief and humanitarian supplies reached the
war-affected people in Afghanistan.

I spoke a little while ago of the fact that the OIC's
initiatives are in harmony with the United Nations
peace-making efforts in Afghanistan. This is fully reflected
in the framework of consultations that are being pursued
between the two Organizations and between the
representatives of each with the leadership of all Afghan
factions in the country.

At this stage in my intervention, I should mention the
Proximity Peace Talks held in Teheran, Iran, from 29
November to 7 December 1994, among the Afghan parties,
with the participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General and the OIC Permanent Representative
for Afghanistan and in the presence of the representative of
the United Nations. These talks, which were conducted on
the initiative of the Government of Iran, were devoted to a
comprehensive exchange of views on ways to establish a cease-

fire, a mechanism for the transfer of power, a new

interim Government and a permanent political
infrastructure in Afghanistan. The continuing in-fighting
in Afghanistan, however, has militated against giving
practical effect to whatever understanding may have been
arrived at in these talks.

Within the framework of OIC initiatives, I had then
the privilege of leading OIC delegations to Afghanistan
on two different occasions in 1995, once in June and July
and again in September in my additional capacity as
chairman of the OIC mission for Afghanistan. Prior to my
first visit of June and July, Ambassador Mahmoud
Mestiri, special representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General for Afghanistan affairs, had visited
upon our invitation the OIC General Secretariat in J eddah
and engaged in constructive talks with our Secretary
General and other senior OIC officials. In my own
consultations with Mr. Rabbani, Commander Masoud and
other leaders in Kabul, Jalalabad, Herat and Kandahar,
and particularly in Mazar-i-Sharif, where I observed a
genuine spirit of cooperation and support for the United
Nations/OIC initiative, as well as in Islamabad, where I
had detailed discussions with all authorities concerned and
with Mr. Mahmoud Mestiri, the OIC's complementary
role to that of the United Nations in seeking a peaceful
solution of the Afghanistan situation was clarified once
again.

However, unlike some other peace initiatives, ours
did not provide for a prearranged agenda for the initial
peace talks. Rather, it advocated the convening of a
preparatory meeting of representatives of all the leaders
and political factions of Afghanistan, in addition to some
selected Afghan independent personalities, to meet at an
agreed time in Jeddah to discuss freely and, hopefully,
agree on an agenda for peace and on the modalities for its
implementation, all by and among the Afghans
themselves, with absolutely no outside interference of any
kind whatsoever. This meeting would, however, enjoy all
the cooperation and support of both the United Nations
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference and, after
agreeing on a course of action, could be assisted, at the
invitation of participating Afghans themselves, by the
representatives of some neighbouring and other countries
directly concerned in the implementation of future actions.
These issues were also the subject of most recent
discussions between the Secretary General's Special
Representative and the parties concerned in Afghanistan
earlier this year.

 

It is gratifying that General Assembly resolution
50/88, unanimously adopted on 19 December 1995,
expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the OIC in
support of the United Nations Special Mission and the
engagement of my Organization in Afghanistan, in
coordination with the United Nations, with a view to
achieving a just and lasting political settlement. The entire
membership of the OIC fully supports and endorses this
resolution.

I take the liberty of reiterating that the OIC proposals
and initiatives, fully consistent with this resolution, provide
for no outside interference of any kind whatsoever. As can
be deduced from my own talks with the leadership of the
various Afghan factions, including the Kabul authorities,
these proposals would be agreeable to them, given some
time, patience and perseverance. We believe that these
should be seriously considered in all relevant forums and
supported.

It is in this context that we welcome the
Secretary-General's latest report, contained in document
A/50/908 of 3 April 1996, and especially his
recommendations and conclusions concerning alternative
ways of seeking a satisfactory solution to the Afghan
question. We believe that our proposal regarding the
convening of an intra-Afghan meeting under joint United
Nations/OIC sponsorship, to be joined at a later stage by
other countries directly concerned, leading to the emergence
of a fully representative, broad-based authority for
Afghanistan, provides a viable alternative.

In conclusion, we would reaffirm the general
principles enunciated in General Assembly resolution 50/88
as well as in the Secretary-General's recent report to which
I have just referred, and the resolve of the OIC to continue,
in close cooperation with the United Nations, its efforts to
assist the people of Afghanistan in their endeavours to find
a fair and lasting solution to their longstanding, painful
predicament.

