Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I had hoped
that the tone of my speech would have demonstrated to
everyone seated around this table and in the Chamber
our determination that the Council not again manifest
the same divisions. I wanted my statement to reflect my
desire to respect the dignity of the debate - a debate
that has to do with the infinite suffering of the Syrian
people - and my desire that those who committed
crimes be one day held to account for them. I see no
other way except to appeal to the International Criminal
Court. It was therefore a quite simple intervention. I
regret the fact that the representative of the Russian
Federation replied with an invective and direct personal
attacks. I will refer to four points raised in my Russian
colleague's intervention: absurdity, confusion, error
and, lastly, effrontery.

With respect to absurdity, it was said that we
introduced draft resolution (S/2014/348) in preparation
for a military intervention. I do not consider that point
even worth arguing. As Talleyrand said, whatever is
excessive is insignificant.

On confusion, we have heard and seen our Russian
colleague moving from Tripoli to Baghdad, as if the
crimes and excesses committed in Tripoli and Baghdad
excused the current crimes and excesses in Damascus
today.

In error, my Russian colleague asserted that
the Syrian National Coalition was responsible for
the current impasse in the Geneva talks. In fact, as
Mr. Brahimi said himself here in the Council, in reality
it is the regime that is refusing his proposed two-
pronged approach, namely, parallel negotiations on the
subject of terrorism and the matter of the transitional
Government.

The representative of the Russian Federation
appealed to Mr. Brahimi several times to convene new
negotiations in Geneva. And Mr. Brahimi replied that it
was impossible because the regime simply did not want
to negotiate the transition. He said that he first needed
a general agreement on terrorism, before negotiating
the transition. If I define my Russian colleague's
description of the reasons for the failure of the Geneva
negotiations as erroneous, it is because I am being quite
polite.

Finally, referring to effrontery, I believe that in
New York it is known as "chutzpa": just like accusing
Western Powers of providing weapons to the opposition
while in fact Russia has never stopped selling weapons
to the regime. I am absolutely speechless at the fact
that the Russian Federation dares to raise the issue
of weapons. But if the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation wants, we can impose an arms embargo on
Syria. I am ready to vote in favour of that. But would
he vote in favour of an arms embargo? Clearly, I think
he would not.
Lastly, with regard to the statement that the Caesar
report (S/2014/244, annex) is not verifiable - I regret
to say that is simply not true. The Caesar report was
submitted to independent experts from several countries
and all of them said that the photographs could not have
been technically altered.

I regret having to respond in this tone to the direct
attacks on the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
France. I wanted this debate to consider only the crimes
and atrocities committed by both sides in Syria - as we
have stated - and our straightforward determination
to send the clear message that in 2014 we cannot not
allow what took place in 1942 - notably at Russia's
expense - or in 1994 to happen again. There are
judges, and one day the criminals will pay. However,
some prefer to protect the criminals.

