Mr. Kolby (Norway): We welcome the fact that
Ethiopia and Eritrea have cooperated constructively
with the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) since the signing of the Algiers
peace Agreement. We are encouraged by the latest
progress; certainly, the establishment yesterday of the
Temporary Security Zone is a milestone. The full
deployment of UNMEE can now be undertaken, and
that is a key element in the implementation of the
peace Agreement.

We note with appreciation the expeditious
deployment of UNMEE, facilitating the redeployment
of the military forces of both countries, and we would
like to express our appreciation to those Member States
that have provided UNMEE with forces and with
additional assets. Norway, for its part, has deployed
five military observers to UNMEE, and we have also
contributed resources to the civilian component of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) military
observation unit. We strongly support Ambassador
Legwaila's mission.

We would like to emphasize the close relationship
between UNMEE and the Boundary Commission
established under the comprehensive peace Agreement.
As we understand it, termination of the mandate of
UNMEE requires completion of the process of
delimitation and demarcation of the Ethiopia-Eritrea
border. Therefore, an early start of the work of the
Boundary Commission, including proper arrangements
for the Secretary of the Commission, would, in
Norway's View, constitute a most cost-effective use of
resources. We therefore support the approach proposed
by the Secretary-General in that regard, and we favour
an expeditious handling of the manner in order to
facilitate the earliest possible start of the pivotal work
of the Boundary Commission. We also appreciate the
efforts of the Netherlands in facilitating the recent
preliminary meeting of the Commission, which was
convened at The Hague.

The Government of Norway has contributed
substantially to the United Nations trust fund
established for border delimitation and demarcation,
and we hope that other members also will be able to
provide contributions.

Building on the momentum created by the
establishment of the Temporary Security Zone, every
effort should now be made by the parties to find
practical solutions to the remaining outstanding issues,
especially those related to the Irob area, to allow the
peace process to move forward. We also believe that
the establishment of a direct air corridor between Addis
Ababa and Asmara, to ensure freedom of movement for
UNMEE flights, and the conclusion of the necessary
status of forces agreement between Eritrea and the
United Nations would also enhance the peace process.

Norway would like to urge the parties to continue
their efforts in the following areas: first, to facilitate
mine action in coordination with the United Nations
Mine Action Service- Norway will continue to
support mine action activities; secondly, to ensure the
release and the voluntary and orderly return, under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, of civilians and prisoners of war, and generally
to provide humane treatment; thirdly, to ensure safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance to
those in need and to respect strictly the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law; and
finally, to redirect efforts towards reconstruction and
development, and to work towards reconciliation with a
View to normalizing relations and further stabilizing
the Horn of Africa.

Norway continues its support, inter alia, for
dialogue between the religious leaders of the two
countries. Norway froze and withheld development aid
at the height of the war last year, but intends to
continue development cooperation with both countries.
We will contribute to the humanitarian appeals of the
United Nations. We consider it important at this stage
that the parties, with the assistance of the international
community, focus their efforts on peace, reconciliation
and stability measures supported by activities in the
areas of democracy, human rights and good
governance. We believe that only democratic
development and an environment of good governance
in both countries can guarantee the future stability of
relations between the two countries.

