Mrs. Ogata (Japan): It is a great pleasure for me
to be present in the Council to discuss the important
issue of Afghanistan. It is appropriate indeed for the
Council to hold this meeting in the presence of
Ambassador Brahimi, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Afghanistan. His contributions have
been widely acknowledged. Having observed closely
his extraordinary efforts to achieve peace and
prosperity in Afghanistan during the Emergency Loya
Jirga, I wish to join the international community in
expressing my deepest respect and gratitude for his
achievements.

I visited Afghanistan as Prime Minister
Koizumi's special representative from 13 to 19 June.
During that period, in addition to witnessing the
Emergency Loya Jirga, I was able to have discussions
with key officials of the Afghan Administration,
including President Karzai the leadership of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and
members of the diplomatic community. I also had an
opportunity to visit Kandahar, where I met with local
government officials and representatives of United
Nations agencies, and visited camps for internally
displaced persons and refugees in Spin Boldak and
Chaman, located near and across the border with
Pakistan.

My overall impression was that significant
improvements have been achieved since my last visit
five months ago. Based on what I learned there, I
would like to offer my observations to the Council and
to suggest possible ways to move on.

The process of the Emergency Loya Jirga started
from grass-roots efforts to choose delegates from all
over the country, and even abroad. It was an impressive
sight to witness 1,650 chosen delegates, including 200
women, assembled in an enormous tented hall, openly
making and reacting to statements for more than one
week. My warmest congratulations go to President
Karzai, who was elected through a secret ballot,
obtaining an approval rate exceeding 85 per cent. The
successful conclusion of the Emergency Loya Jirga was
essential for the long-term peace and reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
On the other hand, the political balance on which
the newly created Transitional Authority of
Afghanistan stands is still very precarious. This was
most recently underscored by the tragic assassination
of Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir. I wish to express
my deepest regret and condolences to the people of
Afghanistan. These developments, therefore, make it
all the more important that the international community
continue to support the newly established
Administration to ensure clear progress in both the
political and the national reconstruction process.

Two issues stand out as requiring urgent
attention: security and the rapid return of refugees. The
provision of adequate security throughout the country
is a prerequisite for peace to take root and for recovery
and reconstruction efforts to proceed. When I met with
Pashtoon internally displaced persons who had fled the
north in recent months in Kandahar province, they
spoke of the security threats and requested the
deployment of an international peacekeeping presence
in the Mazar-e-Sharif area. They also regarded the
demobilization and disarmament of armed elements, as
well as compensation for their lost property, as
necessary preconditions for their return. Given the
recent developments in Afghanistan, I feel that their
pleas merit the Council's renewed consideration. I wish
to join my voice with those who are calling for the
deployment of ISAF or other peacekeeping forces in
unstable areas in the north. We should also find ways to
help return the internally displaced persons.
Furthermore, it is important that international efforts to
assist the reform and rehabilitation of the national
military, police and judicial systems and the
demobilization and reintegration of armed elements
produce concrete results very soon. I was very pleased
when listening to previous interventions that these
were directions which Council members were
considering.

The other significant issue is the rapidity with
which refugees are returning, especially from Pakistan.
While I was in Kabul, the one-millionth returnee
registered for arrival. At the school I visited in Kabul,
one half of the students in the classrooms were recent
returnees. This in itself is a sign of people's hope for a
better future in Afghanistan, and it is to be welcomed.
There will inevitably be variations in the rate of
refugee return. However, the scale, combined with
internal displacements due to drought and ethnic
confrontations in some parts, could overwhelm the
absorptive capacity of receiving communities. In the
medium-to-long term, this could have grave
implications for the security environment as well as for
the political stability of Afghanistan. That concern was
repeatedly raised by officials I met in Kabul and
Kandahar, and, I might add, it was also recognized in
resolution 1419 (2002), which the Council recently
adopted.

In order to avoid the worst-case scenario and to
stabilize the country, immediate steps must be taken to
provide employment opportunities and other forms of
assistance for returnees and internally displaced
persons so that they can be swiftly integrated into local
communities. The Afghan Administration needs
support in planning and implementing community
development programmes.

How are we now to proceed? Bearing in mind
that we are now in the post-Emergency Loya Jirga
phase of the Bonn process, the international community
must take the next step and begin the full-scale
implementation of its recovery and reconstruction
assistance. In this regard, I am happy to note that the
meeting of the co-chairs of the Afghan Reconstruction
Steering Group (ARSG), which was held on 10 July in
Paris with the participation of Finance Minister Ashraf
Ghani of the Transitional Administration and
Ambassador Brahimi, provided a good opportunity to
review the current needs and the resources pledged and
to coordinate a future strategy.

Operationally speaking, full-scale reconstruction
efforts, while awaited, seem to be still at the planning
stage. Judging from the situation that I observed on the
ground, humanitarian assistance continues to
predominate, while recovery work is still in the offing.
At this point, all out efforts should be devoted to
community development in order to meet the recovery
needs of the population, as well as to the reintegration
of refugees, internally displaced persons and former
combatants.

The early establishment of potable and
agricultural water supplies, education, sanitation,
health care services and road reconstruction projects
will make a crucial difference at this juncture. With
respect to roads, which President Karzai has repeatedly
stressed as a priority issue, I have conveyed his
message to the Asian Development Bank and urged it
to promptly implement its plans.

Japan considers that the return and reintegration
of refugees and internally displaced persons through
the programmes of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Children's Fund and other international humanitarian
agencies, combined with regional reconstruction
programmes of the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank, would constitute the base for a
comprehensive area development programme. Such a
programme is, in fact, being formulated under the
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in close consultation with the Transitional
Authority and provincial administrations. Kandahar
could be a starting point. It is in this context that Japan
has decided to expand the United Nations Development
Programme Recovery and Employment Afghanistan
Programme - already successfully undertaken in
Kabul - to Kandahar. Japan intends to play a key role
in the formulation and implementation of such
comprehensive area development. It will be
announcing a large package of assistance to
Afghanistan in the next few weeks; a comprehensive
area development programme would be given a
sizeable portion.

At the outset of my statement, I mentioned that
my overall impression of Afghanistan was that
significant improvements have been achieved in the
past five months. In closing, let me describe what I
saw. When I returned to the Shomali plains, north of
Kabul, the internally displaced, who in January had
been heading home in vast numbers, were now settled
in their original communities and were starting to
rebuild their houses. Some families had, in fact,
already finished the rebuilding and were starting to
resume their handicraft work. Green leaves were
sprouting on the grapevines in the fields - another
encouraging sign of recovery. Such progress, even in
small increments, enables the people of Afghanistan to
personally experience the dividend of peace. That is
what is important in the end, and the international
community must continue to render its support to
Afghanistan to ensure that this trend is not reversed.

