Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Secretariat, the Security Council
team, Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, his deputies and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) in general, as well as President
Obasanjo's team, for organizing the Great Lakes leg of
our visit. Given that a detailed account of all our visits
and meetings will be included in the report to be
distributed by the Council, I shall limit myself to a few
observations. In addition to our talks in Rwanda, to
which the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom referred earlier, the Council delegation met
with Mr. Obasanjo in Addis Ababa. That, too, has
already been mentioned.

In Goma, we heard briefings on the
reorganization of their forces by the leaders of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), officers
of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC), leaders of the Congolese National
Police, and representatives of non-governmental
organizations. We also met the Governor of North Kivu
and visited the HEAL Africa Hospital, which
specializes in treating victims of sexual violence,
before moving on to the MONUC camp in Kiwanja.

In Kinshasa, the Council delegation was received
by President Kabila, the Congolese Prime Minister,
accompanied by the top leaders of his Government, and
the Presidents of the Senate and the National
Assembly. We also met with members of Congolese
civil society. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all the representatives of the
United Nations agencies briefed us on their strategic
working plan for MONUC's activities over the next
few years and on the main activities of the United
Nations system as a whole.

From all these talks, the members of the
delegation learned the following fundamental lessons
concerning the situation on the ground.

First, the situation in the Great Lakes region has
improved considerably, particularly thanks to the
rapprochement between Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as has already been noted.
Presidents Kabila and Kagame both clearly expressed
their intentions to continue along that path. Among
other things, the Economic Community of the Great
Lake Countries should be reactivated in order to allow
the launch of regional economic projects. The Security
Council encouraged that intention. President Obasanjo
will pursue his good offices mission between the
regional capitals. Moreover, the Security Council
mission had the opportunity to express its unanimous
support for the initiatives he has already taken and his
outstanding work to promote convergence among the
various parties.
09-35198

Secondly, and more sadly, sexual violence
remains far too widespread. We were able to see the
pain it engenders during our visits to the female
victims at the HEAL Africa Hospital. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
taken some measures, including the adoption of a law
on sexual violence, the establishment of an agency to
combat all forms of violence, and the creation of funds
to help women and promote child protection. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
launched its fight against impunity, inter alia by
involving the International Criminal Court, and we
reaffirmed that it must remain a priority.

Armed groups and the FARDC must also cease
all their abuses against the population, in particular
sexual violence against women. Those who are guilty
of violence or recruit children must be arrested. We
conveyed that message very clearly to all the
authorities we met, at every level. In particular, high-
ranking FARDC officers, be they long-time members
or newly integrated from rebel groups, must be
arrested, tried and imprisoned if they are perpetrators.
A new law on the police, which has been under
consideration for two years, must finally be adopted.

Having discussed the matter among ourselves, on
behalf of the Security Council I gave the highest
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo an
initial list of the names of five leaders of the FARDC
who have been convicted of sexual violence against a
number of women currently being treated at the HEAL
Africa Hospital. We asked the President and the Prime
Minister, with MONUC's support, to arrest those five
officers and bring them to trial publicly so as to begin
restoring the confidence of the civil population.

Another element is security sector reform, which
is of great importance in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as it is in many post-conflict countries. In
order to attain peace, various armed groups have been
progressively integrated into the FARDC, but they are
very difficult to control. The soldiers are poorly paid,
when they are paid at all, poorly housed, poorly fed,
poorly equipped and poorly trained. And yet, all the
officers we met and MONUC assured us that when
Congolese soldiers are treated properly and led
effectively, they are very good fighters and fully
accomplish their missions while respecting
fundamental ethical criteria. We must therefore ensure
that they are paid on a regular basis.

There must also be a mechanism preventing those
responsible for serious rights violations from
09-35198

remaining in the armed forces, pursuant to the
provisions of the relevant resolution. The international
community must coordinate its assistance to the
Congolese authorities in carrying out a broad training
operation in the army and in reforming the police and
the justice system in depth. The Council also insisted
that Congolese democracy be further entrenched,
notably through the organization of local elections. We
understood that certain difficulties remain, in particular
concerning the law on apportionment of constituencies,
but that the elections should be held before next year.

MONUC remains indispensable on the ground.
President Kabila and the members of his Government
insisted that the reinforcements authorized under
resolution 1843 (2008) be dispatched rapidly in order
to support the FARDC in operations Kimia II and
Rudia II against the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda and the Lord's Resistance Army,
respectively. Based on what we were told by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
3,000 additional troops authorized should be deployed
in June and July. Their contributors have already been
identified as Egypt and Jordan.

MONUC has taken serious steps to implement
resolution 1856 (2008). Our visit in particular to
Kiwanja, where massacres have taken place, allowed
us to take note of the measures adopted to better
protect civilians. We met a joint protection team, and
the officer in charge of the local MONUC unit briefed
us on new rapid-reaction mechanisms involving the
local population, thereby ensuring that MONUC and
FARDC forces can intervene in less than 10 minutes
once the alarum has been raised. Of course, that, for
now, is limited to a very small area.

MONUC's mission is certainly very sensitive.
Protecting civilians and supporting the FARDC in its
fight against armed groups - which unfortunately
continue to target civilians - can sometimes be
counteractive. A strategic plan of action has been
prepared by MONUC, identifying prospects and the
conditions for a drawdown of MONUC in the medium
term. President Kabila explicitly asked for it. Once the
local elections are over, if the situation continues to
stabilize, we can start to consider a drawdown of
MONUC.

In conclusion, we noted in general that, over the
past few months, the situation has been moving in the
right direction. The Security Council will have to
remain fully mobilized to support those developments.
MONUC's implementation of its strategic plan of
action and the development of operation Kimia II
require our attention.

