Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in Spanish): At the

outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Oscar
Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and pay
tribute to him for his personal commitment to peace and
the role he played in the negotiation and implementation
of the Peace Agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP).

(spoke in French)

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, both for
the quality of his briefing and for his exemplary work
as Head of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.

The Colombian authorities, particularly President
Santos Calderon, have shown exceptional political
courage that has been a source of admiration and
inspiration for the entire international community.
Despite doubts and criticism, they initiated a historic
peace process with the FARC-EP and have redoubled
their efforts to implement it. Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, our
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, is currently
visiting Colombia and will take the opportunity to
reaffirm France's unwavering support for this process
and our readiness to continue to support the Colombian
people on the road to peace. That is the message that
he will convey to the President-elect, Mr. Ivan Duque,
whom he will have the honour of meeting during
his visit.

The United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, have also played a key role in
implementing the Peace Agreement by providing the
necessary support for disarmament and the political
transition of the FARC-EP. With regard to the mandate
conferred on the second United Nations Mission in
Colombia, I would like to focus on three points today.

First, France reiterates its congratulations to
the Colombian authorities on their organization and
successful holding of presidential elections on 27 May
and 17 June. That democratic exercise, which followed
the parliamentary elections held in March, confirmed
the evolution of Colombian political life towards a
more peaceful climate and Colombian citizens" broader
participation in the democratic process. In that regard,
we encourage the elected authorities to pursue the
implementation of every aspect of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace concluded with the FARC-EP. Particular
attention should be paid to the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which is the cornerstone of the comprehensive
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition system,
as well as to amnesty for detainees and the search
for the tens of thousands of persons assumed to be
missing. Those commitments by the Colombian State
are commitments to peace undertaken before the
international community and it is important that they
be fully honoured.

My second point concerns the security of the
women and men working for peace in the areas affected
by the conflict. France firmly condemns the killings of
civil-society leaders, human rights defenders and those
involved in coca substitution programmes. Despite
the Colombian authorities' commitment to reducing
the level of violence, the situation remains extremely
worrying. In a context where illegal armed groups
are struggling to regain control of areas previously
controlled by the FARC-EP, it is taking a long time
for peace dividends to reach the local populations.
We therefore encourage continued efforts, including
the deployment of State services, both security forces
and civilian institutions, in those areas. Furthermore,
combating impunity for crimes committed in the context
of the conflict, including extrajudicial executions, is
crucial and must continue.

Finally, I would like to draw the Council's attention
once again to another key point for reintegration and
the future of the peace process, which is access to
land and sources of income. Indeed, once the issue
of access to land is resolved and the restitution of the
lands looted during the conflict is the subject of legal
proceedings, it is socioeconomic projects that will give
former combatants prospects for a future within the
Colombian national community. That socioeconomic
reintegration, which is closely linked to the provision
of State services in the most vulnerable areas, is the
key to the lasting success of the peace process. It
is receiving major support from the international
community, including France and the European Union,
through various financial instruments. The restoration
of territories that have been ruined by half a century of
conflict depends on it.

Regardless of their political affiliation, all
Colombians can be proud of the Peace Agreement reached
with the FARC-EP. More than ever, consolidating that
peace requires the unity of the Colombian nation as
it enters a new era, one in which former combatants
will take their full place in Colombian society and
other groups, we hope, will choose to turn away from
violence, as we expect the National Liberation Army
to do. France therefore encourages the new Colombian
authorities to continue implementing the agreement and
confirm the remarkable success of the peace process
in Colombia.

