Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): These are trying and most
unfortunate circumstances for Syria and its people. The
increasing violence, killings and violations of human
rights in Syria, which are being attributed to both sides
but of which innocent civilians are the main victims,
are totally unacceptable and must be condemned. Our
position in the Security Council has been motivated
primarily by the desire to end the violence and alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people, as well as to address
their legitimate aspirations. That is also the desire of
the wider international community. And there was
agreement that the best way to address this increasingly
complex and volatile situation was through a political
process led and owned by the Syrians. Militarization
could only take us away from a peaceful solution and
cause even greater suffering for the Syrian people, as is
evident from recent developments.

After an initial period of division and stalemate,
what brought the entire Council together was the
mission of the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi Annan, and
his six-point plan. The Council subsequently agreed
unanimously to deploy the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS), the
value of which has been acknowledged by all despite
the circumstances under which it has had to work. The
Secretary-General has accordingly recommended the
continuation ofUNSMIS. As the situation on the ground
got worse we saw other avenues explored, such as the
30 June Action Group for Syria meeting in Geneva,
the outcome of which (S/2012/523, annex) Pakistan
also agreed to support in good faith, even though we,
like many others, were not part of that process. The
objective was again to continue support for the Envoy's
plan and the efforts for a political settlement.

Pakistan believes that the success of the Council's
collective and stated objective to achieve a peaceful
solution in Syria hinged on a united approach, as has
also been consistently emphasized by the Special
Envoy. This was a time for the Council to remain united
and to build on the Geneva outcome, which provided
openings for the much-needed political track. It was
also an opportunity for all sides, especially the most
influential quarters, to throw their genuine and full
weight behind the Special Envoy's efforts by engaging
and working with the parties.
It is unfortunate that, despite the clear objective of
supporting Mr. Annan's efforts and despite the gravity
of the situation, the Council's unity was undermined
by the divergence of views on how to move forward.
As a result, the Council has ended up not moving at all.
This is a serious setback that could have been avoided
had the divisive issues of Chapter VII and coercive
measures been set aside.

From the outset, Pakistan expressed its reservations
about a coercive approach, which in our View could
further escalate tensions and be counterproductive
and unhelpful in the pursuit of a pacific settlement of
the situation. A constructive spirit of flexibility was
necessary to bring all Council members on the same
page and to ensure that the Syrian crisis was resolved
with minimum damage to the country and without
extra-territorial repercussions. Regrettably, that spirit
was not upheld in the run-up to the draft resolution
(S/2012/538) that has just been put to a vote. Our
repeated calls for a united, consensus approach by the
Council were not heeded. We were therefore left with
no choice but to dissociate ourselves from the divisive
scenario that the Council has been led into, and thus to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

As we have said before, this is not and must not
be a blame game, as any success of failure of the
Council will always be collective. The environment of
uncertainty resulting from today's actions is extremely
dangerous and explosive. We therefore need to pick up
the pieces and quickly get our act together for the sake
ofpeace and of the Syrian people. We urge both sides to
eschew violence and to facilitate a Syrian-led political
process. Primary responsibility in this regard lies with
the Syrian Government. The forthcoming month of
Ramadan should be a reason for all sides to declare a
truce and engage in dialogue. That has become all the
more evident due to the condemnable suicide attack
targeting the Syrian leadership yesterday.

We believe that a continued UNSMIS presence
on the ground is crucial to facilitating and supporting
peace efforts. We are ofthe view that linking its mandate
extension to Chapter VII and coercive measures was
not the right course of action. We would therefore like
to propose, as an interim measure, a draft resolution
for a technical rollover of UNSMIS for a short period,
pending Council agreement on the vital issues for a way
forward.

