Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the voting on resolution 2551 (2020), prepared by the United Kingdom, on the sanctions on Somalia. We note the amendments, included at the request of Mogadishu, aimed at streamlining the arms embargo. We hope that they will contribute to normalizing the situation and to reducing the terrorist threat coming, first and foremost, from Al-Shabaab. However, our principled and duly justified observations were not taken on board in the resolution. We deem inappropriate the inclusion of paragraphs on Djibouti and Eritrea in a document focusing on Somalia. Sanctions on Eritrea were lifted in 2018. The situation in the relations between Djibouti and Eritrea poses no threat to international peace and security. The remaining disputes between those countries should be resolved through bilateral diplomacy. The report of the Secretary-General circulated this summer confirmed these assessments. We also regret the continued practice of using Security Council resolutions to promote human rights- related aspects of the Somalia dossier. Let me stress once again that there is a separate body - the Human Rights Council - that exists to address those issues. We call for respect for the traditional division of labour. We also cannot accept the singling out in the text of certain partners for providing assistance to Somalia in the fight against organized crime and illegal trafficking in coastal waters at the expense of other stakeholders in the region. Such a selective approach does not seem constructive. In conclusion, I would like to express regret that once again this year the Council was not able to reach a consensus on the adoption of this resolution, which is so important for our Somali colleagues. It is unfortunate that, rather than trying to find trade-offs and compromise solutions for the text, our British colleagues preferred to ignore the comments made by our delegation at the last stage and to force a vote. We hope that appropriate conclusions will be drawn from this situation.
