Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing.

Let me start by welcoming President Nikolie and
Ambassador Citaku to the Council today.

In the interests of keeping this meeting to time, and
noting that we have many pressing issues to discuss in
the Council, I shall keep my remarks briefthis morning.

Like so many others here, the United Kingdom is
committed to the stability and security of the western
Balkans. A central part of that is our full support for the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia
and the prosperity and stability that normalization
would bring for both their peoples. Since we last met on
this issue (see S/PV.7811), there have been many positive
steps made by Kosovo towards that goal. The economy
is growing and some steps have been taken to deal with
corruption, including with support from the United
Kingdom Government, although there is still more to
do. Kosovo has secured its own international dialling
code, as well as recognition from Singapore and, just
this morning, from Bangladesh, as Ambassador Citaku
has already mentioned.

I would also like to note the success of the British-
Kosovo film Home, which won the award for best short
film from the British Academy of Film and Television
Arts. It is Kosovo's first. Following the Oscar
nomination of Shock last year, it is clear that Kosovo's
cultural sector is going from strength to strength.

But in light of the continued progress in Kosovo,
we cannot help but be concerned by the heightened
tension between Serbia and Kosovo over the reporting
period. At a time when both countries should be
looking towards a prosperous future, we instead find
ourselves here today discussing provocative acts that
belong firmly in the past. At the heart of so many of
these issues - whether the inflammatory train incident
or the illegal wall in Mitrovica - lie narrow-minded
politics and electioneering. Stirring up nationalist
sentiments to advance short-term political agendas
not only enflames tensions, but also distracts from the
many more important issues that Kosovo and Serbia
need to deal with, most particularly the implementation
of important dialogue agreements.

We welcome the intense engagement of High
Representative Mogherini and the European External
Action Service to help bring about a resolution of
those disputes. I should like to highlight specifically
the excellent cooperation between the Government of
Kosovo and the Kosovo-Serb Mayor of North Mitrovica
on the wall issue. Such cooperation shows that, at the
local level, people want to work together to improve
their lives rather than be drawn into political squabbles.
It is that spirit that we all should channel here in the
Security Council. It is a spirit of integration and
cooperation, not division. It is a spirit of dialogue. It is
a spirit that both Serbia and Kosovo claim to support in
their discussions in Brussels.

And yet, here in the Council today, we have
witnessed yet another meeting that has descended into
lengthy exchanges and unproductive statements. It is
long past time for the Council to stop contributing to
the tensions in the region by holding such incendiary
briefings on so regular a basis. I therefore call again for
a reduction in the number of these meetings and in the
number of these reports. In that spirit, let me join the
United States and others in again calling for increased
efficiencies to be found in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and for the further
downscaling of the Mission, in line with its mandate.
We also suppport calls for the Secretariat to present
proposals for restructuring the Mission in the next
report - something that we note has not materialized
on this occasion.

