Mr. Mahiga: Let me once again thank the
members of the Security Council for the support they
continue to render to the peace process in Somalia. As
members of the Council are aware, the current
transitional period in Somalia is expected to end on
20 August 2011, in line with the Djibouti Agreement
and the Transitional Federal Charter. The run-up to
August 2011 has generated anxiety within the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) and confusion
among the Somali public and some key stakeholders in
the region on how to proceed towards ending the
transition. Disagreement over the election issue
between the TFIs is causing a political paralysis in
Mogadishu. There is therefore a need to develop
urgently a consensus on when and how to hold
elections and to define the mandate of the next
dispensation while seeking to defuse the stalemate
between the legislative and executive branches of
Government.
On a positive note, the seven-month-old
Government of Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed came in with a promising road map. I am
delighted to be sitting next to the Prime Minister. The
road map emphasized good governance and began to
put in place an administrative system for its
implementation, but it still lacks capacity for civilian
institution-building and the delivery of basic services.

On the security front, forces of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) have made significant
territorial gains in Mogadishu. Allied militia forces are
also making impressive gains on the central, western
and southern frontiers. Political and civilian
administrative structures need to be put place by the
TFG in the newly liberated areas as the insurgents
retreat and are growing increasingly weaker. There is
an urgent need to build civilian institutional capacities
and deliver basic services, including much-needed
humanitarian assistance in those areas.

On a not-so-encouraging note, the process of
political outreach for inclusive dialogue and
reconciliation by the TFIs has stalled since the signing
of the Djibouti Agreement. The efforts of the
international community and regional actors to
facilitate dialogue have not been fully reciprocated by
the TFIs. The High-level Committee provided for by
the Djibouti Agreement to promote Somali-Somali
dialogue has not met since December 2009, despite my
constant calls on the TFG for the Committee to be
convened.

Agreements between the TFG and the regional
entities have not been followed through, while civil
society groups, such as elders, women's groups and the
business community have not yet been actively
involved in the political process. Most regrettable is
the absence of communication and working relations
between the executive and legislative branches of the
Transitional Federal Institutions for the past several
months. The President and the Speaker have not
worked together since the beginning of February this
year. At the same time, the unilateral extension of the
Parliament for three years and the decision of the
Government to defer elections for one year have
further polarized relations between the two branches.

It is against this background that, on 12 and
13 April, in consultation with regional and
international partners, I convened in Nairobi a
11-33181
consultative meeting of stakeholders to encourage
dialogue among the TFIs on the transition and to
initiate a similar dialogue with the regional entities that
have signed agreements with the TFG. The agenda was
built around exchanging information on the respective
responsibilities of the TFIs for implementing
transitional tasks and on sharing experience and
improving working relations between the TFIs, on the
one hand, and local administrations, on the other. The
meeting was intended to initiate a process of
consultative dialogue that would be followed by a more
substantive meeting in Mogadishu.

Regrettably, and despite my relentless efforts to
persuade the leadership of the TFG, neither the
President nor the Prime Minister attended the meeting
in Nairobi. They ostensibly objected to the separate
invitations extended to Parliament and regional
administrations and to the holding of the meeting in
Nairobi rather than in Mogadishu. The Government
complained about the meeting and a section of the
Somali media attacked the initiative.

I am heartened, however, that the TFG has, since
the Nairobi meeting, decided to convene a meeting of
various stakeholders in Mogadishu between 11 and
16 June 2011 to carry on the consultative process. I
fully support this initiative of the TFG, and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) will
provide the necessary assistance. As this initiative goes
on, the issue of the elections for the presidency in July
or the deferral of the elections for one year has
lingered on and has further polarized Parliament and
the executive branch. The polarization is unfortunately
resonating within the Somali public and the region as a
whole.

I have taken another round of initiatives to
encourage the President, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker to overcome the deadlock between the two
institutions. Belatedly, the President is becoming more
amenable to the need for dialogue, but the political will
is still lacking. The President has promised to prepare a
plan for political outreach, including visits and
dialogue with the regional entities. That remains to be
seen. I have just held meetings with the leaders of
Djibouti and Ethiopia and attended a meeting of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU)
and a tripartite meeting with AMISOM. and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
on how to resolve the current situation in Somalia.

11-3318]
I have requested IGAD and the African Union
(AU) to help in resolving this issue. The Council of the
Wise of the African Union will meet and take up the
issue of Somalia on 12 May, and IGAD is preparing to
convene a summit soon to discuss, among other issues,
the end of the transition in Somalia. I appeal to the
Security Council to weigh in on this issue. The single
most divisive issue among the political groups in
Mogadishu today is the timing of the elections, as
provided for the Charter, and whether to hold this in
July or to defer them to a future date.

Regardless of the election date that would be
agreeable to all the TFIs, UNPOS is preparing a road
map that will suggest benchmarks for the next
Government in implementing priority transitional tasks
that have not been implemented by the current or
previous Governments. I will work to ensure that both
Parliament and the executive branch are engaged, as
this process must be Somali-owned. The road map will
contain suggested benchmarks, timelines and resource
requirements. The most urgent issue is to help the two
institutions to resolve their differences on the issue of
elections and to get them to start to work together.

Of late, the TFG, with the support of AMISOM,
has made significant territorial and military gains
against the insurgency. However, continued in-fighting
within the leadership of the TFIs could negatively
affect the progress that has so far been made on the
ground. As most territories are captured by the TFG
and the allied forces, it is critical that the TFG move in
partnership with local communities to establish
effective administrations in those areas and begin to
provide basic services as peace dividends. The United
Nations and the international community as a whole
have a crucial role to play in assisting the TFG and
regional administrations in establishing viable
administrations in those liberated areas. UNPOS and
the country team are stepping up their access to and
presence in those areas.

The role of AMISOM. in the stabilization of
Somalia is crucial. The current strength of AMISOM. is
9,000 personnel, with an additional 3,000 expected
soon from Burundi and Uganda to reach the total
strength of 12,000 authorized by the Security Council.
I would like to commend Member States, particularly
those that have offered equipment and supplies for the
additional troops mandated by resolution 1964 (2010),
for their continued generous support to AMISOM.
There is, however, still great need for force enablers
and specialized capabilities; in particular, the need for
helicopters became more evident and pressing during
the February offensive.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report
(S/2011/277), AMISOM. continues to suffer critical
resource gaps that adversely impact the Mission's
effectiveness. As the offensive against insurgent groups
continues and the transitional period draws to an end, it
is important that AMISOM. receive full support from
Member States in order to enable it fully discharge its
challenging mandate. In particular, support for the
capacity of troops to be self-sustaining is required, as
are in-kind contributions to close equipment gaps.
Financial contributions without caveats to the trust
fund in support ofAMISOM. would also be welcome.

The United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
continues to deliver a United Nations logistical support
package to AMISOM. comprising basic supplies and
equipment, engineering and construction, medical
services, aviation and transportation, strategic and
tactical telecommunications capability, and so on.
Importantly, this support will now include
accommodations, offices and supplies for 13 AMISOM
civilian personnel who are expected to deploy in
Mogadishu this month.

The African Union is still of the view that the
Security Council should take more robust action to
prevent supplies from reaching the insurgents. The port
of Kismaayo has increasingly become a commercial
hub that provides vast revenues to Al-Shabaab with
impunity. Action against violators of the United
Nations arms embargo operating through Kismaayo
harbour and airport needs to be considered and taken
by the Sanctions Committee of this Council. Several
other fields in south-central Somalia continue to be
used by violators of the arms embargo to resupply
Al-Shabaab.

Piracy in Somalia continues to threaten world
maritime trade and to undermine the economies of
Eastern African countries. The work of the
international naval coalition to protect shipping and
deter pirates is commendable, but has not been
successful in stopping the menace. The real solution
lies on land and in an overall political and security
construct to restore peace, security and stability in
Somalia. The recent resolution 1976 (2011) sets out a
number of key deliverables, and UNPOS is actively
engaged with the Office of Legal Affairs in urgently
preparing a report to the Council on establishing
specialized courts to try pirate suspects, and in
continuing to develop prosecution and prison capacity
throughout the region, as recommended in the Lang
report (S/2011/30). We are also taking forward the
Council's directive to report on the issue of protecting
natural resources, toxic waste dumping and illegal
fishing. My office is urgently setting up a piracy unit as
the United Nations focal point to coordinate all of
these activities and, more importantly, to actively
engage the Somali authorities in addressing this
problem through the Kampala process. We look
forward to the Council's continued support in our
assigned tasks.

In conclusion, let me underline, as I have done
before, that the humanitarian situation in Somalia is
reaching catastrophic proportions. This is exacerbated
by the unabated drought and the intensifying fight
against the extremists who continue to block the
provision of critically needed humanitarian assistance
to the areas under their control. As they retreat, they
are leaving behind landmines and explosives that are
slowing down humanitarian access. The United
Nations Mine Action Service is working to facilitate
safe access for humanitarian action. We need to
provide more support to those efforts, while mobilizing
additional resources for the much-needed humanitarian
assistance to the people of Somalia. UNPOS is
undertaking coordinated action to address the issue of
defectors from the ranks of the Al-Shabaab, whose
numbers are increasing by the day.

