Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Allow me first of all to
welcome you, Madam, and to thank you for taking the
initiative of convening today's debate, the interest and

importance of which are such that we have heard from
more than 10 ministers from Africa and, altogether,
14 ministers from various countries.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union. Nevertheless, I would
like to add some comments.

The region of the Great Lakes has been the scene
of recurrent ethnic violence and interrelated crises in
recent years that have on many occasions challenged
the international community's capacity for crisis
response and management.

The Rwandan genocide of 1994 had a
destabilizing effect throughout the region. Civil war
has devastated the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ethnic warfare in Burundi has tormented the country
since its independence, resulting in waves of refugees
and displaced persons. The situation in northern
Uganda has had repercussions for the neighbouring
countries.

However, in recent years, considerable, albeit
painstaking improvements have taken place. Those
include a remarkable national reconciliation in
Rwanda; a successful organization of the referendum in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and an
overwhelming approval of the new constitution;
peaceful and democratic elections in Burundi, a bright
example that led to the election of a new president and
Government; and the weakening of the Lord's
Resistance Army and the issuing of indictments to its
leaders by the International Criminal Court.

Despite the existence of peace agreements among
the different contending parties, their implementation
is far from self-sustaining. The countries of the area, as
well as the international community, have gradually
realized that achieving peace, stability, security and
development in the Great Lakes region will entail a
strong regional dimension.

Indeed, over the past five years, the progress
made by Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo owes much to regional
diplomatic efforts, such as the Tripartite Plus
Commission, as well as to concerted multilateral
efforts, culminating in the signing on 20 November
2004 of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration of Principles on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region.

The African Union-United Nations International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region is not an event,
but a regional process based on confidence-building
measures, parallel efforts in security and development,
and addressing common problems in synergy. We fully
support it and believe it to be of critical importance to
the area.

We firmly believe that the upcoming Nairobi
summit should continue along that regional approach.
Long-term peace and stability in the region can be
attained only on the basis of a genuine commitment by
all the countries to respect territorial integrity and
national sovereignty and to the peaceful resolution of
outstanding issues. Conflicts and instability in each of
the Great Lakes countries, as well as military
incursions, endanger peace and stability in the region
as a whole and seriously compromise national efforts
for peace, security and development.

In both formal and informal consultations, Greece
has stressed time and time again that security sector
reform, in conjunction with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
together with concerted efforts to establish an
environment of rule of law, are essential to creating the
necessary circumstances in which peace can prevail.

We have expressed our support for the Dar es-
Salaam Declaration, which provides a solid framework
for the elaboration of a security, stability and
development pact to be adopted at the second summit
in Nairobi. We are convinced that the International
Conference process represents a genuine platform for
consolidating and enhancing regional peace without
creating cumbersome and overlapping follow-up
mechanisms.

We firmly believe that, in the light of those
efforts, we should persevere along the same lines. In
particular, besides following closely the transition in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi,
the Security Council could also focus on the regional
context by better assisting in the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement of ex-combatants, as well as by improving
the monitoring and strict implementation of the arms
embargo, especially in respect of small arms. It should
also direct peacekeeping operations to pay special
attention to strengthening border security.

The United Nations system in general, including
the Peacebuilding Commission that, hopefully, will
soon be put into action, should also concentrate on
facilitating solutions to several key issues for the
region, such as combating the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. In that respect, we are ready to
support proposals for special mechanisms, taking into
account such existing initiatives as the Kimberly
Process for diamonds and the European Union Action
Plan on Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and
Trade for illegal logging.

We firmly believe that ending impunity in the
Great Lakes region will contribute to the promotion of
peace and stability there. In that respect, we would like
to emphasize the central role that the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Criminal Court can play in bringing to justice those
responsible for serious violations of human rights, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In addition, a
national accountability mechanism should be actively
supported. The aforementioned elements are included
in the draft resolution prepared by Tanzania, for which
we are grateful and which we will be supporting.

I would like to close by stating that Greece will
continue to support the peace process in the Great
Lakes region, both within the European community
and bilaterally, to the benefit and prosperity of the
peoples of the area and of permanent stability in the
region.

