Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): Ithank the Security
Council and its Bolivian presidency for convening
today's open debate. I would also like to commend the
briefings by Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
of Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Joseph Ballard, of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
for their keen interest in and insights into the various
areas where our engagement with resolution 1540
(2004) and its implementation can be further enhanced.

We also align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I believe it is important today to recognize the
progress that the Security Council has made in
enhancing the global framework designed to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons of mass destruction. In that regard,
we commend Spain for its leadership in steering the
2016 comprehensive review exercise of resolution 1540
(2004). As a result, we then witnessed the Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), and I
would therefore like to stress that we will continue to
spare no effort to work with the relevant stakeholders
to strengthen and promote the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

For its part, Malaysia continues to meet its
international obligations by further enhancing the
enforcement and effectiveness of measures aimed
at improving domestic controls preventing the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery, including by
establishing appropriate controls over related materials.
Malaysia also made amendments to strengthen its
strategic trade act of 2010, which provides control over
the export, trans-shipment, transit and brokering of
strategic items, including arms and related materials,
and other activities that could facilitate the design,
development and production of WMDs and their
delivery systems. The amended act was passed by the
Malaysian Parliament on the 21 June 2017.

Among the amendments to the act were
enhancements related to definitions and scope of
implementation and on penalties designed to dictate
serious repercussions for violations. Commensurate
penalties are now provided for each offence under
the strategic trade act; indeed, committing an offence
under the act carries very severe penalties in the form
of harsh fines and prison terms.

We reaffirm our commitment to engaging
and working together with all Member States and
the international community to collectively strive
to maintain international peace and security by
strengthening all global non-proliferation efforts, in
cooperation with our partners here at the United Nations.

