Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief

Coordinator, for her briefing on the latest
developments in the humanitarian situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

Since the end of April the north-western part of
Syria, in particular Idlib, has been the site of a new
military escalation, which, in addition to causing
many casualties and thousands of wounded, has led
to the displacement of 239,000 people, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Regrettably, that new outbreak of violence, like
previous ones, did not spare hospitals or schools, as
Ms. Mueller informed us. The displaced persons camps
were also not spared. Unfortunately, each incidence
of violence further aggravates an already worrying
humanitarian crisis, as evidenced by the situation in the
Al-Hol camp. Initially planned to accommodate 10,000
people, according to the Human Rights Council, the
camp now hosts 73,000 displaced persons, including
about 6,500 foreign children, 240 of whom died from
malnutrition or poorly treated or untreated injuries.

In addition to the humanitarian consequences,
such armed confrontation undermines the efforts of the
international community to achieve a lasting peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis.

The determination of the international community
to achieve the immediate cessation of hostilities
throughout Syrian territory must be as firm as its call
on all parties to promote dialogue in order to give
the protracted peace process a chance to succeed. To
that end, Cote d'Ivoire calls for compliance with the
Russian-Turkish agreement on the demilitarized zone,
reached in September. The agreement should allow for
the separation of insurgent territories from Government
zones and ensure a cessation of hostilities in that region.

My country also calls on the parties to the Syrian
crisis to respect the obligations to protect civilians
under international law and international humanitarian
law. They must therefore remove all obstacles to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons, including women and children,
and to refrain from taking hostile action against
humanitarian personnel, which is an obligation under
international humanitarian law and a moral imperative
that the belligerent parties cannot ignore.

I would like to affirm my country's conviction that
peace in Syria is still possible, but only if the parties to
the conflict want it and give themselves the means, in
good faith, to achieve it. The prospect of peace indeed
depends on constant internal efforts and the strong
support of the Security Council, which, as we have
underscored, must once again find its unified voice
in order to contribute to the peaceful coexistence and
long-term stability of Syria.

Finally, cote d'Ivoire will continue to support the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in all of his
initiatives aimed at a peaceful resolution to the crisis,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

