Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to start by thanking President Agius and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their presentation of the
fifteenth report of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (S/2019/888, annexes I and II).
I wish to assure them of my delegation's full support
as the Mechanism's first biennium as an autonomous
institution draws to a close.

France welcomes the significant efforts made to
close the cases currently under way by the end of 2020.
With regard to The Hague branch, France takes note
of the preparations for a hearing in the Mlaa'ie appeal,
which we hope will be announced soon. France also
welcomes the progress of the work in trial proceedings
for the Stanisie and Simatovic' case. With regard to
the Arusha branch, we welcome the revised judgment
handed down by the Appeals Chamber in September
and take note of the possible joinder of the two cases of
false testimony and contempt.

Furthermore, we welcome the changes in the
practice followed by the President to decide on requests
for early release by taking into account all aspects
related to the rehabilitation of the prisoner in question
and the points of view of all stakeholders. We note
the prospect of updating the Practice Direction on
the Procedure for the Determination of Applications
for Pardon, Commutation of Sentence and Early
Release of Persons Convicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the Mechanism, and we continue to encourage the
Mechanism to adopt a conditional early-release regime
as well, in accordance with resolution 2422 (2018).
We believe that such a regime will usefully enhance
international jurisprudence.

With regard to cooperation, France would like to
point out that every State is required to cooperate with
the Mechanism in the search for, arrest and transfer
of the eight fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and to execute
the issued arrest warrants. We regret that some States
are not doing everything they can to comply with that
obligation. France has been fully cooperating in that
effort by responding every year to the Mechanism's
multiple requests for mutual assistance in criminal
matters. With regard to the cases that the ICTR has
transferred to the French judicial authorities, the
period since the last briefing (see S/PV.8416) has been
marked by the conclusion of the Munyeshyaka case
by the judgment issued on 30 October by the Court
of Cassation, France's highest court, which upheld
its dismissal. France reaffirms its full commitment
to bringing the Bucyibaruta case to a conclusion. We
hope that a trial date for that case will announced in the
near future.

As President Agius underscored, the work of the
Mechanism is not limited to judicial activities. The
protection of the more than 3,000 witnesses is extremely
important, and we welcome the efforts of the Kigali and
Sarajevo branches in that regard. We also welcome the
projects that have been carried out with the European
Union since the beginning of the year with the aim
of raising awareness in the communities affected
and among the younger generations in the countries
of the former Yugoslavia with regard the Criminal
Tribunal's legacy and the Mechanism's ongoing work.
Such efforts to preserve memory are particularly
essential in the context of recent controversies arising
from acts committed during the conflicts of the 1990s
in the Western Balkans and especially in Kosovo in
1999. We urge all leaders involved to refrain from
statements denying the established facts and the crimes
committed. Denials of genocide and the glorification of
war criminals convicted by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the ICTR and subsequently
the Mechanism, following impartial and independent
proceedings, are unacceptable. The national justice
systems that are seized of these matters must also be
able to carry out their work with complete impartiality
and independence.

In order to carry out all these activities on two
continents and complete its proceedings before the end
of next year, the Mechanism must be able to count on
adequate financial resources. It also has to continue
sharing resources between the two divisions, as
exemplified by the establishment of a shared archival
database. That is crucial if it is to function effectively
and consistently, which will continue in a truly residual
fashion after 2020. The Security Council's review of
the work of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
will provide an occasion to discuss these matters
once again.
