Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (Spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for the update that he
has provided in the wake of the report submitted by the
Secretary-General in March 2017 (S/2017/208) on the
implementation of the framework agreement for Peace,
Security and Cooperation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region.

During the past few weeks, the Security Council has
devoted several meetings to the countries of the Great
Lakes region, including the review of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/206) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the process
for the renewal of the mandate of that Mission pursuant
to resolution 2348 (2017), which the Security Council
adopted on 31 March. Moreover, the present meeting
comes at an opportune time in that it allows us to
focus on the regional dynamics, which are essential
for the peace and security of the States of the region.
In that regard, the Senegalese delegation reiterates its
support for the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy,
Mr. Said Djinnit, in particular in the areas of preventive
diplomacy and the promotion of peace and security in
the Great Lakes region.

In the area of security, the ongoing situation in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a
matter of concern, with the resurgence of the Movement
of March 23 (M-23), which has been observed during
the past months. The resurgence of M-23, once again,
underscores the crucial question of the implementation
of the Declaration of Commitments by the Movement
of March 23, known as the Nairobi Declarations, and
therefore poses new challenges to regional cooperation.
Such regional cooperation is absolutely necessary to
achieving peace, security and sustainable development
in the Great Lakes region. It continues to be the only
viable mechanism to overcome the decades-long threat
posed by armed groups in and beyond the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example, such
regional cooperation could well provide the appropriate
framework for finding a solution to the problem
generated by the presence of elements of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo following
last July's clashes so as to not further complicate
the already fragile security situation of the area.
Accordingly, all efforts by the United Nations as well as
the countries of the region must contribute to the search
for an appropriate solution to that problem.

Furthermore, with regard to security, the spread
of outbreaks of community violence beyond eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a matter of
great concern to us. We therefore call for a rapid
response to that emerging threat, including through
political responses.

One of the most tangible consequences of the
regional security situation, which remains fragile, is
the large number of refugees and displaced persons
representing respectively more than 3.5 million and
6 million individuals in the region. The Senegalese
delegation shares the satisfaction expressed by the
Secretary-General with regard to the hospitality of
the countries and peoples of the region who have
welcomed that flow of people with the limited means
and resources at their disposal. Those host countries
and communities deserve increased support from the
international community.

At the political level, we note that instability
persists in some countries of the region despite the
political processes and dialogue that were initiated and
aimed at peacefully resolving crises that, for the most
part, are associated with issues pertaining to electoral
processes. I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage the Special Envoy to pursue his coordination
work with the organizations and countries of the region
to support the inter-Burundi dialogue facilitated by
the Economic Commission for Africa and the ongoing
political process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, among others.

In that regard, my delegation would like to call
upon the various parties concerned by those political
processes to further explore the inexhaustible
possibilities for dialogue in a spirit of enhanced mutual
trust, respect for human and civil rights and ensuring
public order, while, above all, showing a genuine desire
for compromise.

Concerning more specifically the implementation
of the Framework Agreement, we note with satisfaction
the progress made in the establishment of a joint
follow-up mechanism to address the threat of the
Allied Democratic Forces. The mechanism, it should
be recalled, was agreed by the Heads of State of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Kenya
and Tanzania on the sidelines of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) in
June 2016. The same dynamic should be implemented
in connection with repatriating and disarming the
combatants of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda and M-23, which, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, are making limited progress.

It is also necessary to recall that the implementation
of the Framework agreement includes a component
which concerns the international community, in
particular the United Nations. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy to promote
international support for the Framework agreement,
as well as the operationalization of the Great Lakes
Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017, which we
endorsed here in March 2016 with the adoption of
resolution 2277 (2016).

Finally, the Senegalese delegation would like to
speak on behalf of the other countries of the region
who believe that the fight against insecurity in the
Great Lakes region should proactively take charge
of the trafficking and illegal exploitation of natural
resources that fuel conflicts and support armed groups.
In that regard, we look forward to the holding of a
meeting jointly organized by the Executive Secretary
of the ICGLR and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General on the illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources by armed groups, as was requested by the
Defence Ministers for member States of the ICGLR and
Southern African Development Community in Nairobi
on 20 July 2016 (see S/2016/840).

