Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would first like
to thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-eighth report
on the situation in Darfur and for her briefing today.
I would also like to commend the hard work that she
and her staff have done in relation to this investigation
and their commitment to making progress and getting
justice for the victims.

The United Kingdom welcomes the reports that the
level of violence against civilians in Darfur has fallen
over the past six months. As the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) draws
down, we encourage the Government of the Sudan to
focus its efforts and resources on building the capacity
of the Sudanese police force and judiciary to prevent,
respond to and investigate human rights abuses and
violations. We continue to support the Government of
the Sudan's stated aim of opening an office for the High
Commissioner for Human Rights before next October.
More broadly, we encourage the Government of the
Sudan to engage constructively with the Secretary-
General's recommended benchmarks in order to ensure
that the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in Darfur is a success.

While the situation in wider Darfur shows signs
of improvement, the situation in Jebel Marra remains
of serious concern. The ongoing targeting and
displacement of civilian populations is particularly
worrying, with as many as 2 million internally
displaced persons currently in Darfur. The United
Kingdom urges the Government of the Sudan to abide
by its unilateral cessation of hostilities and to facilitate
unfettered access throughout Darfur to UNAMID and
humanitarian actors. We also urge the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid to extend its unilateral cessation of
hostilities, which is due to expire on 18 December, and
to engage immediately with the peace process.

The United Kingdom welcomes the recent
signing in Berlin of a pre-negotiation agreement for
the resumption of the peace process in Darfur and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
meeting in Addis Abba. The people of Darfur have
already waited too long for sustainable peace, justice
and accountability. We therefore urge all parties to
build on the current momentum by swiftly agreeing to
a permanent ceasefire and engaging meaningfully in
negotiations to reach an inclusive political settlement
that addresses the root causes of the conflict.

The United Kingdom was pleased to co-host the
Arria Formula meeting in July that resulted in productive
discussions on the relationship between the Court and
the Council. We encourage further discussion on ideas
generated from that meeting to improve the relationship,
including addressing non-compliance by States parties.
We call on all States parties to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and abide by their
Rome Statute obligations. We note the Government
of the Sudan's continuing complete disregard for its
obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate
with the Court and to fulfil its international obligations.
We yet again urge the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor and to provide them with assistance.

The United Kingdom continues to be frustrated
about the fact that fugitives of the Court, including
President Al-Bashir, are still travelling overseas
unhindered, including to the territory of States parties to
the Rome Statute. We will continue to raise our concerns
with the relevant Governments and to renew our call on
all States to cooperate with the ICC in relation to the
Darfur situation, as required by the Security Council,
and on States parties to abide by their obligations under
the Rome Statute. We urge any State that feels unable
to cooperate with the Court for any reason to consult
the Court's authorities. We also support France's
proposal that States that according to the Court have
not complied with their obligations to cooperate with it
be invited to address the Security Council.

Finally, we acknowledge the Prosecutor's dedication
to her continuing investigations, and welcome the news
that significant progress has been achieved by the
Darfur investigation team within the reporting period.
We recognize the importance for the victims and their
families, some of whom I understand are with us today,
of hearing regularly from the Prosecutor on progress
in the investigation, and it is important for the Council
to hear from her too. The United Kingdom again
thanks the Prosecutor for her report, and her Office for
its persistent pursuit of justice for victims in Darfur.
We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
the United Kingdom's commitment to supporting the
Court, both as a State party to the Rome Statute and as
a member of the Council.

