Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this significant meeting and for inviting
Australia to participate. I especially want to welcome
President Ramos-Horta's presence today, despite his
difficult family circumstances, and to say how much his
personal contribution to the emergence of an independent
and - as we have heard and know - increasingly
vibrant Timor-Leste is admired in Australia. I can assure
him and all the citizens of Timor-Leste that for my own
country Timor-Leste will never be just a corner of the
world. I also thank Special Representative Ameerah Haq
for her report and for all her work and that of her team.

As we know, 2012 will be an historic and pivotal

year for Timor-Leste, with elections and its tenth

anniversary on 20 May. Timor-Leste has made

remarkable progress in recent years, including an

impressive growth rate of 10 per cent in its gross

domestic product expected this year, a strong

petroleum fund underpinning the prospects of long-

term and sustainable economic development, and
important efforts to build the country's infrastructure.

We recognize, of course, that the challenge of
improving standards of health and education in
particular is ongoing, as is building the institutions that
underpin democracy. Nonetheless, we share an
optimistic view of Timor-Leste's future as the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
prepares to wind down at the end of the year.

My own country supports the renewal of
UNMIT's mandate until the end of 2012. That will
ensure UNMIT support at the political level, as well as
support from the United Nations police throughout the
full election cycle, including after the formation of a
new Government. It will be important for decisions on
the pace of the withdrawal of UNMIT staff following
the mid-year parliamentary elections to take full
account of the conditions on the ground, as well as of
the wishes of the Government of Timor-Leste.

The elections, as we know, will be a test for the
institutions and people of Timor-Leste, but Australia
has confidence in the electoral authorities' capacity to
conduct effective elections. We know that a great deal
of preparatory work with the support of the United
Nations police and the International Stabilisation Force
(ISF) provided by New Zealand and Australia are
under way to secure election security. That preparation
is obviously critical. The ISF, of course, stands ready
to provide support to Timorese security services and
United Nations police in the very unexpected event
that such a need should arise.

We all know that elections are often
unpredictable and tightly fought. We have been
encouraged by commitments made across the political
spectrum in Timor-Leste to participating peacefully
and in a democratic spirit. We would also like to
commend Timor-Leste for increasing the number of
female candidates for Parliament from one in four to
one in three on all political party lists - a better record
than my own country, I should say. That will help to
give the women of Timor-Leste an even greater say in
how their country is governed.

Looking ahead, Australia welcomes the
Secretary-General's intention to report to the Council
60 days after the formation of the new Government.
His assessment will be a critical element in finalizing
decisions on the final pace of UNMIT's drawdown, as
well as on the possible roles and functions for the
United Nations in Timor-Leste after the departure of
the peacekeeping mission. We are pleased that work
has started on this planning, and underscore the
importance of the incoming Government of Timor-
Leste reaching a timely decision on the future shape of
a United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. I note
President Ramos-Horta's comments today about the
emerging consensus on that.

An important factor in those decisions is the
success of the very innovative and welcome Joint
Transition Plan, for which we commend both the
Government and UNMIT. Ongoing dialogue between
the Government, UNMIT and bilateral and multilateral
partners will be needed to ensure that smooth
transition, in which strengthening key institutions, such
as the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) in
particular, will be a decisive part.

This morning's Member State consultations were
very important in that regard. We look forward to
continuing those consultations with our fellow
partners. In that context, the long-term Strategic
Development Plan of the Government itself must
remain the cornerstone of international assistance. Last
November in Busan, my own Government signed a
partnership agreement with Timor-Leste in the margins
of the High-level Meeting on Aid Effectiveness that
aligns our development assistance with the Strategic
Development Plan. Under the agreement, Australian
aid focus on strengthening services such as health and
education; on improved governance and security,
including through continuing institutional support to
the PNTL; and on promoting economic growth through
agricultural and infrastructure development. Particular
attention must continue to be paid by all of us to youth
unemployment.

In concluding, Busan was also the venue where
Timor-Leste, as leader of the Group of Seven Plus of
fragile and post-conflict States (g7+) launched a new
deal for engagement in these States, demonstrating the
importance of joint partnership rather than just money
in assisting such countries. Timor-Leste's leadership of
the g7+ is a very strong statement of how far it has
come in its first 10 years as an independent country
and Member of the United Nations.

The Timorese have much to celebrate in this
historic tenth anniversary year, and we congratulate
them on their achievements. We all have much to learn
from that success. Finally, I would like to thank South
Africa as the new Chair of the Core Group on Timor-
Leste for its very hard work in drafting and
coordinating the draft resolution to renew UNMIT's
mandate. I also thank Brazil for its effective leadership
of the Group last year. My own country looks forward
to continuing to work with the Group under its new
chair.

