The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Germany, Italy, Malaysia
and Turkey, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia), Mr. Eitel (Germany),
Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy), Mr. Rastam
(Malaysia) and Mr. Vural (Turkey) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, document S/ 1998/491. Members
of the Council also have before them document 5/1998/502,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, the Russian
Federation, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1998/475, letter
dated 5 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a statement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) following the ministerial
meeting held in Luxembourg on 28 and 29 May 1998;
S/1998/498, letter dated 10 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting, in his
capacity as the coordinator of the Consulting and
Coordinating Process, the declaration of the Luxembourg
Peace Implementation Conference Steering Board issued
on 9 June 1998; S/l998/501, letter dated ll June 1998
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council, transmitting a letter of the same
date from the Secretary-General of NATO addressed to
the Secretary-General, conveying the seventeenth monthly
report on the operations of the Stabilization Force; and
S/ 1998/314, letter dated 9 April 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a letter dated 9 April 1998 from the
High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, conveying his
ninth report.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to whom I give the floor.


