Mr. Niasse (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
First, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. We consider it a tribute to the
entire continent of Africa and to your country, Guinea-
Bissau, which is close to Senegal. I should also like to
congratulate you on the outstanding way in which you
have been discharging your task - a sensitive one,
especially in the present circumstances that are the reason
for our meeting. I take great pleasure in expressing these
sentiments, as you are the son of a brotherly and friendly
country, an immediate neighbour of Senegal with whom

 

our Government and people have always enjoyed privileged
and multifaceted relations.

The prevailing situation in Jerusalem is more than
alarming. The numerous casualties that have occurred in
that city every day during the deplorable confrontations
between Israelis and Palestinians have plunged the Middle
East into tensions that the peace process launched at the
Madrid Conference seemed to have removed from this
region forever.

These confrontations, which are the concern of the
entire world, are all the more grievous in that they are
taking place in a city that was the birthplace of sublime
messages, proclaiming love for one's neighbour, that have
been transmitted through the centuries by the three revealed
religions that share the same cradle - Judaism, Christianity
and Islam.

Jerusalem, which, etymologically, means "city of
peace" should, be the focus, today more than ever, of all
the efforts made by the Palestinian and Israeli leaders, as
well as by the international community over the past few
years, to create, maintain, consolidate and expand a
dynamic of lasting peace in the Middle East.

It is therefore regrettable that Jerusalem's original
mission continues to be betrayed almost every day. In
particular, the events taking place there today are the result
of practices that the United Nations, in several relevant
resolutions, has condemned in an attempt to end, especially
those aimed at changing the demographic, historical and
cultural status of that Holy City, which is an international
city.

The decision leading to the opening by the Israeli
occupier of a tunnel in the area of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the
third holy site of Islam, was far from wise if we measure
its impact by the amount of blood that has been shed over
three days in Jerusalem and by the many additional
obstacles to the Israeli-Arab peace process that it has
caused.

My country, Senegal, following the example of the
international community, condemns that action and
solemnly appeals to the Israeli Government to modify its
position on the peace process and to take unequivocally into
account the hopes that the entire world had placed on the
establishment of dialogue between Israel and the Arabs -
a dialogue that we have hailed and supported. This is an
appeal designed to be constructive, made by a country that
everyone knows has relations with both parties: Israel and
the Palestinian State.

This is an opportunity for my country to reaffirm its
support for all United Nations resolutions on the problem
of the Middle East and the question of Palestine in
particular. This question is at the heart of this critical
issue, whose resolution hinges on the establishment of an
independent State for the Palestinian people. This
reaffirmation is perfectly understandable for Senegal,
which has presided over the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People since
the creation of that body.

Senegal's Head of State, President Abdou Diouf, has
always devoted particular attention to the problem of the
Middle East in all its aspects and dimension. Senegal
believes that, despite the difficulties inherent in any
attempt to build peace on a foundation of long-standing
passions, we should not throw up our hands in the face of
the uncertainty which, for some time, has been part of the
search for a peaceful and lasting solution to this issue.

We base this conviction, which we are honoured to
express here, not only on the determination of the
international community, under United Nations auspices,
not to let slip all the hopes born of the agreements
concluded since 1993 between Israel and the Palestinians
and certain other Arab countries. But we base it above all
on the existence, in Israel as in the Arab world, of a
majority opinion in favour of peace. We know that to be
true. That is a major advantage and takes us farther from
the long-standing passions of the past to a new situation
that falls within the framework of changes experienced by
the world in the past few years.

Let all peace-loving countries and nations ensure that
this reality is strengthened, instead of allowing it to
dissolve in the continuation of practices inspired by
extremism, whatever its origin.

