Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) (spoke internationaln Spanish): I would like to thank the delegation of the
United States for convening this meeting and for the
concept note that has been circulated. I am also grateful
to Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her statement.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is a serious and real threat to international peace and
security. When we discuss the proliferation of such
weapons in the Security Council, we must remember
that all States have a duty to respect their obligations
under international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In 1968, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was hailed as the most
significant international agreement on disarmament
ever achieved. Under the Treaty, non-nuclear-weapon
States committed to refraining from acquiring,
developing or producing such arms and to verification
by the international community, and recognized the
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Nuclear-weapon States committed to getting rid of
them. The NPT, which became the cornerstone of the
disarmament and nuclear-non-proliferation regime,
requires a balanced implementation of its three
pillars - disarmament, non-proliferation and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. It is the only Treaty
currently in force with regard to such weapons. Thirty
years after the NPT's entry into force, two of the three
countries that were not signatories to it detonated
nuclear bombs and joined the category of nuclear-
weapon States. Much more recently, a third State,
which withdrew from the Treaty, has also entered that
category, and we cannot ignore that.

With the fiftieth anniversary of the NPT one year
away, it is clear that the goal of achieving general and
complete disarmament is a long way off. Disarmament
today is either at a standstill or, worse, sliding
backwards. To quote article VI of the NPT,

"Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes
to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective
measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and
on a treaty on general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control."

The commitment undertaken by the nuclear-
weapon States is far from having been fully upheld.
A clear example of this is the absence of those States
from the negotiation process on the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which opened for
signature yesterday. Our country is proud to be a
signatory thereto.

The use and threat of use of nuclear weapons
represent a crime against humanity and a grave
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian law, and of the Charter of the United
Nations. The only guarantee against the use and threat
ofuse of these weapons is their express prohibition and
their total elimination.

At a time when tension on the Korean peninsula
continues to escalate and when the threat of the use of
nuclear weapons and of a military conflict is keeping
everyone on high alert, it is necessary to remain calm
and ensure that we protect global peace and security.
Nuclear weapons must never again be used by any actor,
under any circumstances. There is no military solution
to the North Korean problem. The solution must be a
political one.

The Security Council must remain united on this
issue and uphold its commitment to a peaceful and
diplomatic solution to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. Any other option would be an immense
failure for the Council and the Organization.
Uruguay sees no other solution to the North
Korean issue than one that is found through dialogue,
negotiation and political commitment between parties.

Regarding chemical weapons, Uruguay condemns
the use of toxic chemicals as weapons against civilians
in any armed conflict. Such actions constitute war
crimes, and those responsible must be held accountable
and brought to justice. In this connection, Uruguay
supports the work undertaken by the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and we commend the
work of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) to clarify who was responsible for the
incidents in Syria. The JIM. has identified the terrorist
group the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham-Da'esh
and the Government of Syria as responsible for some of
the chemical attacks in Syria.

Uruguay also wishes to underscore the importance
of halting the proliferation of conventional weapons to
areas of conflict. The trafficking and trading of arms
among the parties to armed conflict directly contributes
to the suffering and death of civilians. As was the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay stated in May
in the Council, quoting the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, the five permanent members
of the Security Council supplied 75 per cent of the
volume of the total arms exports for the 2011-2015
period (see S/PV.7951).

As a country resolutely committed to bolstering
the disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
Uruguay from this rostrum issues a strong appeal to
all States to urgently comply with all disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations, in line with the
international legal framework. In particular, we appeal
to those States that produce, possess and sell arms.
Disarmament and non-proliferation must be a priority
for all without exception.

