Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the
quarterly report on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We reiterate our appreciation for his able
leadership of the work of the Committee.

Chile is closely following the negotiations between
the permanent members of the Security Council plus
Germany and the European Union, on the one hand,
and the Islamic Republic of Iran, on the other. This is
an historic opportunity to demonstrate the effectiveness
of diplomacy as the primary tool in the conduct of
international relations.

Chile welcomes the report of the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
5 September on the implementation of the Safeguards
Agreement in connection with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the Islamic Republic
of Iran. In particular, we welcome the implementation
of three of the five measures agreed in the Framework
on Cooperation with the Agency, including two within
the deadline of 25 August. We note that the Islamic
Republic of Iran has begun discussions with the IAEA
on the implementation of the two remaining measures,
which are perhaps the most important, concerning the
delivery of information on the conduct of explosives
experimentation and neutron transport calculations. We
encourage the Islamic Republic of Iran to ensure that
the commitment it has undertaken in the Framework of
Cooperation with the IAEA and the Joint Plan of Action
signed with the P5+1 countries plus the European Union
is reflected within the 1737 Committee, for example by
responding to letters addressed to the Committee. That
would be a good sign.

Chile understands that we do not work in a political
vacuum and that actions or measures that could be
negatively perceived by either party and affect the
climate of dialogue should be avoided. However, it
is important to remember that while a definitive and
satisfactory agreement that has been endorsed by the
Security Council does not exist, the measures imposed
by the United Nations with respect to Iran's nuclear
programme will remain in force. Chile is confident
that the spirit of cooperation and commitment that has
been demonstrated by the Government in Tehran in its
dialogue with the P5+1 on its nuclear programme can
be reflected in other pressing issues in the Middle East.
Iran's support in resolving such issues is needed.

In conclusion, and with respect to the Panel of
Experts, Chile notes the new configuration of that
group. We underscore the need for the Secretariat to be
guided by the principles of gender equality and equitable
geographical representation in the Committee and in
the other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

